Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Title 3 PUBLIC SAFETY
Title 4 PUBLIC WELFARE, MORALS, AND CONDUCT
Title 5 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Title 6 BUSINESSES, PROFESSIONS, AND TRADES
Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Title 8 FINANCE, REVENUE, AND TAXATION
Title 9 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Title 10 PLANNING AND ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1 ADOPTION OF CODE
Chapter 2 PENALTY AND COST RECOVERY PROVISIONS
Chapter 3 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 4 APPEALS
Chapter 5 CITATIONS
Chapter 6 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES

Chapter 1 ADOPTION OF CODE
Sec. 1-1.01. Title: Reference to Code.
        This Code shall be known as the “Ojai Municipal Code,” and it shall be sufficient to refer to this Code as the “Ojai Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof. It shall also be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, or repealing said Code, or portions thereof, as an addition or amendment to, or a repeal of, the “Ojai Municipal Code,” or a portion thereof.

 

Sec. 1-1.02. Authority.
        Except as otherwise herein or hereafter provided, this Code consists of all the regulatory, penal and administrative laws of general application of the City of Ojai, codified pursuant to the authority contained in Section 50022.2 of the Government Code of the State of California.

 

Sec. 1-1.03. Effective date.
        This Code shall take effect upon the effective date of the ordinance adopting this Code by reference.

 

Sec. 1-1.04. Effect of Code on past actions and obligations.
        Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance of this City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license or penalty or the penal provisions applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all vested rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect.

 

Sec. 1-1.05. Reference to specific ordinances.
        The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect deposits or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within this Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code.

 

Sec. 1-1.06. Validity of Code.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional.

 

Sec. 1-1.07. Repeal of ordinances.
        All ordinances or portions of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Code are hereby repealed.

 

Sec. 1-1.08. Maintenance of Code.
        Not less than three (3) copies of this Code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Clerk. At least three (3) additional copies, duly certified by the City Clerk, shall be maintained on file in his or her office as the official copies of the Code. Additional copies of the Code shall be distributed to the departments and divisions of the City as shall be prescribed by the City Manager.

        Upon the adoption of any amendment or addition to this Code, or upon the repeal of any of its provisions, the City Clerk shall certify thereto and shall make an appropriate notation in the official volumes of this Code of the taking of such action, noting thereon the number and date of the ordinances pursuant to which such action is taken.

        Duly certified copies of each ordinance making changes in this Code shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk in books for such purpose, duly indexed for ready reference.

        At least annually the City Clerk shall cause the loose-leaf pages of this Code in which changes have been made to be reproduced, including a notation as to the ordinance number and date pursuant to which such change is adopted, and distributed in order that the loose-leaf copies of this Code, prepared for the use and convenience of the officers and employees of the City and the general public, may be brought up to date.

Chapter 2 PENALTY AND COST RECOVERY PROVISIONS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 2, consisting of Sections 1-2.01 through 1-2.06, codified from Ord. Nos. 5, 96, and 152, amended in its entirety by Part 1, Ord. No. 508, effective July 24, 1975.

 

Sec. 1-2.01. Violations as infractions.
        It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Code. Unless otherwise provided herein, any violation of any provision of this Code shall be an infraction. Any such violation may be prosecuted by City authorities in the name of the People of the State of California or redressed by civil action. A violation shall be a separate offense for each day upon which the violation occurs or continues to exist.

(Part 1, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 1-2.02. Violations as misdemeanors.
        Any violation of any provision of this Code which is of an aggravated nature shall be a misdemeanor. Violations of an aggravated nature include those which are intentional and deliberate, those which occur repeatedly (i.e., three (3) or more times) although not intentional or deliberate, and those which are expressly declared to be misdemeanors by the provisions of this Code or by applicable law.

(Part 1, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 1-2.03. Charging violations: Penalties.
        City authorities shall determine whether a person violating this Code shall be prosecuted for an infraction or a misdemeanor. Every violation determined to be an infraction shall be punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same law within one year; and (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same law within one year. Every violation determined to be a misdemeanor shall be punishable by: (1) a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); or (2) imprisonment in the City or County Jail for a period up to six (6) months; or (3) both a fine and imprisonment. The court having jurisdiction to impose sentence shall determine the punishment within the limits prescribed herein for the violation.

(Part 1, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 1-2.04. Public nuisances.
        Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this Code shall be deemed a public nuisance which may be abated by City authorities in addition to any prosecution undertaken by such authorities.

(Part 1, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

Sec. 1-2.05. Recovery of inspection and code enforcement costs: Certificate of Compliance.
(a)    When any person violates any section of the Ojai Municipal Code, and such violation continues past the date for City Code compliance, as set forth in a written notice of violation to the violator or to the owner or party in possession of real property to which the violation relates, the City may do all or any of the following:

(1)    Record with the Ventura County Recorder a Notice of Violation of the Ojai Municipal Code setting forth all violations related to real property;

(2)    Require the violator to obtain from the City a Letter of Compliance indicating the correction of the specific code violations, and pay a certificate processing fee which will be equal to all costs incurred by the City in connection with its inspection and code enforcement efforts from the initial discovery of the situation until such violations have been corrected and such certificate can be issued. The Letter of Compliance shall be issued when the individual complies with all provisions of the Code;

(3)    Where there is a violation relating to real property, require the owner, as part of the application fee for any needed permit which the property owner failed to obtain before the activity or use was initiated, to pay a code enforcement cost surcharge in an amount equal to the City’s cost for its code enforcement efforts;

(4)    Request, as a condition of probation or sentencing on any criminal conviction of such City code violation, that the defendant provide full restitution to the City for such inspection and code enforcement costs;

(5)    Require the violator to pay all costs, including attorneys’ fees, incurred by the City in connection with its inspection and code enforcement efforts from the initial discovery of the situation until such violations have been corrected. At the discretion of the City, such amounts may be recovered in a civil action in the name of the City in any court of competent jurisdiction within the County of Ventura;

(6)    Make the costs incurred by the City in connection with its inspection and code enforcement efforts, from the initial discovery of the situation until such violations have been corrected, a special assessment against the premises on which such violations existed pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the California Government Code regarding abatement of nuisances and the collection of associated costs as an assessment against the premises. The prevailing party in any judicial action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance may recover its reasonable attorneys’ fees, provided that the City elected, at the initiation of such individual action or proceeding, to recover its own attorneys’ fees. In no judicial action or administrative or special proceeding shall an award of attorneys’ fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the action or proceeding. A “judicial action” includes, but is not limited to, any civil or criminal action, inspection or abatement warrant or appeal. An “administrative proceeding” includes, but is not limited to, any public nuisance hearing, administrative citation or appeal(s) therefrom, revocation of permits by the City, or cost recovery hearing. Any recovery of attorneys’ fees for abatement of a nuisance shall be in accordance with this section.

In addition to recovery of any other costs as provided by this Code, in any action to abate a nuisance, the City shall be entitled to recover from the property on which the nuisance exists and against the property owner and any other violators jointly and severally, all staff and administrative costs, including, but not limited to, those incurred in investigations, inspections, enforcement and providing any notice required by this Code or State law.

(b)    The written Notice of Violation described in subsection (a) of this section shall be mailed to, or personally served on, the violator and, if deemed appropriate by the City, to the party in possession of any real property to which a violation relates. The notice shall contain the nature of the violation or violations of the Ojai Municipal Code, a warning that the violator may be obligated to pay all of the City’s code enforcement and inspection costs incurred in obtaining compliance with the code should the person not correct the violation within the time specified in the written notice, and the person’s right to a hearing on the matter.

(c)    Hearings. Any person who receives a Notice of Violation described in subsection (b) of this section may file a Request for Hearing on a form to be provided by the City within ten (10) days of the service by mail or in person. Failure to timely file a Request for Hearing shall result in a waiver of the right to a hearing. Within thirty (30) days of the filing of the request, and on ten (10) days’ written notice, the City shall hold a hearing on the violator’s objections and determine the validity thereof. Said hearing shall be before any person designated by the City Manager. The hearing provided for herein shall be the violator’s sole administrative remedy. No appeal to the City Council shall be allowed.

(§ 2, Ord. 697, eff. June 25, 1993, as amended by § 3, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

Chapter 3 RULES OF CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 1-3.01. Scope.
        Unless the provisions of the context otherwise specify, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions set forth in this chapter shall govern the construction of this Code. The provisions of this Code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effect its objects and to promote justice.

 

Sec. 1-3.02. Provisions construed as restatements and continuations.
        The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantially the same as existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations and not as new enactments.

 

Sec. 1-3.03. Tenure of officers preserved.
        All person who, at the time this Code takes effect, hold office under any of the ordinances repealed by this Code, which offices are continued by this Code, shall continue to hold such offices according to their former tenure.

 

Sec. 1-3.04. Headings.
        The title, chapter, article, and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or in any manner affect the scope, meaning, or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter, article, or section of this Code.

 

Sec. 1-3.05. Meaning of section and subsection.
        “Section” shall mean a section of this Code, unless some other source is specifically mentioned. “Subsection” shall mean a subsection of the section in which the term occurs, unless some other section is expressly mentioned.

 

Sec. 1-3.06. References to acts or omissions within the City.
        This Code shall refer only to the omission or commission of acts within the territorial limits of the City

and to that territory outside the City over which the City has jurisdiction or control by virtue of the Constitution, or any law, or by reason of ownership or control of property.

 

Sec. 1-3.07. Acts by deputy.
        Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, or employee, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by a deputy of such officer or employee or by a person otherwise duly authorized pursuant to law or ordinance unless this Code expressly provides otherwise.

 

Sec. 1-3.08. Writing includes what.
        Writing includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this Code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

 

Sec. 1-3.09. Reference applies to amendments.
        Whenever a reference is made to any portion of this Code, or to any ordinances of this City, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.

 

Sec. 1-3.10. Notices: Service of.
        Whenever a notice is required to be given under this Code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made in said Code, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail, in a sealed envelope postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified, at his last known business or residence address as the same appears in the public records of the City or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office.

 

Sec. 1-3.11. Proof of notice.
        Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the City, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen (18) years, which shows service in conformity with this Code, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned.

 

Sec. 1-3.12. Statute of limitations.
        When a limitation or period of time prescribed in any existing ordinance or statute for acquiring a right or barring a remedy, or for any other purpose, has begun to run before this Code goes into effect, the time which has already run shall be deemed a part of the time prescribed as such limitation.

 

Sec. 1-3.13. Significance of certain words.
        The following words shall be interpreted as follows, unless otherwise apparent from the context:

(a)    “Property” includes both real and personal property;

(b)    “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments;

(c)    “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt;

(d)    “Month” means a calendar month, unless otherwise expressed;

(e)    “Quarterly,” when used to designate a period of time, means the first three (3) calendar months of any given year or any succeeding period of three (3) calendar months;

(f)    “Calendar year” means from January 1 through December 31 of any given year;

(g)    “Fiscal year” means from July 1 of any given year through June 30 of the following year;

(h)    “Tenses.” The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future, the present;

(i)     “Gender.” The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neuter;

(j)     “Number.” The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular;

(k)    “Shall” is mandatory;

(l)     “May” is permissive;

(m)   “Oath” includes affirmation;

(n)    “Person” includes any person, firm, company, corporation, partnership, association, any public corporation, political subdivision, city, excepting the City of Ojai, County of Ventura, district in the County of Ventura, the State of California, or the United States of America, or any department or agency of any thereof, unless this Code expressly provides otherwise;

(o)    “State” is the State of California;

(p)    “County” is the County of Ventura;

(q)    “City” is the City of Ojai;

(r)    “Office.” The use of the title of any officer, employee, office or ordinance shall mean such officer, employee, office or ordinance of this City, unless otherwise specified;

(s)    “Council” is the City Council of this City;

(t)     “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, boulevards, alleys, courts, places, squares, or other public ways in the City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state;

(u)    “Owner,” as applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, or joint tenant of the whole or a part of such building or land; and

(v)    “Tenant or occupant,” as applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Chapter 4 APPEALS
Sec. 1-4.01. Right to appeal.
        Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Code, any person excepting to the denial, suspension, or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him or her pursuant to any provision of this Code, or to any administrative decision made by any official of the City pursuant to any provision of this Code, may appeal in writing to the Council by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of such appeal setting forth the specific grounds thereof.

 

Sec. 1-4.02. Time within which appeals shall be filed.
        The written notice of appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of written notice of such action appealed from but in no event later than thirty (30) days after the date of such action.

 

Sec. 1-4.03. Hearings: Notices.
        The City Clerk shall forthwith set such matter for a hearing before the Council at a subsequent regular meeting and shall cause a notice thereof to be given to the applicant not less than five (5) days prior to such hearing, unless such notice is waived in writing by the applicant. At such hearing the appellant shall show cause on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal why the action excepted to should not be approved. The Council may continue the hearing from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter.

 

Sec. 1-4.04. Time for judicial review.
        The judicial review of any decision of the City, or of any commission, board, officer, or agent thereof, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State.

(Part 1, Ord. 548, eff. September 8, 1977)

 

Sec. 1-4.05. Appeal by Council.
(a)    For purposes of this chapter or any other provision of this Code which provides for appeal of any denial, suspension or revocation of a permit or any administrative decision made by an official, board or commission of the City pursuant to any provisions of this Code, the term “person” or “aggrieved person” or “appellant” shall include the City Council, any officer of the City, or another governmental agency.

(b)    In the event that an appeal is brought by a member of the City Council, such Councilperson shall be prohibited from voting on or in any way participating in the Council’s deliberations on the appeal. The appellant Councilperson may, however, testify or otherwise participate as a member of the general public at the hearing on such appeal.

(c)    In the event that an appeal is brought by the City Council, acting as a whole, there shall be no requirement at the time the Council hears such appeal that the Council show cause, on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal, why the action excepted to should not be approved. The Council shall, instead, have full power and authority to sustain, reject or overrule wholly or partly the decision from which the appeal is taken.

(d)    No fee shall be required for an appeal brought by the City Council, any official of the City, or another governmental agency.

(§ 1, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

Chapter 5 CITATIONS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 831, effective September 28, 2013, amended the title of Title 1, Chapter 6, Article 1. This article was formerly titled “Transient Violations.”

 

Sec. 1-5.01. Release procedures.
        Except as otherwise provided by law, in any case in which a person is arrested for a violation of this Code declared to be an infraction or a misdemeanor, the person may be released according to the procedures set forth in the Penal Code of the State for the release of persons arrested for an offense declared to be a misdemeanor.

(Part 2, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 1-5.02. Violations of promises to appear.
        Any person who wilfully violates his written promise to appear in court given pursuant to the release procedures set forth in the Penal Code of the State shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and a warrant may be issued for his arrest within twenty (20) days after his failure to appear as promised.

(Part 2, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 1-5.03. Citations by Code Enforcement Officer and Building Inspector.
        The Code Enforcement Officer and/or the Building Inspector shall have the duty to enforce the following provisions of this Code as appropriate:

(a)    Title 5, except Chapter 4 relating to animals;

(b)    Title 7;

(c)    Title 9; and

(d)    Title 10.

        In enforcing such provisions, the Code Enforcement Officer and/or the City Building Inspector, as appropriate, are authorized to arrest persons for violations of such provisions pursuant to Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the State and release such persons upon their written promises to appear as provided in this chapter.

(Part 1, Ord. 530, eff. October 29, 1976, as amended by § 4, Ord. 697, eff. June 25, 1993)

Chapter 6 ADMINISTRATIVE REMEDIES
Article 1. Administrative Citations
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 831, § 1, effective Sep. 28, 2013, amended the title of Title 1, Chapter 6, Article 1. This article was formerly titled “Transient Violations.”

 

Sec. 1-6.101. Applicability.
        This article is adopted pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4 and provides for administrative citations which are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the City to address any violation of this Code. Use of this article shall be at the sole discretion of the City, subject to the provisions of this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 2, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.102. Enforcement Officer defined.
        For purposes of this article, “enforcement officer” shall mean any City employee or agent of the City with the authority to enforce any provision of this Code, or any person so designated by the City Manager.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.103. Administrative citation.
        Whenever an enforcement officer charged with the enforcement of any provision of this Code determines that a violation of that provision has occurred, the enforcement officer shall have the authority to issue an administrative citation to any person responsible for the violation.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.104. Contents of citation.
        Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

(a)    The date of the violation;

(b)    The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;

(c)    The section of this Code violated and a description of the violation;

(d)    The amount of the fine for the Code violation;

(e)    The name and address of the violator;

(f)    A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid;

(g)    An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the Code violation described in the administrative citation;

(h)    A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation may be obtained; and

(i)     The name, signature and department of the citing enforcement officer.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.105. Amount of fines.
        The amounts of the fines for Code violations imposed pursuant to this article shall be set forth in a schedule of fines established by resolution of the City Council. The schedule of fines shall specify any increased fines for repeat violations of the same Code provision by the same person. The schedule of fines shall specify the amount of any late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.106. Payment of fine.
        The fine shall be paid to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation. Any administrative citation fine paid pursuant to this section shall be refunded in accordance with Section 1-6.111 if it is determined, after a hearing, that the person charged in the administrative citation was not responsible for the violation or that there was no violation as charged in the administrative citation. Payment of a fine under this article shall not excuse or discharge any continuation or repeated occurrence of the Code violation that is the subject of the administrative citation.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.107. Hearing request.
        Any recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of this Code, or that he or she is the responsible party, by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the City within thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation, together with an advance deposit of the fine, or notice that a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver has been filed pursuant to Section 1-6.108. A request for hearing form may be obtained form the department specified on the administrative citation. The person requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. If the enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the administrative citation to the Hearing Officer for consideration at the hearing, then a copy of the report also shall be served on the person requesting the hearing at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.108. Advance deposit hardship waiver.
        Any person who intends to request a hearing to contest that there was a violation of the Code or that he or she is the responsible party and who is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine as required in Section 1-6.107 may file a request of an advance deposit hardship waiver as follows:

(a)    The request shall be filed with the Department of Finance on an advance deposit hardship waiver application form, available from the Department of Finance, within ten (10) days of the date of the administrative citation.

(b)    The requirement of depositing the full amount of the fine as described in Section 1-6.107 shall be stayed unless or until the Director of Finance makes a determination not to issue the advance deposit hardship waiver.

(c)    The Director of Finance may waive the requirement of an advance deposit set forth in Section 1-6.107 and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the cited party submits to the Director a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the Director of Finance the person’s actual financial inability to deposit with the City the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.

(d)    If the Director of Finance determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the person shall remit the deposit to the City within ten (10) days of the date of that decision, or thirty (30) days from the date of the administrative citation, whichever is later.

(e)    The Director of Finance shall issue a written determination listing the reasons for his or her determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the Director of Finance shall be final.

(f)    The written determination of the Director of Finance shall be served upon the person who applied for the advance deposit hardship waiver.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.109. Hearing Officer.
        The City Manager shall designate a Hearing Officer for the administrative citation hearing.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.110. Hearing procedure.
        All administrative citation hearings conducted in accordance with this article shall be done as follows:

(a)    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a Hearing Officer shall be held unless the fine has been deposited in advance in accordance with Section 1-6.107 or an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued in accordance with Section 1-6.108

(b)    A hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be set for a date that is not less than ten (10) days and not more than sixty (60) days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this article, unless the Hearing Officer determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an extension of time.

(c)    At the hearing the party contesting the administrative citation shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present evidence concerning the administrative citation.

(d)    The failure of any recipient of an administrative citation to timely make the advance deposit, obtain an advance hardship waiver or to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies.

(e)    The administrative citation and any additional report submitted by the enforcement officer shall constitute prima facie evidence of the respective facts contained in those documents.

(f)    The Hearing Officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.111. Hearing Officer’s decision.
        The Hearing Officer shall render his or her decision as follows:

(a)    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or cancel the administrative citation and shall list in the decision the reasons for that decision. The decision of the Hearing Officer shall be final.

(b)    If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld, the fine amount on deposit with the City shall be retained by the City.

(c)    If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation should be upheld and the fine has not been deposited pursuant to an advance deposit hardship waiver, the Hearing Officer shall set forth a payment schedule for the fine in the decision.

(d)    If the Hearing Officer determines that the administrative citation should be cancelled and the fine was deposited with the City, the City shall promptly refund the amount of the deposited fine, together with interest at the average rate earned on the City’s portfolio for the period of time that the amount was held by the City.

(e)    The recipient of the administrative citation shall be served with a copy of the Hearing Officer’s written decision.

(f)    The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the Hearing Officer shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the Hearing Officer.

(g)    In the event the City elects, at the initiation of the hearing, to seek recovery of its attorneys’ fees, the Hearing Officer shall order that the prevailing party in the hearing be awarded its attorneys’ fees. In no event shall the award of attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the proceeding.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004, as amended by § 1, Ord. 796, eff. July 26, 2007)

 

Sec. 1-6.112. Late payment charges.
        Any person who fails to pay the City any fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article on or before the date the fine is due also shall be liable for the payment of any applicable late payment charges set forth in the schedule of fines.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.113. Recovery of administrative citation fines and costs.
        The City may collect any past due administrative citation fine, late payment charge and its administrative costs (including attorney’s fees) by use of all available legal means, including recording and foreclosing a lien pursuant to Sections 1-6.218 through 1-6.223. The City also may recover its collection costs and attorney’s fees incurred in any subsequent legal action.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.114. Failure to comply with administrative order.
        Failure to pay any past due administrative citation fine, late penalty or administrative costs may be enforced as:

(a)    A personal obligation of the violator; and/or

(b)    If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the administrative penalties, interest and administrative costs and attorney’s fees are paid in full.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.115. Right to judicial review.
        Any person aggrieved by an administrative decision of a Hearing Officer or an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the Municipal Court in Ventura County in accordance with the time line requirements and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.116. Notices.
        The administrative citation and all notices required to be given by this article shall either be personally served on the responsible party or by mail, postage prepaid to the responsible party at the last known residence address. Failure to receive any notice specified in this article does not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Article 2. Administrative Orders
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 831, § 3, effective Sep. 28, 2013, amended the title of Title 1, Chapter 6, Article 2. This article was formerly titled “Continuing Violations.”

 

Sec. 1-6.201. Applicability.
        This article is adopted pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.4 and provides for administrative remedies which are in addition to all other legal remedies, criminal or civil, which may be pursued by the City to address any violation of this Code including the provisions of Article 1 of this Chapter. This article shall be used at the sole discretion of the City, subject to the provisions of this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 4, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.202. Director defined.
        For purposes of this article, “Director” means the head of any City department which is charged with responsibility for enforcement of any provision of this Code, the Building Official as defined in Section 9-1.203(c) or any person as the City Manager may designate.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.203. Compliance order.
        Whenever the Director determines that a violation of any provision of this Code within the Director’s responsibility is occurring or exists, the Director may issue a written compliance order (“compliance order”) to any person responsible for the violation (“violator” and/or “owner”).

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.204. Contents of compliance order.
        A compliance order issued pursuant to this article shall contain the following information:

(a)    The date and location of the violation;

(b)    The section of this Code violated and a description of the violation;

(c)    The action required to correct the violation;

(d)    The time period after which administrative penalties will begin to accrue if compliance with the order has not been achieved; and

(e)    Either a copy of this article or an explanation of the consequences of non-compliance with this article and a description of the hearing procedure and appeal process.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.205. Time for compliance.
        The Director shall give the violator a reasonable period in which to comply with the compliance order. However, should the violation constitute an imminent threat to life or property, immediate compliance may be ordered.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.206. Method of service.
        Service of a compliance order shall be made as follows:

(a)    Except where real property is involved, all notices required by this article shall be served in the manner provided in Section 1-6.116

(b)    Where real property is involved, written notice shall be mailed to the violator and/or owner at the address as shown on the last equalized County assessment roll, and a copy of the order shall be conspicuously posted at the property which is the subject of the order.

(c)    The failure of any person to receive any notice required under this article shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.207. Hearing—Serving of notice.
        If the director determines that all violations have been corrected within the time specified in the compliance order, no further action shall be taken. If full compliance is not achieved within the time specified in the compliance order, the Director shall schedule a hearing before a Hearing Officer approved by the City Council. The Director shall cause a written notice of hearing to be served on the violator and, where real property is involved, a notice of hearing (“notice of hearing” or “notice”) shall be served on the violator and/or owner at the address as it appears on the last equalized County assessment roll available on the date the notice is prepared, and a copy of the notice shall be conspicuously posted at the property which is the subject of the notice.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 5, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.208. Notice of hearing—Contents.
        Every notice of hearing on a compliance order shall contain the date, time and place at which the hearing shall be conducted by the Hearing Officer. Each hearing shall be set on a date not less than ten (10) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of the notice of hearing unless the Director determines that the matter is urgent or that good cause exists for an extension of time. At the hearing, any person named in or subject to a compliance order, shall be given a full opportunity to object to the determination that a violation has occurred and/or that the violation has continued to exist. The failure of any person subject to a compliance order, pursuant to this article, to appear at the hearing shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies and a waiver of the right to be heard by the Hearing Officer.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 5, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.209. Hearing—Findings and order.
        The Hearing Officer shall conduct its hearing in accordance with the following:

(a)    At the place and time set forth in the notice of hearing, the Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing on the compliance order issued pursuant to Section 1-6.203

(b)    Consistent with any rules and procedures adopted pursuant to Section 1-6.266, the Hearing Officer shall consider any written or oral evidence regarding the violation and compliance by the violator or owner.

(c)    Within fifteen (15) days following the conclusion of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall make findings and issue its determination regarding:

(1)    The existence of the violation; and

(2)    The failure of the violator or owner to take required corrective action within the required time period.

(d)    The Hearing Officer shall issue written findings on each violation. The findings shall be supported by evidence received at the hearing.

(e)    If the Hearing Officer finds that there is a preponderance of the evidence showing that a violation has occurred and that the violation was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the Hearing Officer shall issue an administrative order (“administrative order”).

(f)    If the Hearing Officer finds that no violation has occurred or that the violation was corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the Hearing Officer shall issue a finding of those facts (“findings of fact”).

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 5, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.210. Administrative order.
        If the Hearing Officer determines that a violation occurred which was not corrected within the time period specified in the compliance order, the Hearing Officer shall issue the administrative order described in Section 1-6.209 which imposes any or all of the following:

(a)    An order to correct, including a schedule for correction where appropriate;

(b)    Administrative penalties as provided in Section 1-6.211; or

(c)    Administrative costs as provided in Section 1-6.212

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 5, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.211. Administrative penalties.
        The Hearing Officer may impose administrative penalties as follows:

(a)    The Hearing Officer may impose administrative penalties for the violation of any provision of this Code in an amount not to exceed a maximum of one thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) dollars per day for each ongoing violation, or for any related series of violations, except that the total administrative penalty shall not exceed one hundred thousand and no/100ths ($100,000.00) dollars excluding administrative costs, including attorney’s fees and costs, interest and restitution for compliance reinspections.

(b)    In determining the amount of the administrative penalty, the Hearing Officer may take any or all of the following factors into consideration:

(1)    The duration of the violation;

(2)    The frequency, recurrence and number of violations, related or unrelated, by the same violator;

(3)    The seriousness of the violation;

(4)    The good faith efforts of the violator to come into compliance;

(5)    The economic impact of the penalty on the violator;

(6)    The impact of the violation on the community; and

(7)    Such other factors as justice may require.

(c)    Administrative penalties imposed by the Hearing shall accrue from the date specified in the compliance order and shall cease to accrue on the date the violation is corrected as determined by the Director or the Hearing Officer.

(d)    The Hearing Officer, in its discretion, may suspend the imposition of applicable penalties for any period of time during which:

(1)    The violator has filed for necessary permits;

(2)    Such permits are required to achieve compliance; and

(3)    Such permit applications are actively pending before the City, state or other appropriate governmental agency.

(e)    Administrative penalties assessed by the Hearing Officer shall be due by the date specified in the administrative order.

(f)    Administrative penalties assessed by the Hearing Officer are a debt owed to the City and, in addition to all other means of enforcement, if the violation is located on real property, may be enforced by means of a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred.

(g)    If the violation is not corrected as specified in the Hearing Officer’s order to correct, administrative penalties shall continue to accrue on a daily basis until the violation is corrected, subject to the maximum amount set forth in subsection (a) of this section.

(h)    If the violator gives written notice to the Director that the violation has been corrected and if the Director finds that compliance has been achieved, the Director shall deem the date the written notice was postmarked or personally delivered to the Director or the date of the final inspection, whichever first occurred, to be the date the violation was corrected. If no written notice is provided to the Director, the violation will be deemed corrected on the date of the final inspection.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 5, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.212. Administrative costs.
        The Hearing Officer shall assess administrative costs against the violator when it finds that a violation has occurred and that compliance has not been achieved within the time specified in the compliance order. The administrative costs may include any and all costs, other than attorneys’ fees, incurred by the City in connection with the matter before the Hearing Officer including, but not limited to, costs of investigation, staffing costs incurred in preparation for the hearing and for the hearing itself, and for all costs for all reinspections necessary to enforce the compliance order. In addition, in the event the City elects, at the initiation of the hearing, to seek recovery of its attorneys’ fees, the Hearing Officer shall order that the prevailing party in the hearing be awarded its attorneys’ fees incurred throughout the administrative process outlined in this article and for any subsequent legal action. In no event shall the award of attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the proceeding.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 796, eff. July 26, 2007; § 5, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.213. Failure to comply with administrative order.
        Failure to pay the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs specified in the administrative order of the Hearing Officer may be enforced as:

(a)    Personal obligation of the violator; and/or

(b)    If the violation is in connection with real property, a lien upon the real property. The lien shall remain in effect until all of the administrative penalties, interest and administrative costs and attorney’s fees are paid in full.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 5, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.214. Right of judicial review.
        Any person aggrieved by an administrative order of the Hearing Officer may obtain review of the administrative order by filing a motion for review with the Superior Court in Ventura County in accordance with the time line requirements and provisions set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 5, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.215. Recovery of administrative civil penalties.
        The City may collect the assessed administrative penalties and administrative costs and attorney’s fees by use of all available legal means, including recording a lien pursuant to Section 1-6.218.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.216. Report of compliance after administrative order.
        If the Director determines that compliance has been achieved after a compliance order has been sustained by the Hearing Officer, the Director shall file a report indicating that compliance has been achieved.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 6, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.217. Compliance dispute.
        If the Director does not file a report pursuant to Section 1-6.216, a violator or owner who believes that compliance has been achieved may request a compliance hearing before the Hearing Officer by filing a request for a hearing with the Hearing Officer. The hearing shall be noticed and conducted in the same manner as a hearing on a compliance order provided in Sections 1-6.208 and 1-6.209. The Hearing Officer shall determine the dispute as follows:

(a)    If compliance has been achieved, when it was achieved, and to what relief, if any, the violator may be entitled.

(b)    If compliance has not been achieved, to what extent has it not. Further, for good cause shown, the Hearing Officer may amend or modify its original order.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 6, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.218. Lien procedure.
        The City may impose a lien on real property as follows:

(a)    Whenever the amount of any administrative penalty and/or administrative cost imposed by the Hearing Officer pursuant to this article in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full within forty-five (45) days and/or has not been successfully challenged pursuant to the applicable provisions of Government Code Section 53069.4, this obligation may constitute a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred.

(b)    The lien provided herein shall have no force and effect until recorded with the County Recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Section 697.340 and may be extended as provided in California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive.

(c)    Interest shall accrue on the principal amount of the lien remaining unsatisfied pursuant to the law applicable to civil money judgments.

(d)    Prior to recording any such lien, the Director of Finance shall prepare and file with the City Clerk a report stating the amounts due and owing.

(e)    The City Clerk shall fix a time, date and place for hearing such report by the City Council and any protests or objections thereto.

(f)    The Director of Finance shall cause written notice to be served on the violator and/or owner not less than ten (10) days prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served as provided in Section 1-6.206

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 6, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.219. Public hearing and protests.
        The City Council’s hearing on the report shall be conducted as follows:

(a)    Any person whose real property is subject to a lien pursuant to Section 1-6.218 may file a written protest with the City Clerk and/or may protest orally at the City Council hearing.

(b)    Each written protest or objection shall contain a description of the property in which the protesting party is interested, the interest in such real property assessed by the protesting party and the grounds of such protest or objection; provided, however, that any member of the public may speak on the subject of the report at such hearing.

(c)    The City Council, after the hearing, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.220. Recording of lien.
        Thirty (30) days following the adoption of a resolution by the City Council imposing a lien, the City Clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the office of the County Recorder of Ventura County, California. The lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by resolution of the City Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.221. Satisfaction of lien.
        Once payment in full is received by the City for outstanding penalties and costs, the Director of Finance shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the violator and/or owner, or financial institution, with a notice of satisfaction so they may record the notice with the office of the County Recorder. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the City’s lien.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.222. Foreclosure of real property lien.
        The lien imposed pursuant to this article is deemed a judgment pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4(c), and may be foreclosed and the real property sold, by the filing of an action for foreclosure in a court of competent jurisdiction, and the issuance of a judgment to foreclose. There shall be no right to trial by jury. The City shall be entitled to its attorney’s fees and costs incurred in connection with prosecuting the foreclosure action.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.223. Redemption of lien.
        The lien may be redeemed by the payment in full of all amounts secured by the lien within six (6) months after the lien is recorded and notice is given to the violator and/or owner. There shall be no right of redemption after foreclosure of the lien in accordance with Section 1-6.222.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

 

Sec. 1-6.224. Penalties as a personal obligation.
        The administrative penalties and costs set forth in the Hearing Officer’s order shall also become a personal obligation of the violator and/or owner.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 7, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.225. Interest.
        Interest shall accrue on all amounts declared due by the Hearing Officer, and unpaid, from the date of the administrative order to the date paid pursuant to the laws applicable to civil money judgments.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004; § 7, Ord. 831, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 1-6.226. Rules and regulations.
        The City Council may, by resolution, adopt such rules and regulations for the administration and interpretation of this chapter as it may consider proper.

(§ 1, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 2 FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 3 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 4 DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 5 FINANCE DIRECTOR
Chapter 6 ELECTIONS

Chapter 1 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION
Article 1. Official Seal
Sec. 2-1.101. Official seal.
        There is on file in the office of the City Clerk a drawing of a seal, which drawing is identified by the following designation: “Official Seal of the City of Ojai, October 28, 1957, Charles A. Phillips, Ojai City Clerk.” Said seal is hereby adopted as the official seal of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 225)

 

Article 2. City Council
Sec. 2-1.201. Time and place of meetings.
        Regular meetings of the City Council shall be held in the Ojai City Hall, located at 401 South Ventura Street, Ojai, California, on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month at the hour of 7:00 p.m. and adjourning at 10:30 p.m., or upon completion of agenda matters under consideration at time for adjournment. The exception is that closed sessions may continue past this hour.

(§ 1, Ord. 212, as amended by § 1, Ord. 373, eff. November 9, 1967, § 1, Ord. 421, eff. April 8, 1971, and Part 1, Ord. 522, eff. July 22, 1976, Ord. No. 818, § 2, eff. April 13, 2012)

 

Sec. 2-1.202. Parliamentary procedure.
        Subject to applicable statutes, meetings of the Council shall be conducted in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, latest Revised Edition.

(§ 2, Ord. 212)

 

Sec. 2-1.203. Council members expense reimbursement.
(a)    General. Members of the City Council shall be entitled to be reimbursed for all expenses incurred by them in the performance of their official duties.

(b)    Findings. The City Council finds and determines that the members of the City Council incur monthly out-of-pocket expenses in excess of the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).

(c)    Reimbursement—Flat amount. Each member of the City Council shall be entitled to receive monthly without written claim or demand the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) which shall be deemed reimbursement in full for all of the general day-to-day out-of-pocket expenses incurred by each member of the City Council in the functions and duties of that Council member’s office.

(d)    Reimbursement—Itemized. Members of the City Council shall be entitled to reimbursement for other than day-to-day expenses as authorized pursuant to the administrative policies and procedures, including verification itemization, as adopted by the City Council as the same may be amended from time to time.

(§ 1, Ord. 730, eff. August 14, 1998)

 

Sec. 2-1.204. Compensation.
        As permitted by Government Code Section 36516, all members of the City Council shall receive a salary of seven hundred sixty dollars ($760.00) per month payable monthly for each month on or about the first day of such month. Such adjustment amounts to an increase equal to five (5%) percent for each calendar year from 2006, the operative date of the last adjustment to City Council compensation, codified in the former Section 2-1.205, as authorized by Government Code Section 36516, subdivision (c).

(§ 2, Ord. 730, eff. August 14, 1998, as amended by § 3, Ord. 885, eff. July 12, 2018)

 

Article 3. Unclaimed property
Sec. 2-1.301. Inventory of personal property.
        The Chief of Police shall, on or before the first Monday in November of each year, and may, at such other times as in his or her discretion appear desirable, make an inventory of all personal property which has come into the possession of the Police Department and been unclaimed by the owner and will, at the time of any proposed sale, have been in the possession of the Police Department for at least six (6) months. Such inventory shall give a brief description of all property so held.

(§ 1, Ord. 188)

 

Sec. 2-1.302. Notice of proposed sale.
        Public notice shall be given by publication in the official newspaper of the City at least five (5) days prior to any proposed sale. The notice shall contain a brief description of the property to be sold, and the time, place, and manner of the sale. It shall also contain a brief description of the property to be kept or destroyed and a statement that all of the listed property will be either sold, kept, or destroyed if not claimed by the owner before the date set for the sale.

(§ 2, Ord. 188)

 

Sec. 2-1.303. Sale at public auction.
        The Chief of Police shall, on the first Monday in December of each year, and may, at other times in his discretion, sell at public auction to the highest bidder all property upon such inventory, except arms or weapons, burglar’s tools, liquors, and drugs.

(§ 3, Ord. 188)

 

Sec. 2-1.304. Disposition of unsold property.
        Any unclaimed property properly inventoried, offered for sale, and remaining unsold may be summarily destroyed by the Chief of Police.

(§ 4, Ord. 188)

 

Sec. 2-1.305. Disposition of weapons, liquors, and drugs.
        Any arms, weapons, or burglar’s tools listed in the notice shall be kept or destroyed by the Police Department. The Chief of Police may decide, in his discretion, whether any of such items should be kept or destroyed. All liquors and drugs listed in the notice shall be destroyed immediately after the date of the sale.

(§ 5, Ord. 188)

 

Article 4. Posting of Official Notices
Sec. 2-1.401. Places of posting.
        The following described places are hereby designated as the places for posting public notices pursuant to the provisions of Section 37903 of the Government Code of the State relating to notices inviting bids and as places for posting public notices, ordinances, and other official documents and advertising required to be posted by any other statute, ordinance, or provision of this Code when the exact place of posting is not otherwise specified:

(a)    Ojai City Hall Lobby, 401 South Ventura Street, Ojai, California;

(b)    United States Post Office Lobby, 201 East Ojai Avenue, Ojai, California; and

(c)    The outside wall of the Ojai Pharmacy, 328 East Ojai Avenue, Ojai, California.

(§ 1, Ord. 243, eff. December 22, 1958, as amended by Part 1, Ord. 516, eff. May 13, 1976)

Chapter 2 FISCAL ADMINISTRATION
Article 1. Official Bonds
Sec. 2-2.101. City Clerk bond.
        The City Clerk shall execute a bond to the City in the penal sum of Ten Thousand and no/100ths ($10,000.00) Dollars, in such form as may be required by statute, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties.

(§ 2, Ord. 135, as amended by § 1, Ord. 278, eff. April 22, 1961)

 

Sec. 2-2.102. City Treasurer bond.
        The City Treasurer shall execute a bond to the City in the penal sum of Twenty-Five Thousand and no/100ths ($25,000.00) Dollars, in such form as may be required by statute, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties.

(§ 3, Ord. 135, as amended by § 1, Ord. 278, eff. April 22, 1961)

 

Sec. 2-2.103. Chief of Police bond.
        The Chief of Police, before entering upon the duties of his office, shall execute a bond to the City in the penal sum of One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars, in such form as may be required by statute, conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties.

(§ 4, Ord. 135)

 

Sec. 2-2.104. Bonds: Minimum amounts.
        The bonds of the City Clerk, City Treasurer, and Chief of Police holding office on January 23, 1950, shall, from and after such date, be in amounts not less than the amounts set forth in this article.

(§ 5, Ord. 135)

 

Sec. 2-2.105. Finance Director bond.
        The Finance Director shall execute a bond to the City in the penal sum of Ten Thousand and no/100ths Dollars ($10,000.00), in such form as may be required by statute, conditioned for the faithful performance of his or her duties.

(§ 2, Ord. 747, eff. October 26, 2000)

 

Article 2. Warrants
Sec. 2-2.201. Signatures.
        All warrants drawn on the City Treasury may be signed by the Finance Director or, in the absence of the Finance Director, by the City Manager, instead of by the Mayor.

(Part I, Ord. 462, eff. November 9, 1972, as amended by § 3, Ord. 747, eff. October 26, 2000)

Chapter 3 CITY MANAGER
Sec. 2-3.01. City Manager form of government.
        A City Manager form of government is hereby established for the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 204)

 

Sec. 2-3.02. Qualifications.
        No one shall be eligible for appointment as City Manager who has not served as a City Manager, Administrator, Assistant City Manager, or Deputy thereof for at least three (3) years or, in the alternative, has had at least five (5) years’ experience in a responsible executive position. The City Manager need not be a resident of the City unless specifically required by the Council at the time of the appointment.

(§ 2, Ord. 204, as amended by Part 1, Ord. 481, eff. February 21, 1974)

 

Sec. 2-3.03. Term.
        The City Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term and shall be removable at the pleasure of the Council.

(§ 3, Ord. 204)

 

Sec. 2-3.04. Powers and duties.
        The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government under the direction and control of the Council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City government which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head of the City government, it shall be his duty, and he shall have the powers set forth as follows:

(a)    To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced;

(b)    To appoint all appointive officers and employees of the City, upon merit and fitness alone, to have general supervision and control over such officers and employees, and to remove such officers and employees at pleasure;

(c)    To exercise general supervision over all privately owned public utilities operated within the City so far as the same are subject to municipal control;

(d)    To see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, contracts, permits, and privileges granted by the City are fully observed, and to report to the Council any violation thereof;

(e)    To attend all meetings of the Council unless excused therefrom by three (3) members thereof or by the Mayor;

(f)    To act as purchasing agent for the City. All purchases shall be made by purchase order signed by the City Manager;

(g)    To examine or cause to be examined, without notice, the official conduct of any officer or employee of the City except a Councilman or member of the Planning Commission;

(h)    To keep the Council advised as to the needs of the City;

(i)     To prepare and submit to the Council the annual budget estimate and such reports as may be required by the Council, including an annual report of all departments of the City, and to keep or supervise the keeping of a system of budgetary accounting; and to prepare an agenda for each regularly scheduled Council meeting and include a financial statement and a summary of the activities of each department of the City. A copy of the agenda and required reports shall be delivered to each Councilman on the Saturday prior to each regularly scheduled Council meeting;

(j)     To prepare, or cause to be prepared, plans and specifications for work which the Council may order coming under his supervision; and to provide such plans and specifications in sufficient number and in ample time to give full opportunity for all contractors who desire to bid thereon to do so;

(k)    To have control, subject to such ordinances as may from time to time be adopted, of all public utilities owned or operated by the City;

(l)     To have general supervision over all City property and its use by the public or City employees;

(m)   To devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties;

(n)    To perform such other duties as may be required of him or her by the Council;

(o)    From time to time, in order to facilitate the prompt, economical, and efficient dispatch of City business, to organize the work of the departments under his control, to assign assistance, deputies, and employees from any office or department of the City government to perform work or service in connection with any other office or department thereof, or to work in more than one of said offices or departments; provided that no such change shall affect the powers and duties of any elective officer of the City;

(p)    To audit all statements submitted to the City and report to the Council his recommendations thereon;

(q)    To maintain a perpetual inventory of all City property; and

(r)    To receive and open all mail addressed to the Council and give immediate attention thereto to the end that all administrative business referred to therein and not requiring Council action may be disposed of expeditiously.

(§ 4, Ord. 204)

 

Sec. 2-3.05. Limitation on powers.
        The City Manager shall act as agent for the City in the discharge of its administrative functions, but shall not exercise any policy-making or legislative functions nor attempt to commit or bind the Council to any action, plan, or program requiring action by the Council.

(§ 5, Ord. 204)

 

Sec. 2-3.06. Method of discharging duties.
        In the discharge of his duties, the City Manager shall endeavor at all times to exercise the highest degree of tact, patience, and courtesy in his contacts with the public and with all City officers and employees, to the end that the highest possible standards of public service be continuously maintained.

(§ 6, Ord. 204)

 

Sec. 2-3.07. Interference in administration.
        No member of the Council shall in any manner, directly or indirectly, by suggestion or otherwise, attempt to influence or coerce the City Manager in the making or removal of any appointment or the purchase of supplies, or attempt to exact any promise relative to any appointment from any candidate for City Manager, or discuss directly or indirectly with any such candidate the matter of appointments to any City office or employments; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting the Council, while in open session, from discussing with or suggesting to the City Manager, fully and freely, anything pertaining to City affairs and for the best interests of the City. The Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services and employees of the City only through the City Manager except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager. Neither the City Manager nor any person in the employ of the City shall take any part in securing, nor shall contribute any money, toward the nomination or election of any candidate for municipal office.

(§ 7, Ord. 204)

 

Sec. 2-3.08. Manager Pro Tem.
        In case of the absence of the City Manager, or his or her temporary disability to act as such, the Council shall appoint a Manager Pro Tem who shall possess the powers and discharge the duties of the City Manager during such absence or disability only; provided, however, a Manager Pro Tem shall have no authority to appoint or remove any City officer or employee except with the concurrence of the Council.

(§ 8, Ord. 204)

 

Sec. 2-3.09. Ineligible persons.
        No person related to the City Manager by consanguinity or affinity with the third degree shall hold any appointive office or employment with the City.

(§ 9, Ord. 204)

Chapter 4 DEPARTMENT ADMINISTRATION
Article 1. Parks and Recreation Commission
Sec. 2-4.101. Establishment of a Parks and Recreation Commission.
        A Parks and Recreation Commission is hereby established for the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 213, as amended by § 1, Ord. 273, eff. February 23, 1961, and § 1, Ord. 372, eff. September 7, 1966)

 

Sec. 2-4.102. Members.
        The Parks and Recreation Commission shall be composed of five (5) members and one nonvoting youth member who shall be a full-time high school student living within the boundaries of the Ojai Unified School District. Each Councilmember shall appoint one Commissioner, ratified by the approval of a majority of the full Council. The youth member shall be appointed by the Mayor, ratified by the approval of a majority of the full Council, and will be a nonvoting member. While it is preferred that all members of the Commission have primary residence and be domiciled within the City, a minimum of three (3) members of the Commission must have primary residence and be domiciled within the City. All members must live within the Ojai Area of Interest, as defined by the Ventura County Local Agency Formation Commission.

(§ 2, Ord. 213, as amended by § 1, Ord. 242, eff. January 7, 1959, § 1, Ord. 273, eff. February 23, 1961, § 1, Ord. 372, eff. September 7, 1966, Part 1, Ord. 520, eff. June 24, 1976, § 1, Ord. 687, eff. September 27, 1991, § 1, Ord. 709, eff. August 24, 1995, § 1, Ord. 845, eff. September 26, 2014, § 1, Ord. 895, eff. April 25, 2019, and § 2, Ord. 909, eff. September 25, 2020)

 

Sec. 2-4.103. Terms.
        The members of the Parks and Recreation Commission shall, subject to the conditions set forth in this section, be appointed to the following terms:

        (a)    All members of the Parks and Recreation Commission other than the youth member shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years.

        (b)    The youth member shall be appointed for a term of two years; and can be appointed for a maximum of two (2) terms.

        (c)    All members shall hold office until their successors have been appointed and qualified. A person appointed to fill a vacancy on the Commission shall hold office for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any member of the Parks and Recreation Commission may be removed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council, or by a majority vote of the Council.

        (d)    The first voting Commission seat to become vacant after passage of the ordinance codified in this section shall be filled by the Councilmember representing City Council District 4. The second voting Commission seat to become vacant shall be filled by the Mayor. Subsequent appointments shall be made in the following order: City Council District 1, City Council District 2, City Council District 3, City Council District 4, and the Mayor, repeating as terms expire such that the five (5) Commission members correspond to the Mayor and four (4) City Council Districts. If a member resigns before the end of their term, the City Councilmember for the Voting District that appointed that member shall appoint their replacement.

        (e)    The terms of members of the Commission shall expire at the second regular City Council meeting of May. Appointments will be for four (4) years, except for the youth member, who shall be appointed for two (2) years. The term of the youth member of the Commission shall expire at the second regular Council meeting in May of every other year.

(§ 3, Ord. 213, as amended by § 2, Ord. 242, eff. January 7, 1959, § 1, Ord. 273, eff. February 23, 1961, § 1, Ord. 372, eff. September 7, 1966, Part 1, Ord. 493, eff. June 27, 1974, § 1, Ord. 620, eff. May 17, 1984, § 2, Ord. 687, eff. September 27, 1991, § 1, Ord. 843, eff. August 22, 2014, § 2, Ord. 895, eff. April 25, 2019, and § 3, Ord. 909, eff. September 25, 2020)

 

Sec. 2-4.104. Powers and duties.
        The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

(a)    To act in an advisory capacity to the Council on all matters pertaining to recreation programs and facilities. (Recreation facilities include, but are not limited to, parks, buildings, trails, bike paths and open space.)

(b)    To become knowledgeable about the general field of recreation, the programs and facilities provided by other agencies and organizations within the area, and the needs of City recreation program participants and recreation facility users.

(c)    To receive input from current and potential recreation program participants and recreation facility users regarding the recreation program and facility needs of the Community.

(d)    To periodically review the Recreation Element of the General Plan and such master plans and facility plans as are deemed advisable, and make recommendations to the City Council.

(e)    To periodically review recreation policies of the City, and make recommendations to the City Council.

(f)    To participate in the annual review of the proposed budget as it relates to recreation programs and facilities, and make recommendations to the City Council.

(g)    To participate in the annual review of the Five-Year Capital Improvement Plan as it relates to recreation facilities, and make recommendations to the City Council.

(h)    To participate in the annual review of City fees as it relates to recreation programs and facilities, and make recommendations to the City Council.

(i)     To make recommendations to promote participation in recreation programs and use of recreation facilities.

(j)     To report fully to the public through the Council on all of the activities of the Commission at least once each year, and at such other times as may be required by the Council or requested by the Commission.

(§ 1, Ord. 273, eff. February 23, 1961, as amended by § 1, Ord. 372, eff. September 7, 1966, repealed and replaced by § 2, Ord. 845, eff. September 26, 2014)

 

Sec. 2-4.105. Officers: Committees.
        The Parks and Recreation Commission shall elect from among its members a Chair and a Vice-Chair and may appoint a Secretary who need not be a member of the Commission. The Commission shall also create such committees as it deems necessary to the performance of its duties and may delegate to such committees such investigations, studies, and other administrative duties as it deems advisable.

(§ 5, Ord. 213, as amended by § 1, Ord. 273, eff. February 23, 1961, and § 1, Ord. 372, eff. September 7, 1966)

 

Article 2. Parks and Parkways Commission
Note
*       Editor’s note: Sections 2-4.201 through 2-4.205, codified from § 1, Ord. No. 273, effective February 23, 1961, repealed by implication by § 1, Ord. No. 372, effective September 7, 1966)

 

Article 3. Recruitment and Training of Peace Officers
Sec. 2-4.301. Declaration to receive aid from the State.
        The City hereby declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the State under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the Penal Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 272, eff. December 1, 1960)

 

Sec. 2-4.302. Standards for recruitment and training.
        Pursuant to Section 13522 of the Penal Code, the City, while receiving aid from the State pursuant to Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the Penal Code of the State, will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training.

(§ 1, Ord. 272, eff. December 1, 1960)

Chapter 5 FINANCE DIRECTOR
Article 1. Office
Sec. 2-5.01. Creation of office.
        The office of Finance Director is hereby created and established.

(§ 1, Ord. 747, eff. October 26, 2000)

 

Sec. 2-5.02. Powers, duties and responsibilities.
        The Finance Director shall be the head of the Finance Department of the City under the direction and control of the City Manager. Further, his or her duties and responsibilities shall be as follows:

(a)    Pursuant to California Government Code Section 40805.5, as amended, the Finance Director shall be the accounting officer of the City and maintain records readily reflecting the financial condition of the City;

(b)    The Finance Director shall cause a summary of the City’s financial report required by Government Code Section 53891, as amended, in a form prescribed by the State Controller, to be published not later than 120 days after the close of the City’s fiscal year for which the report is compiled, once in a newspaper of general circulation. If there is no such newspaper, he or she shall cause copies of the statement to be posted in three public places in the City designated by ordinance as the places for posting of public notices;

(c)    The Finance Director shall also perform those duties set forth for the Finance Director in Section 4-16.205, Article 2, Chapter 16, Title 4 of the Ojai Municipal Code concerning receiving cash bonds for outdoor gatherings in the City;

(d)    The Finance Director shall also maintain and operate the general accounting systems of the City and each of the respective departments and divisions and functions thereof, and prescribe such accounting and reporting procedures to be established or in operation in each;

(e)    The Finance Director shall assume, maintain and perform all functions and duties as may be assigned by the City Council and/or City Manager pertaining to any fees charged by the City and the collection thereof;

(f)    The Finance Director shall assist in the purchase of all services, supplies, goods, equipment or materials which may be necessary for the proper function of the City;

(g)    The Finance Director shall prepare and submit such financial data and detail as to keep the City Council and City Manager informed on the financial condition of the City; and

(h)    The Finance Director shall perform all other duties as may be imposed upon him or her by law or by direction of the City Manager.

(§ 1, Ord. 747, eff. October 26, 2000)

Chapter 6 ELECTIONS
Article 1. City Council Members Elected By-District
Sec. 2-6.101. Purpose.
        The City Council declares that this change in method of electing members of the City of Ojai City Council is enacted in furtherance of the California Voting Rights Act of 2001.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

 

Sec. 2-6.102. By-district elections.
        Beginning with the municipal election in November 2020, the four (4) members of the City Council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by Section 2-6.103 and subsequently reapportioned as provided by State law. Elections shall take place by-district as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871, meaning one member of the City Council shall be elected from each district by the voters of that district alone. Each member of the City Council shall serve a four (4) year term.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

 

Sec. 2-6.103. District maps.
        Members of the City Council shall be elected on a by-district basis from the four (4) City Council districts hereby established. The boundaries and identifying number of each district shall be as described on the City Council District Map attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as “Exhibit A” and incorporated by reference.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

 

Sec. 2-6.104. Election sequence.
        Commencing with the general municipal election in November 2020 and every four (4) years thereafter the voters in District 4 shall elect a member of the City Council by-district for a full four (4) year term. At the general municipal election in November 2022 and every four (4) years thereafter, the voters in Districts 1, 2, and 3 shall elect members of the City Council by-district for full four (4) year terms.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

 

Sec. 2-6.105. City Council residency.
        Each member of the City Council elected by-district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for City Council must reside in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued pursuant to Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227. It is the intent of the City Council that no term of any member of the City Council that commenced on the same day as or before the effective date of this ordinance shall be affected by this chapter. Any sitting City Council member elected at-large may reside anywhere within the City during the pendency of his or her term in effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

 

Sec. 2-6.106. Voter residency.
        Registered voters signing nomination papers or voting for a member of the City Council shall be residents of the geographical area making up the district from which the candidate is to be elected.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

 

Sec. 2-6.107. Termination of residency.
        Termination of residency in a district by a member of the City Council elected by-district shall create a vacancy for that City Council District unless a substitute residence within the district is immediately declared and established within thirty (30) days after the termination of residency. In the event that a vacancy is created as a result of termination of residency as provided herein, such vacancy shall be filled pursuant to the provisions of the Elections Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

 

Sec. 2-6.108. Technical amendments.
        If necessary to facilitate the implementation of this article, the City Clerk is authorized to make technical adjustments to the district boundaries that do not substantively affect the populations in the districts, the eligibility of candidates, or the residence of elected officials within any district. The City Clerk shall consult with the City Manager and City Attorney concerning any technical adjustments deemed necessary and shall advise the City Council of any such adjustments required in the implementation of the districts.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

 

Article 2. Mayor Elected At-Large
Sec. 2-6.201. Mayor elected at-large.
        The office of Mayor of the City of Ojai is a separate office with a term of two (2) years, which shall continue to be elected at-large, as approved by a majority of the City’s electorate in November 2014 by adoption of Measures A and B, under the provisions of Government Code Section 34900. The at-large electoral system for the Mayor may only be changed by a vote of the City’s electorate.

(§ 2, Ord. 889, eff. December 11, 2018)

Title 3 PUBLIC SAFETY
Chapter 1 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
Chapter 2 TRAFFIC
Chapter 3 POLICE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 4 FIRE PREVENTION
Chapter 5 SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 6 MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Chapter 7 SKATEBOARD PARK FACILITIES
Chapter 8 FILM PERMITS

Chapter 1 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 1, Disaster Regulations, consisting of Sections 3-1.01 through 3-1.09, codified from Ord. No. 132, repealed by Part 1, Ord. No. 468, effective March 29, 1973.

 

Sec. 3-1.01. Purposes.
        The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency, the direction of the Emergency Organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of the City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.02. Emergency defined.
        As used in this chapter “emergency” shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or the imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are, or are likely to be, beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.03. Disaster Council: Membership.
        The Ojai Disaster Council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

(a)    The Mayor, who shall be chairman;

(b)    The Director of Emergency Services, who shall be vice-chairman;

(c)    The Assistant Director of Emergency Services;

(d)    Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in the current Emergency Plan of the City, adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and

(e)    Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veteran, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility as may be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services with the advice and consent of the City Council.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.04. Disaster Council: Powers and duties: Meetings.
        It shall be the duty of the Ojai Disaster Council and it is hereby empowered to develop and recommend for adoption by the City Council emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The Disaster Council shall meet upon the call of the chairman or, in his absence from the City or inability to call such meeting, upon the call of the vice-chairman.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.05. Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services: Offices created.
(a)    There is hereby created the office of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.

(b)    There is hereby created the office of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.06. Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services: Powers and duties.
(a)    The Director of Emergency Services is hereby generally empowered as follows:

(1)    To request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency,” if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation, if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter, or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

(2)    To request the Governor of the State to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the Director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

(3)    To control and direct the effort of the Emergency Organization of the City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

(4)    To direct cooperation between and the coordination of the services and staff of the Emergency Organization of the City and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; and

(5)    To represent the City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter.

(b)    In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency,” as provided in this section, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor of the State or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the Director of Emergency Services is hereby empowered:

(1)    To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations shall be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

(2)    To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property, and to bind the City for the fair value thereof, and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

(3)    To require the emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the County or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of the community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties. Such persons shall be entitled to all the privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by State law for registered disaster service workers;

(4)    To requisition the necessary personnel or materials of any City department or agency; and

(5)    To execute all of his ordinary powers as City Manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by the provisions of this chapter or by resolution or Emergency Plan adopted by the City Council, and all the powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.

(c)    During periods of great calamity, such as extra ordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic, earthquake, sabotage, or enemy attack, the Director of Emergency Services shall have complete authority over the City and the right to exercise all police powers vested in the City by the Constitution and general laws of the State. Such authority shall terminate upon the adoption of a resolution to that effect by the City Council.

(d)    The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, which shall take effect in the event the Director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.

(e)    The Assistant Director of Emergency Services shall, under the supervision of the Director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the City, and he shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.07. Emergency Organization.
        All officers and employees of the City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may, by agreement or operation of law, including persons pressed into service under the provisions of subsection (3) of subsection (b) of Section 3-1.06 of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the City during such emergency, shall constitute the Emergency Organization of the City of Ojai.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.08. Emergency Plan.
        The Ojai Disaster Council shall be responsible for the development of the Ojai Emergency Plan, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the City, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency and which shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the Emergency Organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.09. Expenditures.
        Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities and emergency preparedness services provided the City under contract or agreement, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.10. Volunteers.
        All persons, other than officers and employees of the City, volunteering services pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall serve without compensation from the City. While engaged in such services, they shall have the same immunities as officers and employees of the City performing similar duties.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.11. Violations: Penalties.
        It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six (6) months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:

(a)    Wilfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the Emergency Organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of said provisions;

(b)    Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy, or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the City, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof; or

(c)    Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the State.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

 

Sec. 3-1.12. Severability.
        If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.

(Part 2, Ord. 468, eff. March 29, 1973)

Chapter 2 TRAFFIC
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 2 consisting of Article 1 entitled “Definitions,” consisting of Sections 3-2.101 through 3-2.113, Article 2 entitled “Enforcement and Obedience to Traffic Regulations,” consisting of Sections 3-2.201 through 3-2.207, Article 3 entitled “Traffic Control Devices,” consisting of Sections 3-2.301 through 3-2.307, Article 4 entitled “Turning Movements,” consisting of Sections 3-2.401 through 3-2.403, Article 5 entitled “One-Way Streets and Alleys,” consisting of Section 3-2.501, Article 6 entitled “Special Stops Required,” consisting of Sections 3-2.601 through 3-2.603, Article 7 entitled “Miscellaneous Driving Rules,” consisting of Sections 3-2.701 through 3-2.704, Article 8 entitled “Pedestrians,” consisting of Sections 3-2.801 through 3-2.803, Article 9 entitled “Stopping, Standing, and Parking,” consisting of Sections 3-2.901 through 3-2.913, Article 10 entitled “Stopping for Loading or Unloading Only,” consisting of Sections 3-2.1001 through 3-2.1008, Article 11 entitled “Stopping, Standing, or Parking Prohibited on Certain Streets,” consisting of Sections 3-2.1101 through 3-2.1104, Article 12 entitled “Designated Streets,” consisting of Sections 3-2.1201 through 3-2.1208, Article 13 entitled “Approval by State Department of Public Works,” consisting of Sections 3-2.1301 and 3-2.1302, Article 14 entitled “Regulation of Bicycles and Skateboards,” consisting of Sections 3-2.1401 through 3-2.1404, and Article 15 entitled “Off-Street Parking,” consisting of Sections 3-2.1501 and 3-2.1502, codified from Ord. No. 148, as amended by Ord. Nos. 153, 173, 195, 301, effective September 12, 1962, 461, effective November 9, 1972, 544, effective May 12, 1977, 550, effective January 12, 1978, 556, effective May 11, 1978, 560, effective July 27, 1978, 586, effective September 23, 1980, 587, effective December 12, 1980, 589, effective April 23, 1981, 598, effective December 8, 1981, 607, effective February 24, 1983, 610, effective August 25, 1983, and Ord. No. 635, effective December 26, 1985, repealed by Ord. No. 649, effective September 24, 1987.

 

Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 3-2.101. Short title.
        This chapter may be cited as the “Ojai Uniform Traffic Law.”

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.102. State laws.
        The Vehicle Code, as now or hereafter constituted, is hereby adopted by the City, and a violation of said statute shall be an offense against the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.103. Scope.
        The provisions of the Vehicle Code and this chapter shall be applicable to the following:

(a)    All streets and highways;

(b)    Those driveways, paths, roads, parking facilities, and grounds owned, operated, or controlled by the City as determined by the Director of Public Works; and

(c)    Those privately-owned and maintained roads and parking facilities as determined and designated by the Council by resolution according to the provisions of the Vehicle Code and City policy and when signs giving notice thereof have been erected.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.104. State approval required.
        Whenever the provisions of this chapter establish regulations applicable to a portion of a State highway or delegate to a City official authority for the administration and enforcement of regulations applicable to a portion of a State highway, such regulations shall have been submitted to the Department of Transportation of the State in draft form for approval prior to enactment pursuant to Sections 21104, 21353, 22501, 22506, 35702, and other applicable sections of the Vehicle Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 3-2.201. Scope.
        For the purposes of this title, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this title are defined as set forth in this article.

        Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this chapter but are defined in the Vehicle Code, such definitions shall be incorporated in this title and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases in this title as though set forth in this title in full.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.202. City.
        “City” shall mean the City of Ojai, California.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.203. Loading zone.
        “Loading zone” shall mean the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.204. Local street.
        “Local street” shall mean any street or highway in the City other than a State highway.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.205. State highway.
        “State highway” shall mean those portions of Route 33 and Route 150 located within the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.206. Vehicle Code.
        “Vehicle Code” shall mean the Vehicle Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 3. Administration
Sec. 3-2.301. Powers of the Council.
        Subject to State laws, the Council shall exercise all municipal traffic authority for the City, except those powers specifically and expressly delegated in this title or by another ordinance.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.302. Duties of the Director of Public Works.
        The Director of Public Works shall place and maintain, or cause to be placed and maintained, all official traffic control devices where, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, such official traffic control devices are necessary to protect the public safety.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.303. Authority of the Police Department.
        It shall be the duty of the officers of the Police Department, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police, to enforce all street traffic laws of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 4. General Traffic Regulations
Sec. 3-2.401. General traffic regulations.
        Except as provided in this title, the general traffic regulations of the City shall be those set forth in the Vehicle Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.402. Local street closures.
        The City Council may, by resolution, close or partially close, either temporarily or permanently, a local street in order to implement the circulation element of the Ojai General Plan, provided that provisions shall be made for emergency vehicle access and other necessary safety measures.

(§ 1, Ord. 757, eff. February 12, 2002)

 

Article 5. Speed Limits
Sec. 3-2.501. Prima facie speed limits.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the prima facie speed limits for all streets and highways shall be as set forth in Section 22352 of the Vehicle Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.502. State highway speed limits.
        Pursuant to Section 22354 of the Vehicle Code, the Department of Transportation of the State shall determine and declare the appropriate speed limits for State highways.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.503. Local street limits.
(a)    Pursuant to Section 22357 of the Vehicle Code, the Council may designate by resolution a prima facie speed limit greater than twenty-five (25) miles per hour for certain specified local streets.

(b)    Pursuant to Section 22358.3 of the Vehicle Code, the Council may designate by resolution a prima facie speed limit of less than twenty-five (25) miles per hour for certain specified local streets less than twenty-five (25′) feet in width.

(c)    Any such resolution shall set forth the designated speed which is most appropriate to facilitate the orderly and safe movement of traffic.

(d)    Any such designated speed shall be based upon appropriate traffic engineering and survey data analyses.

(e)    Any prima facie speed limit so designated shall become effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon the streets specified.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 6. Traffic Control Devices
Sec. 3-2.601. Authority.
        The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to place and maintain such traffic control devices deemed necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter or to warn or guide traffic and to determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect. The Director of Public Works is further authorized to move, relocate, or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by State laws or this chapter whenever he shall determine in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist or apply.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.602. Uniform standards.
        Only those official traffic control devices which conform to the uniform standards and specifications promulgated by the Department of Transportation of the State shall be placed upon a public street or highway.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.603. Required for enforcement.
        No provision of this chapter for which official traffic control devices are required may be enforced against any alleged violator thereof if, at the time and place of such alleged violation, any official traffic control device required by the provisions of this chapter or the Vehicle Code is not in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 7. Turning Movements
Sec. 3-2.701. Turning markers.
(a)    The Director of Public Works is authorized to place markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections. The Director of Public Works is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right- or left-hand turns, and the course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law.

(b)    When authorized markers, buttons, or other indications are placed within an intersection specifying the course to be traveled by vehicles turning thereat, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of such indications.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.702. Restricted turn signs.
        The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.703. No turn signs.
        Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 8. One-Way Streets and Alleys
Sec. 3-2.801. Signs.
        Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the City designates any one-way street or alley, the Director of Public Works shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof. No such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where the movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 9. Stop Signs
Sec. 3-2.901. Authority.
        Pursuant to Section 21354 of the Vehicle Code, the Director of Public Works may designate any local street intersection as a stop intersection and direct the placement of stop signs at one or more entrances thereto provided such designation is made in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.902. Purpose.
        The purpose of a stop sign is to control traffic within an intersection. It is not the purpose of a stop sign to control speed on local streets.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.903. Reports.
        The designation of a stop intersection shall only be made subsequent to the receipt of a report on the need and necessity of such a determination.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.904. Warranted.
        A report prepared pursuant to this article shall summarize traffic survey findings made of the intersection proposed for such a designation and, based upon accepted traffic engineering standards and criteria, shall make a recommendation as to whether or not such a determination is warranted.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 10. Vehicles on Private Property
Sec. 3-2.1001. Operation without permission.
        No person shall operate any motor vehicle on private property without the prior express consent of the owner and person in lawful possession of the real property. Upon a demand to leave given the operator of any such vehicle by the owner or person in lawful possession of the real property, no person to whom such demand is addressed shall thereafter operate a motor vehicle on such private property, except as necessary to immediately quit such property by the shortest route and time reasonably available.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1002. Equipment and noise control.
(a)    No person shall operate any motor vehicle on private property within the City without a United States Forestry Service-approved or State-approved spark arrester or a State-approved noise-muffling device.

(b)    No person shall operate any motor vehicle on private property within 300 feet of the exterior boundaries of any residential property, except where reasonably necessary upon his own property or property of others over which a lawful easement right is owned for the purposes of ingress and egress.

(c)    No person shall operate within the City any motor vehicle beyond 300 feet of the exterior boundary of any residential property, whether on his own property or that of others, with equipment on such vehicle or in such a manner that the volume of exhaust, sound, or motor noise is audible to the extent that such noise volume is so loud, raucous, or jarring as to be disturbing or a nuisance to the peace or quiet of any adjacent neighborhood or a person residing in an adjacent neighborhood or conducting a lawful business therein. There shall be rebuttable presumption of compliance with the equipment requirements of this subsection if the vehicle is determined to be in compliance with the provisions of subsection (a) of this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1003. Disturbing the peace.
        Any person who operates any type of a motor vehicle on any vacant lot, parking lot, vacant property, or acreage within the City and disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or person by noise, dust, smoke, or fumes caused by such vehicle shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 11. Stopping, Standing, and Parking
Sec. 3-2.1101. Parking prohibited.
(a)    Pursuant to Section 22507 of the Vehicle Code, the Director of Public Works may establish no parking zones on certain streets, or portions thereof, during all or certain hours of the day.

(b)    It shall be unlawful to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in any no parking zone so established. Any such vehicle may be removed from the street at the direction of the Chief of Police pursuant to Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code.

(c)    Whenever such no parking zone is established on a portion of a street subject to parking restrictions established pursuant to this article, the parking prohibition established by the creation of the no parking zone shall prevail.

(d)    Whenever any such no parking zone is established, such area shall be identified by signs or markings giving notice thereof.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1102. Parking restrictions.
(a)    Pursuant to Section 22507 of the Vehicle Code, the Director of Public Works may establish parking restrictions on certain streets, or portions thereof, during all or certain hours of the day.

(b)    Whenever two (2) or more parking time limitations are established over the same portion of a street, the more restrictive time limitation shall prevail.

(c)    It shall be unlawful to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, on any street so designated for a period of time longer than that permitted by such parking restrictions.

(d)    Whenever any such parking restrictions are established, the areas affected shall be identified by signs or markings giving notice thereof.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1103. Angle parking.
        Pursuant to Section 22503 of the Vehicle Code, the Council may designate by resolution the location of the streets, or portions thereof, where angle parking shall be permitted.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1104. Parking space markings.
        Pursuant to Section 22508 of the Vehicle Code, the Director of Public Works shall place and maintain parking space markings in those areas where parking restrictions have been established in accordance with the provisions of this article. When such parking space markings are placed, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing, or parked other than within a single space.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1105. Handicapped parking.
(a)    Pursuant to Sections 22511.7 and 22511.8 of the Vehicle Code, parking spaces may be reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles which display distinguishing license plates or a placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 or 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code.

(b)    The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to locate and establish such reserved spaces in public parking lots and in curb side parking areas as may be reasonably necessary to meet the needs of the disabled.

(c)    It shall be unlawful to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, in a parking space reserved for vehicles displaying the distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 or 22511.9 of the Vehicle Code.

(d)    Whenever any parking spaces are so designated, such spaces shall be identified by signs or markings giving notice thereof in a manner consistent with Section 22511.8 of the Vehicle Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1106. Loading zones.
(a)    Pursuant to Section 22507 of the Vehicle Code, the Director of Public Works may establish loading zones on certain streets, or portions thereof.

(b)    Whenever such a zone is established on any street subject to any parking prohibition or restriction established pursuant to this article, such parking prohibitions or restrictions shall not apply.

(c)    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park or stop such vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, however, no stop shall be longer than three (3) minutes for the loading or unloading of passengers nor longer than twenty (20) minutes for the loading or unloading of materials in any loading zone.

(d)    In no event shall more than one-half (1/2) of the total curb length in any block be reserved for loading zone purposes.

(e)    Permission granted pursuant to this section to stop or stand a vehicle for the purposes of loading or unloading materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty (20) minutes.

(f)    The loading and unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries and the delivery or pick up of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

(g)    Permission granted pursuant to this section to stop or park for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three (3) minutes.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1107. Bus zones.
(a)    The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized to establish and determine the location of bus zones opposite curb space for the loading and unloading of buses or common carriers of passengers when such zones are found by him to be necessary and will not cause a safety hazard.

(b)    Whenever such a zone is established on any street subject to any parking prohibition established pursuant to this article, such parking prohibition shall not apply to buses.

(c)    It shall be unlawful for any operator of any vehicle to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, except a bus, in a bus zone.

(d)    Whenever such a zone is established, the area affected shall be identified by signs or markings giving notice thereof.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1108. Public parking lots.
        Pursuant to Section 22519 of the Vehicle Code, any of the parking regulations set forth in this article may be applied to off-street public parking facilities.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1109. Commercial vehicles.
        Pursuant to Section 22507.5 of the Vehicle Code, no commercial vehicle with a gross weight of more than 10,000 pounds shall park on any residential street, except for loading and unloading purposes in connection with local deliveries.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1110. Seventy-two hour limit.
        It shall be unlawful to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle upon any City street right-of-way for a period of more than seventy-two (72) hours. Any such vehicle may be removed from the street at the direction of the Chief of Police pursuant to Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1111. Parking of motorized vehicles.
(a)    No person shall park or leave standing on any street, alley or public property a non-motorized vehicle that is detached from a motor vehicle.

(b)    A non-motorized vehicle is detached from a motor vehicle if the hitch, coupling device, connections, brakes, light connections, safety chains or other devices required by law for the sale and legal operation of the non-motorized vehicle on a public highway are not connected to a motor vehicle.

(c)    This section shall not apply to:

(1)    A non-motorized vehicle with a commercial license registration while the non-motorized vehicle is being loaded with or unloaded of any goods, wares or merchandise from property adjacent to the non-motorized vehicle;

(2)    A non-motorized vehicle required for any lawfully authorized construction, maintenance or repair to property adjacent to the non-motorized vehicle for no more than time reasonably required for the use of the non-motorized vehicle in carrying out the construction, maintenance or repair; and

(3)    A non-motorized vehicle used solely for recreational purposes while the non-motorized vehicle is being loaded or unloaded or otherwise prepared for its intended recreational use. In no event shall such a non-motorized vehicle be parked on a street, alley or public property for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours.

(Ord. No. 807, § 1, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Sec. 3-2.1112. Parking during street maintenance.
        It shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park, stop, or leave standing, whether attended or unattended, upon any City street right-of-way, or a portion thereof, when such street right-of way is necessary for the repair or construction thereof or for the installation of underground utilities, and signs giving notice that the vehicle may be removed have been erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to any removal. Any such vehicle may be removed from the street at the direction of the Chief of Police pursuant to Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. No. 807, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Sec. 3-2.1113. Parking on hills.
        Pursuant to Section 22509 of the Vehicle Code, no vehicle shall be parked or left unattended on a highway when upon any grade exceeding three (3%) percent within any business or residential district without blocking the wheels of such vehicle by turning them against the curb or by other means.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. No. 807, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Sec. 3-2.1114. Parking on privately-owned property without permission.
(a)    No person shall park a vehicle on private property without the permission, express or implied, of the owner or person in lawful possession of such property or in a manner different or for a period of time longer than the permission which was given.

(b)    Any vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed from the property to the nearest public garage by the owner or person in lawful possession thereof if the property is improved with a single-family dwelling. If the property is vacant or improved with any other type of building or used for other than single-family residence purposes, the vehicle parked in violation of this section may be removed if there is displayed on the property, in plain view, a sign not less than twenty-four (24″) inches by twenty-four (24″) inches in size which states that public parking is prohibited, indicating that parked vehicles will be removed at the expense of the owner of the vehicle, and further containing the telephone number of the Police Department which may be called by the person parking the vehicle, which number shall be the same number to which the owner of the property or person in lawful possession thereof notifies the Police Department of the intent to remove the vehicle.

        Such sign may be erected on the property by the owner or person in lawful possession of such property who shall notify the Police Department in writing of the erection of such sign. This section shall not preclude the City from erecting any such sign on private property with the written consent of the owner thereof provided it is in the interests of the City to erect such sign at public expense.

(c)    The person causing the removal of a vehicle, if the person knows or is able to ascertain from the registration records of the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State the name and address of the registered legal owner thereof, shall immediately give, or cause to be given, notice in writing to the registered legal owner of the fact of the removal and the grounds for the removal and indicate the place to which the vehicle has been removed. A copy of the notice shall be given to the proprietor of the public garage. The notice provided for in this section shall include the amount of mileage on the vehicle at the time of removal. If the person does not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner or for any other reason is unable to give the notice to the owner as provided in this section, the person causing the removal of the vehicle shall comply with the requirements of subsection (c) of Section 22853 of the Vehicle Code in the same manner as applicable to an officer removing a vehicle from private property.

(d)    Any owner or person in lawful possession of any private property causing the removal of a vehicle parked on such property shall state the grounds for the removal of the vehicle if requested by the legal or registered owner of such vehicle.

(e)    The Police Department shall advise owners so requesting of the telephone number where notice shall be given of the intent to remove a vehicle, which number shall also be placed on the sign.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. No. 807, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Sec. 3-2.1115. Parking for repairs.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to park, stop, or leave standing any vehicle upon any City street right-of-way for the principal purpose of washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. No. 807, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Sec. 3-2.1116. Parking by vendors and peddlers.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables, or foodstuffs are sold, displayed, solicited, or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon, eating car, or vehicle, on any portion of any street within the City, except that such vehicles, wagons, or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten (10) minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such articles upon an order of, or by agreement with, a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution.

(b)    No person shall park or stand on any street any lunch wagon, eating car, or vehicle or pushcart from which tamales, peanuts, popcorn, candy, or other articles of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Council which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand.

(c)    No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of persons or property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the Council which shall designate the specific location where such vehicle may stand.

(d)    Whenever any permit is granted pursuant to the provisions of this section, and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon, or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating any of the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the Council upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the Council. No permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six (6) months have elapsed after the date of such revocation.

(e)    Commercial vending vehicles near schools: prohibited during certain hours. No person operating or controlling a vehicle designated for, or intended to be a vehicle for, the selling of any merchandise consisting of food or other commodity may stop or park within 500 feet of the property line of any private or public school between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. on the days the school is in session; provided, however, the principal of any school may permit a person so prohibited from engaging in such business by specifically waiving the provision of this section with express permission of the Chief of Police, who shall first find that such waiver will not cause a hazard to persons or property and not interfere with normal traffic patterns.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 1, Ord. 717, eff. December 12, 1996, § 2, Ord. No. 807, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Sec. 3-2.1117. Emergency parking signs.
        Whenever the Chief of Police shall determine that an emergency traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions or for other reasons, he shall have the power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking, or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets and alleys as he shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency, and the Chief of Police shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. No. 807, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Sec. 3-2.1118. Temporary suspension of regulations.
        When deemed warranted by special events or circumstances, the Chief of Police may temporarily suspend parking restrictions or prohibitions established pursuant to this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. No. 807, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Sec. 3-2.1119. Local parking regulations and exemptions by permit.
(a)    The Chief of Police of the City may, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22507(a) and any future amendments thereto, restrict the parking of vehicles on certain streets or portions thereof, during all or certain hours of the day.

(b)    The Chief of Police may also grant by permit obtained at the office of the Ojai Police Department exemptions from such parking restrictions for residents and/or merchants and their guests whose residences or businesses are adjacent to those certain streets upon which parking restrictions have been imposed.

(c)    Any preferential permit granted pursuant to this Section shall at all times be prominently displayed on the permittee’s vehicle in a manner determined by the Chief of Police.

(d)    With the exception of alley’s, this Section shall have no effect until signs giving adequate notice of such parking restrictions have been placed.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. No. 807, eff. October 8, 2009)

 

Article 12. Curb Markings to Indicate No Stopping and Parking Regulations
Sec. 3-2.1201. Authorization.
        The Director of Public Works is hereby authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place and, when required by this chapter, shall place, in addition to any other signs or markings deemed appropriate by him, those curb markings to indicate the parking or standing regulations set forth in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1202. No stopping.
        Red shall mean no stopping, standing, or parking at any time, except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus or police vehicle may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1203. Loading zones.
(a)    Commercial loading zones, for the purposes of loading or unloading materials for a period of time not to exceed twenty (20) minutes and for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers for a period of time not to exceed three (3) minutes, shall be indicated by yellow paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

(b)    Loading zones for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers or depositing United States mail for a period of time not to exceed three (3) minutes shall be indicated by white paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones.

(c)    Passenger loading zones for the purposes of loading or unloading passengers for a period of time not to exceed twenty (20) minutes shall be indicated by green paint upon the top of all curbs within such zones; provided, however, where such zone has stenciled upon it the black letters “Five Minute Zone,” such restriction shall apply.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 13. Abandoned Vehicles
Sec. 3-2.1301. Findings and determinations.
        In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the State pursuant to the provisions of Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the Council hereby finds and declares that the accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, is hereby found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, promote blight and deterioration, invite plundering, create fire hazards, constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety, and general welfare. Therefore, no person shall cause the accumulation and/or storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as provided in this article, and the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted by the provisions of this article, is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1302. Exceptions.
        The provisions of this article shall not apply to:

(a)    A vehicle, or part thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner and which is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

(b)    A vehicle, or part thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

        The provisions of this article shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined pursuant to provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1303. Effect on other laws.
        The provisions of this article are not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the City. The provisions of this article shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory Codes, statutes, and laws heretofore or hereafter enacted by the City, State, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1304. Authority to abate and remove.
        Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property within the City, the Chief of Police shall have the authority to cause the removal thereof in accordance with the procedures set forth in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1305. Right of entry of certain persons.
        When the Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private or public property to remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle, or part thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to the provisions of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1306. Notices of intention to abate and remove.
        A ten (10) day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail, return receipt requested, to the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. Any reference in this article to “the owner of the land” shall mean the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1307. Hearings: Notices.
        Upon a request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the Chief of Police within ten (10) days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the City Manager on the question of the abatement and removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the costs of removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, against the property on which it is located.

        If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such ten (10) day period, such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for a hearing is not received within ten (10) days after mailing the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle, or part thereof, as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1308. Hearings: Determinations.
        All hearings held pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be held before the City Manager who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on such private or public property. The City Manager shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land with his reasons for such denial.

        The City Manager may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this article. He may delay the time for the removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, if, in his opinion, the circumstances so justify. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the City Manager may find that a vehicle, or part thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property, and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or part thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

        If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the City Manager shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land.

        If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the City Manager but does not appear, such persons shall be notified in writing of the decision.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1309. Appeals.
        Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after his decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the Council which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take any other action deemed appropriate.

        The City Clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and to those persons entitled to the ten (10) day notice of intention.

        In conducting the hearing, the Council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.

        Except as otherwise provided herein, appeals of decisions of the City Manager pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Sec. 3-2.1310. Removal.
        Five (5) days after the adoption of the order declaring the vehicle, or part thereof, to be a public nuisance, or five (5) days after the date of mailing the notice of decision, if such notice is required by the provisions of Section 3-2.1308 of this article, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the Council authorizing removal following an appeal, the vehicle, or part thereof, may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1311. Removal: Notice.
        Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle, or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the State identifying the vehicle, or part thereof, removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to said Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title, and license plates.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1312. Assessment of costs.
        If the administrative costs and the costs of removal charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 3-2.1308 of this article are not paid within thirty (30) days after the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the State and shall be transmitted to the Tax Collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1313. Violations.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, or to refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this article or State laws where such State laws are applicable.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 14. Displaying Vehicles for Sale
Sec. 3-2.1401. Prohibitions on advertising vehicles for sale.
        Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall park any vehicle on any public or private property for the purpose of displaying, advertising, or offering such vehicle for sale.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1402. Prohibitions on advertising vehicles for sale: Exceptions.
        The provisions of Section 3-2.1401 of this article shall not apply to the following:

(a)    Any person parking no more than one vehicle at a time for the purposes specified in Section 3-2.1401 of this article on property in which such person has an estate or right of possession or on the property of another with the written consent of the owner, lessee, or person in lawful possession of such property where them is no more than one vehicle so parked and displayed at any one time on such property;

(b)    Any person licensed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 11500) or Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 11700) of Division 5 of the Vehicle Code and operating at a place of business where such business is permitted by the zoning laws of the City; or

(c)    Any person parking any vehicle for the purposes specified in Section 3-2.1401 of this article on property which is the established place of business of a person licensed as specified in subsection (b) of this section, so long as the person parking the vehicle has the consent of the person so licensed.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 15. Bicycle Licenses
Sec. 3-2.1501. Licenses required.
        Pursuant to Section 21206 of the Vehicle Code, no resident of the City shall operate a bicycle on any street, road, highway, or other public property within the jurisdiction of the City unless such bicycle is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1502. Licenses: Issuance.
        Each person engaged in the business of selling bicycles within the City (referred to in this article as a bicycle retailer) shall issue and affix the license required by this chapter for each bicycle sold by him and for each person applying for such a license. Such bicycle retailers shall obtain such information as is required on forms furnished by the City and shall comply with all procedural requirements of the City or as required by State laws. The license, when affixed, shall be securely attached to the bicycle so as to be visible from the rear and at all times shall be maintained in good condition and in such position of visibility, except during periods of repair. Each bicycle retailer shall be entitled to retain fifty (50) cents from the license fee for each license issued and twenty-five (25) cents from the transfer fee for each license transferred. Licenses may also be issued and transferred by the Police Department.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1503. Licenses: Fees.
        The annual license fee shall be One and no/100ths ($1.00) Dollar. All revenues from such fees shall be used to improve bicycle safety programs and establish bicycle facilities in the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1504. Transfer of ownership.
(a)    Each owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall notify the Police Department within ten (10) days after the ownership of such bicycle has been transferred. The notification may be made orally and shall include his name, the license number, the date of transfer, and the name and address of the transferee.

(b)    Each resident of the City who acquires ownership of a bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall apply, within ten (10) days after such acquisition, for the transfer of such license to his name and furnish the information and fees required for such transfer.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1505. Change of address.
        Whenever the owner of a bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article changes his address, he shall notify the Police Department within ten (10) days of the old and new addresses and the license number of each bicycle owned by him.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1506. Serial numbers.
        No bicycle retailer shall sell a new bicycle unless such bicycle has permanently stamped or cast on its frame a serial number unique to the particular bicycle of the manufacturer. Serial numbers shall be stamped or cast in the head of the frame, either side of the seat down the post tube, or the bottom sprocket bracket.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1507. Information to purchasers.
        Each bicycle retailer shall supply to each purchaser a record of the following information: the name and address of the retailer and the year, make, and serial number of the bicycle.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1508. Reports by bicycle retailers.
        Each bicycle retailer shall furnish a report to the Police Department within ten (10) days after the end of each calendar month as to all licenses issued and shall account for all funds collected. Each such retailer at the same time shall furnish information regarding each bicycle sold, but not licensed, including all information furnished for licensed bicycles.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1509. Reports by used bicycle retailers.
        Each person engaged in the business of purchasing or acquiring used bicycles, in addition to all the other requirements of this article, shall furnish a monthly report to the Police Department as to each used bicycle so acquired, including the name and address of the person from whom it was acquired, the consideration for the acquisition, and all other obtainable information required for licensing the bicycle.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1510. Tampering with registration certificates, bicycle licenses, and serial numbers.
(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate, or alter any registration certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate, or in any way alter or tamper with any bicycle license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article.

(c)    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, alter, or mutilate the serial number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to the provisions of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 16. Operation of Bicycles
Sec. 3-2.1601. State authority.
        Pursuant to Sections 21200 and 21206 of the Vehicle Code, every person operating a bicycle upon any street or upon any bicycle route established pursuant to this article shall be subject to all of the provisions of the Vehicle Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles, except those provisions which by their very nature can have no applicability.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1602. Bicycle routes.
(a)    Pursuant to Section 21207 of the Vehicle Code, the Council may establish by resolution bicycle routes and/or lanes on any street or sidewalk or on any other facility provided for such use, other than a State highway.

(b)    Any bicycle route so established on any street or sidewalk shall be marked and identified in accordance with the provisions of Section 21207 of the Vehicle Code.

(c)    Any bicycle route so established on any facility created solely for the use of bicycles and pedestrians may be marked and identified as needed to assist and direct the use thereof.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1603. Operation on sidewalks.
        Pursuant to Sections 21206 and 21663 of the Vehicle Code, no person shall operate or ride a bicycle on any sidewalk which is not a part of a designated bicycle route established pursuant to this article and properly marked and identified in accordance with the provisions pertaining thereto.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1604. Yield of right-of-way.
        On any facility designated to be jointly used by both pedestrians and bicycles, the operator of any bicycle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1605. Parking bicycles.
(a)    No person shall park a bicycle upon a street or against a building in such a manner so as to obstruct pedestrian, bicycle, or motor vehicle traffic.

(b)    No person shall leave a bicycle lying on its side on any sidewalk or park a bicycle on a sidewalk in a position which does not leave an adequate path for pedestrian traffic.

(c)    Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (b) of this section, no person shall park a bicycle at any location which has been posted with signs prohibiting such parking.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Article 17. Pedestrians, Bicycles, Scooters, Coasters, Toy Vehicles, Skateboards, Roller Skates and Inline Skates
Sec. 3-2.1701. State authority.
        Except as provided in this article, pedestrian rights and duties shall be as set forth in Chapter 5 of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1702. Crosswalks.
(a)    The Director of Public Works may establish and maintain painted crosswalks only as provided for in this section.

(b)    No mid-block crosswalk shall be established without the recommendation of a qualified traffic engineer. Such crosswalks created prior to August 25, 1987, are hereby approved pursuant to Section 21106 of the Vehicle Code.

(c)    Painted crosswalks shall not be established at intersections unless such crosswalks are require to clarify the safest crossing route for pedestrians. Such crosswalks created prior to August 25, 1987, are hereby approved.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-2.1703. Bicycles, scooters, coasters, toy vehicles, skateboards, roller skates and inline skates prohibited where posted on public property.
(a)    No person shall ride a bicycle, in any manner operate a scooter, coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard, roller skates or inline skates on, along, or over any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public property of the City where the City Council has prohibited the same by resolution.

(b)    The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply until notice has been provided in accordance with this section.

(1)    Notices shall be provided in and about the area where the activity is to be prohibited. Notices shall be placed in locations and in sufficient numbers so that they are reasonably likely to be seen by those engaging in the prohibited activities. Notice may be stenciled directly onto the sidewalk or other paved surface. Also, notice may be provided by the posting of signs.

(2)    The notice shall provide in capital letters at least two (2″) inches high which activities are prohibited, and underneath shall provide in print at least one inch high “O.M.C. Sec. 3-2.1703.”

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 1, Ord. 711, eff. March 14, 1996)

 

Sec. 3-2.1704. Operating scooters, coasters, toy vehicles, skateboards, roller skates and inline skates after dark.
        No person shall in any manner operate a scooter, coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard, roller skates or inline skates on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public property of the City after dark; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the operation and/or use of skateboards, roller skates or inline skates at a City operated skateboard park as defined in Section 3-7.01 of this Code so long as such operation and/or use is in compliance with applicable rules and regulations for such skateboard park.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 1, Ord. 711, eff. March 14, 1996, § 1, Ord. 732, eff. October 16, 1998, and § 1, Ord. 745, eff. May 26, 2000)

 

Sec. 3-2.1705. Bicycles, scooters, coasters, toy vehicles, skateboards, roller skates and inline skates violating the right-of-way.
        No person shall ride a bicycle, in any manner operate a scooter, coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard, roller skates or inline skates on any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way or other public property of the City in such a manner as to violate the right-of-way of any vehicle or pedestrian.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 1, Ord. 711, eff. March 14, 1996)

 

Sec. 3-2.1706. Bicycles, scooters, coasters, toy vehicles, skateboards, roller skates and inline skates prohibited where posted on private property.
(a)    No person shall ride a bicycle or in any manner operate a scooter, coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard, roller skates or inline skates on, along or over any privately-owned property in the City where the owner or owner’s representative has prohibited the same.

(b)    The prohibition set forth in this section shall not apply until notice has been provided in accordance with this section.

(1)    The owner or owners’ representative shall notify the City Chief of Police, in writing, of the prohibition and agree to post notice as required by the Chief of Police.

(2)    Notices shall be provided in and about the area where the activity is to be prohibited. Notices shall be placed in locations and in numbers so that they are reasonably likely to be seen by those engaging in the prohibited activities. Notice may be stenciled directly onto the sidewalk or other paved surface. Also, notice may be provided by the posting of signs.

(3)    Each notice shall provide in capital letters at least two (2″) inches high which activities are prohibited, and underneath shall provide in print at least one inch high “O.M.C. Sec. 3-2.1706.”

(c)    For the purposes of this section, “private property” shall be deemed to include property owned by other public agencies within the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987, as amended by § 1, Ord. 711, eff. March 14, 1996)

 

Sec. 3-2.1707. Exceptions.
        Sections 3-2.1703, 3-2.1705 and 3-2.1706 shall not apply to:

(a)    A motorized wheelchair while it is being utilized for transportation by a physically handicapped person;

(b)    A bicycle ridden upon a public street or roadway; or

(c)    Vehicles operated in connection with a permitted parade or other special event where the otherwise prohibited activities have been expressly permitted by the City in a specific area.

(§ 1, Ord. 711, eff. March 14, 1996)

 

Sec. 3-2.1708. Reckless operation of bicycles, scooters, coasters, toy vehicles, skateboards, roller skates and inline skates.
        No person shall ride a bicycle, in any manner operate a scooter, coaster, toy vehicle, skateboard, roller skates or inline skates in wilful or wanton disregard for the safety of persons or property.

(§ 1, Ord. 711, eff. March 14, 1996)

 

Sec. 3-2.1709. Violation: infraction.
        Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction and shall be punishable as provided by Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 711, eff. March 14, 1996)

 

Article 18. Vehicle Removal—Administrative Fee
Sec. 3-2.1801. Vehicle removal—Administrative fee.
(a)    An administrative fee on the registered owner of a vehicle lawfully removed, impounded, stored or released by the Ojai Police Department is hereby established to reimburse the City for costs incurred by the Ojai Police Department relating to the removal, impound storage, or release of a vehicle pursuant to sections 14602.6, 22651 (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (l), (m), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r) (s), (t), 22655.5 or 22850.5 of the Vehicle Code. The owner of the vehicle shall pay this fee to the City Manager’s designee prior to the release of the vehicle.

(b)    The Chief of Police shall propose the fee authorized by this section which fee then shall be set by City Council Resolution. The fee shall not exceed an amount necessary to cover the actual costs incurred by the Police Department in the removal, impoundment, storage or release of the vehicle.

(c)    The City Manager or his designee is authorized to adopt any other rules, regulations and procedures necessary to collect, adjust, refund and administer any fees imposed by this section.

(Ord. No. 805, § 1, eff. May 28, 2009)

Chapter 3 POLICE DEPARTMENT
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 3, Bicycles, consisting of Sections 3-3.01 through 3-3.08, codified from Ord. No. 183, repealed by Ord. No. 504, effective April 10, 1975. Sections 3-3.01 through 3-3.11, as added by said Ord. No. 504, repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 649, effective September 24, 1987.

 

Sec. 3-3.01. Police Department defined.
        All sections of this Title 3 which refer to the Police Department are hereby amended to read the “County Sheriff’s Department.”

(§ 3, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 3-3.02. Chief of Police defined.
        All sections of this Title 3 which refer to the Chief of Police are hereby amended to read the “Sheriff of the County.”

(§ 3, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

Chapter 4 FIRE PREVENTION
Article 1. Fire Protection District
Sec. 3-4.101. City to be included in Ventura County Fire Protection District.
        It is the intention and desire of the City to be embraced and included within that certain fire protection district known as and called “Ventura County Fire Protection District in Ventura County,” established May 16, 1928, pursuant to “An Act to Provide for the Formation, Management, and Dissolution of County Fire Protection Districts, and Annexations Thereto,” approved May 23, 1923, together with amendments thereto in 1925 and 1927, (Stats. 1923, page 431, Amended Stats. 1925, pages 670, 722, 1927, page 1572). The City does hereby declare and determine itself to be embraced and included and is hereby embraced and included within said fire protection district.

         Editor’s note: Also see Fire Protection District Ord. No. 23, App. VII; Ord. No. 24, App. VII; Ord. No. 25, App. VII; Ord. No. 26, App. J; and Ord. No. 27, Section 610 and App. L.

(§ 1, Ord. 48; Res. No. 99-15, adopted June 8, 1999; Res. No. 02-29, adopted Oct. 8, 2002; Res. No. 06-41, adopted Oct. 24, 2006; Res. No. 07-45, adopted Dec. 11, 2007; Res. No. 10-60, adopted Dec. 14, 2010)

 

Article 2. Burning Regulations
Sec. 3-4.201. Permit required.
        No person shall ignite, or cause to burn in the open air, in any open, exposed or outdoor place any combustible waste material or substance unless a written or verbal permit therefor has been secured from the City Manager or his designee. If such permit is granted, said burning shall be at all times under competent and continuous supervision and not within twenty-five (25′) feet of any building or structure. All inflammable or combustible materials shall be cleaned away from hedges, ornamental shrubs and trees for such distance as may be necessary to safeguard the same from scorching, igniting, or burning, but in no case less than six (6′) feet therefrom.

(§ 1, Ord. 239, eff. Dec. 24, 1958)

 

Sec. 3-4.202. Issuance of permit.
        The City Manager may designate any officer or employee of the City or of the Ventura County Fire Protection District as his designee to issue permits under Section 3-4.201 of this article. In issuing permits under Section 3-4.201, the basic test to be applied is whether the fire to which the permit applied for relates can be ignited without substantial risk of getting out of control. Unless special circumstances exist which do not ordinarily exist, such permits shall be issued for burning only between the hours of 6:00 o’clock a.m. and 12:00 o’clock noon of the same day.

(§ 1, Ord. 239, eff. Dec. 24, 1958)

 

Sec. 3-4.203. Burning of offensive materials prohibited.
        No person shall at any time or place within the City limits ignite or cause to burn garbage, hair, rags, rubber, animal waste matter, or other material likely to create offensive odors or excessive smoke.

(§ 1, Ord. 239, eff. Dec. 24, 1958)

 

Sec. 3-4.204. Burning hours.
        No person shall ignite or cause any fire in any outdoor incinerator to burn, smolder or smoke between the hours of 12:00 o’clock noon of any day and 6:00 o’clock a.m. of the following day.

(§ 1, Ord. 239, eff. Dec. 24, 1958)

 

Sec. 3-4.205. Burning on public property prohibited.
        No person except an officer or employee of the City, within the line of duty, shall ignite or cause to burn any combustible material or substance upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park, parkway or public property within the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 239, eff. Dec. 24, 1958)

 

Sec. 3-4.206. Exceptions.
        Nothing contained in this article shall apply to or prohibit burning in containers for the purpose of cooking food or protecting against cold.

(§ 1, Ord. 239, eff. December 24, 1958)

Chapter 5 SWIMMING POOLS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 3-5.01 through 3-5.03, as added by Ord. No. 240, effective December 24, 1958, repealed by Ord. No. 649, effective September 24, 1987. See Section 9-2.08 of Chapter 2 of Title 9 of this Code.

Chapter 6 MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Sec. 3-6.01. Permit required.
        No person shall move any building having a width of more than eight feet (8′) measured at right angles to the direction of movement over, along or across any highway, street or alley in the City without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager. The City Manager may delegate to any other City officer any of his authority conferred by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 248, eff. April 22, 1959)

 

Sec. 3-6.02. Application.
        A person seeking issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall file an application for such permit with the City Manager.

(a)    Form. The application shall be made in writing, upon forms provided by the City Manager.

(b)    Contents. The application shall set forth:

(1)    A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving the street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of exterior and interior;

(2)    A legal description of the lot from which the building is to be moved;

(3)    A legal description of the lot to which it is proposed such building be removed;

(4)    The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved;

(5)    The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved;

(6)    Proposed moving date and hours; and

(7)    Any additional information which the City Manager shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should issue.

(c)    Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other than the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill of sale signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence, that he is entitled to move the building.

(d)    Fee. The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee in the amount of Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars for each building proposed to be moved.

(§ 1, Ord. 248, eff. April 22, 1959)

 

Sec. 3-6.03. General deposit.
        An application hereunder shall be accompanied by a cash deposit in the sum of Five Thousand and no/100ths ($5,000.00) Dollars as an indemnity for any damage which the City may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street, alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant or other property of the City, which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along or across any street in the City and to indemnify the City against any claim of damages to persons or private property, and to satisfy any claims by private individuals arising out of, caused by, or incidental to the moving of any building over, along or across any street in the City.

(a)    Bond in lieu of deposit. Any person filing an application pursuant to this chapter may, in lieu of the general cash deposit required by this section, file with the City Manager a bond, approved as to form by the City Attorney, executed by a bonding or surety company authorized to do business in the State in the amount of Five Thousand and no/100ths ($5,000.00) Dollars for each building proposed to be moved. Such bond shall run to the City for the use and benefit of any person intended to be protected thereby and shall be conditioned on the payment of any damage to public or private property and the payment for any damages or losses resulting from any malfeasance, misfeasance, or nonfeasance, or negligence in connection with any of the activities or conditions upon which the permit applied for is granted.

(b)    Insurance policy in lieu of deposit. Any person filing an application pursuant to this chapter may, in lieu of the general cash deposit required by this section, file with the City Manager an insurance policy, issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the State, and approved as to form by the City Attorney, in the same amount and providing the same protection as would be required for a bond hereunder.

(§ 1, Ord. 248, eff. April 22, 1959)

 

Sec. 3-6.04. Duties of City Manager.
(a)    Inspection. The City Manager shall inspect the building and the applicant’s equipment to determine whether the standards for issuance of a permit are met.

(b)    Standards for issuance. The City Manager shall refuse to issue a permit if he finds:

(1)    That any application requirement or any fee or deposit requirement has not been complied with;

(2)    That the building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the City;

(3)    That the building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the City;

(4)    That the building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the removal location is in the City;

(5)    That the applicant’s equipment is unsafe and that persons and property would be endangered by its use;

(6)    That zoning regulations or other provisions of this Code would be violated by the building in its new location; or

(7)    That for any other reason persons or property in the City would be endangered by the moving of the building.

(c)    Fees and deposits.

(1)    Deposit. The City Manager shall deposit all fees and deposits, and all bonds or insurance policies with the City Treasurer.

(2)    Return upon non-issuance. Upon his refusal to issue a permit, the City Manager shall initiate the refund of all deposits, bonds and insurance policies to the applicant. Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned.

(3)    Deductions for damages. After the building has been removed, the City Manager shall furnish the Council with a written report of all damage caused to or inflicted upon property belonging to the City. The Council shall authorize the return to the applicant of the amount of all deposits after the deduction

of sums sufficient to pay for all damage done to the property of the City by reason of the removal of the building. Permit fees deposited with the application shall not be returned.

(d)    Designate streets for removal. The City Manager shall prepare a list of designated streets over which the building may be moved and shall reproduce the list upon the permit in writing. In making his or her determinations, the City Manager shall act to assure maximum safety to persons and property in the City to minimize congestion and traffic hazards on public streets.

(§ 1, Ord. 248, eff. April 22, 1959)

 

Sec. 3-6.05. Duties of permittee.
        Every permittee under this chapter shall:

(a)    Use designated streets. Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the written permit.

(b)    Notify of revised moving time. Notify the City Manager in writing of a desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application.

(c)    Notify of damage. Notify the City Manager in writing of any and all damage done to property belonging to the City within twenty-four (24) hours after the damage or injury has occurred.

(d)    Display lights. Cause red lights to be displayed during the night time on every side of the building, while standing on a street, in such manner as to warn the public of the obstruction, and shall at all times erect and maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of the removal of the building.

(e)    Street occupancy period. Remove the building from the City streets after four (4) days of such occupancy, unless an extension is granted by the City Manager.

(f)    Comply with governing law. Comply with building, fire zone and zoning provisions of this Code and all other applicable provisions of the City laws and State statutes.

(g)    Pay expenses of officer. Pay the expense of a traffic officer ordered by the City Manager to accompany the movement of the building to protect the public from injury.

(h)    Clear old premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition.

(i)     Remove service connection. See that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper, the water shut off, and the meter returned to the owner thereof. The permittee shall notify the gas and electric companies to remove their services.

(§ 1, Ord. 248, eff. April 22, 1959)

 

Sec. 3-6.06. Enforcement.
(a)    Enforcing officer. The City Manager shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this chapter.

(b)    Permittee liable for expense above deposit. The permittee shall be liable for any expenses, damages or costs in excess of deposited amounts or securities, and the City Attorney shall prosecute an action against the permittee in a court of competent jurisdiction for the recovery of such excessive amounts.

(c)    Original premises left unsafe. The City shall proceed to do the work necessary to leaving the original premises in a safe and sanitary condition, where the permittee does not comply with the requirements of this chapter, and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposit.

(§ 1, Ord. 248, eff. April 22, 1959)

Chapter 7 SKATEBOARD PARK FACILITIES
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 810, Sections 2—7, effective May 13, 2010, amended Chapter 7 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 7, Sections 3-7.01—3-7.04, pertained to skateboard parks and derived from Ord. No. 742, eff. February 11, 2000.

 

Sec. 3-7.01. Definitions.
        As used in this chapter:

(a)    “Skateboard” shall mean a rectangular board or other surface mounted on wheels for the purpose of personal locomotion, sporting activity, or similar purpose. The term “skateboard” shall include roller and in-line skates, but shall exclude scooters, bicycles or other wheeled vehicles of any kind.

(b)    “Skateboard park” shall mean a City-operated facility located on public property designated by the City Council to be used for skateboarding.

(c)    “Scooter” shall mean a wheeled conveyance consisting of a long footboard between two (2) end wheels, controlled by an upright steering handle attached to the front wheel.

(d)    “Bicycle” shall mean a vehicle with two (2) wheels tandem, handlebars for steering, a saddle seat, and pedals by which it is propelled.

(§ 2, Ord. 810, eff. May 13, 2010, as amended by § 1, Ord. 850, eff. February 13, 2015)

 

Sec. 3-7.02. Skateboard park facilities: Helmets, elbow and knee pads required.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to use any skateboard park facility owned or operated by the City unless that person is wearing a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads. Violation of this provision is an infraction punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of the same law within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of the same law within one year in accordance with Section 1-2.03 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 810, eff. May 13, 2010)

 

Sec. 3-7.03. Signs.
        The Public Works Director, or designee, shall ensure that signs affording reasonable notice of the skateboard park facility rules and regulations, including, but not limited to, the requirement that all persons riding a skateboard within the skateboard park must wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads, are posted at all times within the skateboard park facility.

(§ 2, Ord. 810, eff. May 13, 2010)

 

 

Sec. 3-7.04. Designs.
        The initial design and construction of a skateboard park facility shall be approved by the City Council. Thereafter, any changes to the skateboard park facility’s initial design and/or construction may be made by the City Engineer or designee, at his or her discretion.

(§ 2, Ord. 810, eff. May 13, 2010)

 

Sec. 3-7.05. Skateboard park facilities: Regulations.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to:

(1)    Use any skateboard park facility for any activity other than skating and skateboarding unless otherwise authorized by a permit issued by the Public Works Director;

(2)    Use or be upon any skateboard park facility while under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug or under the combined influence of any alcoholic beverage or drug;

(3)    Skate, run, or stand on, jump from, or otherwise employ any exterior wall or fence surface while using any skateboard park facility;

(4)    Play amplified music, or wear audio headsets while skating or skateboarding, in any skateboard park facility; or

(5)    Introduce, employ or use any unauthorized equipment including a scooter or bicycle, obstacle or apparatus within any skateboard park facility.

(§ 2, Ord. 810, eff. May 13, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 850, eff. February 13, 2015)

 

Sec. 3-7.06. Skate park facilities: Violations.
        Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor or an infraction as provided in accordance with Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 810, eff. May 13, 2010)

 

Sec. 3-7.07. Confiscation of unauthorized equipment: Notice and procedure.
(a)    Skateboard parks are specially designed for their intended use by skaters and skateboarders. The uses of unauthorized equipment, particularly scooters and bicycles, pose an immediate risk of serious injury to users of the skateboard park facility as well as serious damage to the facility that in turn can be hazardous to proper use of the facility. Therefore, the City Council determines that it is necessary to the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare that extraordinary remedies be authorized to prevent repeated violations by the same persons.

(b)    In the event an enforcement official determines that a person is liable for a violation of Section 3-7.05(5) for using unauthorized equipment within any skateboard park facility, the enforcement officer may, in his or her discretion, cause the unauthorized equipment to be confiscated and held for safekeeping at the police department for a period of one week for the first time and for a period of thirty (30) days for all subsequent confiscations, provided the requirements of subsection (c) have been met. If equipment is confiscated, the person from whom the equipment is confiscated shall be given a written notice of the confiscation period and the procedures for retrieval of the equipment.

(c)    Before confiscating unauthorized equipment pursuant to this section, the enforcement officer shall ensure that either the owner or the individual in possession of the unauthorized equipment had received at least one written warning for use of unauthorized equipment within the preceding twelve (12) months. The date and location of that prior written warning shall be noted on any citation or other notice to the alleged violator.

 

(d)    Release of the confiscated equipment shall be on the next business day following completion of the waiting period. Persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall be accompanied by their parent or guardian in order to have the confiscated equipment released to them following the waiting period.

(e)    The provisions of this section shall be an additional enforcement mechanism in addition to or in lieu of citations authorized by Section 3-7.06.

(§ 3, Ord. 850, eff. February 13, 2015)

Chapter 8 FILM PERMITS
Sec. 3-8.01. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to provide rules and regulations for the issuance of commercial filming and still photography permits. The development and application of such rules and regulations are intended to ensure that commercial filming activities are consistent with considerations of public health, safety and the protection of property and to facilitate filming within the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. November 24, 2006)

 

Sec. 3-8.02. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Charitable institutions” shall mean a non-profit organization which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code or Section 23701 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from the showing of the film, slides, tapes or photographs.

(b)    “Current news” shall mean regularly scheduled news programs, excluding documentary programs and special news programs which are not pre-planned and are intended to be broadcasted within seventy-two (72) hours after filming. Reporters, photographers or camera persons engaged in the employment of newspaper, news service, broadcasting station or similar entity engaged in the broadcasting or reporting of current news events shall be included in the definition of current news.

(c)    “Film Permit Officer” shall be the representative of the City designated by the City Manager to work directly with the applicant for film permits and to handle the processing, issuance, review and collection of all fees for film permits.

(d)    “Governmental filming” shall mean any filming by, and for the use of, a public entity.

(e)    “Filming” shall mean and include all activity within the City limits attendant to staging, making, rehearsing, shooting, videotaping and still photography for a commercially produced magazine, book, motion picture, television show, program or commercial and any noncommercial filming that obstructs, delays or otherwise interferes with the ordinary use of City streets, parking facilities, sidewalks, parks and other rights-of-way.

(f)    “Student” shall mean an applicant who has submitted a letter written on school letterhead by a school administrator or instructor stating that the applicant is currently enrolled in a recognized United States educational institution and that the film is not for commercial release.

(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. November 24, 2006)

 

Sec. 3-8.03. Permit required.
        No person shall engage in, conduct or use any public or private property, building, street, facility or residence in the City for filming without first obtaining a City film permit pursuant to this chapter. Permittee shall have a copy of the current permit on the site of the event or activity at all times. A copy of the current permit shall be made available upon request by any official or employee of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. November 24, 2006)

 

Sec. 3-8.04. General provisions.
(a)    Applicability. Property in any zone may be used as a location for filming, including filming of motion pictures, videotaping and still photography, subject to the conditions of a film permit issued by the City pursuant to this chapter.

(b)    Permit exemptions. No film permit shall be required for the filming of current news.

(c)    General film permit conditions.

(1)    No filming, including the setup and dismantling of film activity, shall be done before 7:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m. Upon good cause shown, the Film Permit Officer may extend these hours.

(2)    No gunfire, explosions, sirens, public address system, bull horns or other noise-creating devices shall be used, except when otherwise approved by the Police Department, Fire Department and Film Permit Officer.

(3)    The Film Permit Officer may impose permit conditions to carry out the intent and purpose of this chapter, including, but not limited to, parking limitations, security, traffic/crowd control measures, insurance requirements, performance bonds, indemnify and hold harmless agreements and other conditions for permit approval.

(4)    A notification letter to all occupants and business owners within three hundred (300) feet of a private property film location must be delivered at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of filming activity. The notification letter must be typed on film company letterhead with the telephone number of the company noted.

(5)    A notification letter to all occupants and business owners on streets where pedestrian flow, vehicle traffic or parking will be affected must be delivered at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to commencement of filming activity.

(d)    Residential filming conditions. The Film Permit Officer may impose special residential area filming conditions for the protection of the public, including, but not limited to, the following:

(1)    Filming frequency at a single residential site is restricted to three (3) consecutive days per six (6) month period, commencing with issuance of the first film permit for a maximum of six (6) days per year in a residential area. Film companies may exceed this limit with the written approval of all adult occupants living on the parcel adjacent to the film site or across any street from the film site;

(2)    Generally, the City will not permit filming on Sundays or the day of Citywide festivals and on the following holidays: New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day;

(3)    Restricting parking to those locations shown in an approved parking plan for all vehicles connected with the proposed filming session;

(4)    Attendance during the setup and the filming session by uniformed police officers or firefighters, at the applicant’s sole cost and expense.

(e)    Additional conditions. The City Council may, by resolution, adopt additional conditions and policies affecting the issuance of a film permit.

(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. November 24, 2006)

Sec. 3-8.05. Application processing—Permit fees.
(a)    Application. Any person or entity desiring a film permit shall file for a “film permit” with the Film Permit Officer on the City application form which satisfies all of the requirements set forth herein and such additional requirements which the City Council may, by resolution, adopt, at least ten (10) days prior to the contemplated filming. The Film Permit Officer shall review the application and may request additional information, verification of owner/neighbor/occupant approvals or of other facts or may require proof of adequate insurance if any City street or other City property is involved or impacted. The Film Permit Officer may issue the permit if he or she determines the location will not unreasonably impact traffic and it complies with all City standards. The Film Permit Officer may impose such limitations or conditions on the permit as he or she deems necessary to ensure the public safety and welfare.

(b)    Processing fee. Prior to processing an application, the City’s processing fee for film permit applications shall be paid by the applicant in an amount set by resolution of the City Council. The processing fee shall be nonrefundable.

(c)    Permit fee. Prior to issuance of a film permit by the Film Permit Officer, the applicant shall pay the applicable film permit fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council.

(d)    City services. In the event that any applicant requires direct services from the City, as determined by the Film Permit Officer during location-filming activities, including, but not limited to, the use of City property, equipment or personnel, the applicant shall pay all applicable facility use fees and reimburse the City for the cost of any such services provided.

(e)    Deposits. Refundable deposits may be collected from the applicant to ensure compliance with film permit conditions.

(f)    Film permit fee exceptions. No film permit fee, as described in Section 3-8.05(c) shall be required for the following:

(1)    Governmental filming;

(2)    Filming by a charitable institution or an individual when such activities are not for profit and for his or her personal use or entertainment;

(3)    Filming for use in current news gathering, investigative reporting;

(4)    Public access exhibitions not for profit; and

(5)    Filming by a student in that capacity.

(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. November 24, 2006)

 

Sec. 3-8.06. Violations.
(a)    Any person, firm, company or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code pursuant to Section 1-2.01 of Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.

(b)    The Film Permit Officer or designee shall have the authority to issue a written stop notice if there is any violation of the film permit conditions. Filming and all other associated activities shall cease until the violation has been corrected and the stop notice is released, in writing, by the Film Permit Officer or designee.

(c)    Any person, firm, company or corporation who is convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter may be prohibited from obtaining a film permit for a period of one year from the date of the conviction.

(§ 1, Ord. 791, eff. November 24, 2006)

Title 4 PUBLIC WELFARE, MORALS, AND CONDUCT
Chapter 1 ADVERTISING MATERIALS
Chapter 2 TAXICABS
Chapter 3 PUBLIC PARKS
Chapter 4 DANGEROUS WEAPONS
Chapter 5 CURFEW
Chapter 6 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 7 AMBULANCES
Chapter 8 HISTORIC PRESERVATION LAW
Chapter 9 HISTORIC LANDMARK PROPERTY AGREEMENTS
Chapter 10 BINGO GAMES
Chapter 11 PRESERVATION, CUTTING, AND REMOVAL OF OAK, SYCAMORE, HERITAGE AND OTHER DESIGNATED MATURE TREES
Chapter 12 ARCADES AND AMUSEMENT MACHINES
Chapter 13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Chapter 14 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Chapter 15 ABATEMENT OF CLOSED, VACANT, AND INOPERATIVE AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
Chapter 16 PUBLIC ARTS
Chapter 17 OUTDOOR GATHERINGS
Chapter 18 GRAFFITI
Chapter 19 PARADES
Chapter 20 CONDUCT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 21 SOLICITATION
Chapter 22 SLEEPING AND CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 24 PROHIBITION ON ADVERTISING FOR UNLAWFUL SHORT-TERM, TRANSIENT, AND VACATION RENTALS
Chapter 25 BEEKEEPING
Chapter 26 CANNABIS USE AND CULTIVATION
Chapter 27 SHARED ON-DEMAND MOTORIZED SCOOTERS

Chapter 1 ADVERTISING MATERIALS
Sec. 4-1.01. Advertising distribution to pedestrians and vehicles unlawful.
        It is unlawful for any person to distribute to or among pedestrians along or upon any public street, alley, park, or other public place in the City, or to place in any automobile or other vehicle parked along or upon any public street, alley, park, or other place in the City any advertising sample, handbill, dodger, circular, booklet, or notice of commercial advertising.

(§ 1, Ord. 47)

 

Sec. 4-1.02. Advertising distribution to public places and private residences unlawful.
        It is unlawful for any person to distribute or throw upon any street, alley, or public place, or upon any private yard, lawn, driveway, or sidewalk of any residence, or upon any vacant property in the City any advertising sample, handbill, dodger, circular, booklet, or notice of commercial advertising; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prohibit the distribution and delivery of any newspaper of general circulation, as defined by the laws of the State, or any regularly issued magazine into dwelling houses of residents within the City who are subscribers to such newspaper or magazine.

(§ 2, Ord. 47)

Chapter 2 TAXICABS
Sec. 4-2.01. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be deemed and construed to have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section, unless from the particular context it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended:

        “Automobile for hire” shall mean and include every motor vehicle of private appearance not equipped with a taximeter and which is operated and hired from a public or private garage or stand or other location, and the destination and route of which are under the control of the passengers being carried therein, for a compensation which is fixed in accordance with the distance traveled, waiting time, or both, and shall include motor vehicles coming within the above definition whether or not intended to be hired or which are hired for operation by a person other than the owner thereof or his agent or employee;

        “Driver” shall mean and include every person in actual charge and control of any taxicab or automobile for hire as the driver thereof;

        “Owner” shall mean and include every person owning or controlling any taxicab or automobile for hire;

        “Stand” shall mean and include a portion of the street designated by the Council for the sole use of taxicabs and automobiles for hire while waiting for employment;

        “Substantially located within the City of Ojai” means any taxicab or automobile for hire business, owner, or operator with a principal business address located within the City of Ojai or for whom the largest share of trips within Ventura County have been located within the City of Ojai in the year before each year’s permit application;

        “Taxicab” shall mean and include every motor vehicle of a distinct color or commercial appearance used in the business of carrying passengers for hire, and which is rented from a public or private garage or any fixed stand or location, and the destination and route of which are under the control of the passenger being carried therein;

        “Taximeter” shall mean and include a mechanical instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a passenger carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or for waiting time, or both, and upon which such charge is indicated by mean of figures.

(§ 1, Ord. 117, as amended by § 1, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.02. Owner’s permit required.
        It is unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated at any point in the City any taxicab or automobile for hire substantially located within the City of Ojai unless there shall have been issued an owner’s permit to the owner and unless each such permit be in full force and effect. Owners of taxicabs or automobiles for hire substantially located within the City of Ojai shall also procure a business license certificate under Chapter 1 of Title 6 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 117, as amended by § 2, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.03. Owner’s permit application.
        Any owner desiring to obtain the permit required by Section 4-2.02 hereof shall make application therefor to the Council. The application shall be verified under oath and shall set forth:

        (a)    The name, age, business address, residence, and citizenship of the applicant if a natural person; or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal place of business, and the names of its principal officers, together with their respective addresses; or if a partnership, association, or unincorporated company, the names of the partners, or the persons comprising the association of company, with the place of business and residence of each such partner or person; and

        (b)    The street number and exact location of the public or private garage from which each such vehicle is to be operated; and

        (c)    The principal business address of the owner; and

        (d)    Proof of commercial general liability insurance and automobile insurance in amounts as required by law or the City Manager; and

        (e)    Such further information as the Council, or such official of the City to whom the application may be referred, may require.

(§ 3, Ord. 117, as amended by § 3, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.04. Owner’s permit application to operate taxicabs.
        If the application referred to in Section 4-2.03 of this chapter is for a permit to operate taxicabs, it shall also set forth:

(a)    The street number and exact location of the place where the applicant proposes to stand each taxicab;

(b)    If any proposed stand is in the public street, such application shall be accompanied by a written consent thereto of all the occupants of the ground floor of any building in front of which such taxicab or automobile for hire stand is to be located or, if there is no such occupant, by the written consent thereto of the owner or lessee of such building or premises. No permit shall be issued for any stand to be located within one hundred (100′) feet of another stand on the same side of the street;

(c)    The color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia which the applicant proposes to use; and

(d)    That each of the applicant’s taxicabs, at the election of the Council, shall be equipped with a taximeter which will correctly compute and indicate the amount charged, the distance traveled, and/or the time elapsed, and such taximeter shall be affixed to the taxicab in such a manner that the reading dial showing the amount to be and being charged shall be readily discernible from the passenger compartment during all times such taximeter is operating.

(§ 4, Ord. 117, as amended by § 1, Ord. 469, eff. March 29, 1973, and § 1, Ord. 588, eff. December 25, 1980)

 

Sec. 4-2.05. Notice of hearing on applications.
        Upon the receipt of any application referred to in Sections 4-2.03 and 4-2.04 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall set a time, not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days thereafter, for the hearing of such application before the Council and shall give notice of the time so set at least seven (7) days before the date of such hearing to the applicant by mail at the address set forth in such application and by mail to all other permit holders.

(§ 5, Ord. 117)

 

Sec. 4-2.06. Decision by Council at hearing.
        At the time set for the hearing of the application referred to in Sections 4-2.03 and 4-2.04 of this chapter, the Mayor and Council may examine the applicant and all persons interested in the matter set forth in the application and shall determine whether or not the public interest, convenience and necessity require the issuance of the permit applied for, and if it is found by the Council that the public interest, convenience, and necessity require the issuance of the permit applied for, it shall order, by resolution, the City to issue a permit, subject to the filing and approval of an undertaking as hereinafter provided in Section 4-2.18. The following reasons shall be sufficient for denial of the permit:

        (a)    That the application is not in the form and does not contain the information required to be contained therein by this chapter;

        (b)    That the color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia to be used upon such automobile shall be in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia used by any person in such manner as to be misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public;

        (c)    That the location of the stand, as therein stated, is such as to congest or interfere with travel on any public street, or that the proposed stand is within one hundred (100′) feet of any other stand theretofore fixed by the Council on the same street;

        (d)    That it shall appear to the Council that there are a sufficient number of taxicabs and automobiles for hire in the City to fully serve the public, and that the granting of more permits would unduly congest the traffic and interfere with the free use of the public streets by the public, and that the public interest, convenience, and necessity do not require the issuance of such permit;

        (e)    That the persons, firms, or corporations holding permits for the operation of taxicabs or automobiles for hire, as defined in this chapter, are under efficient management, and are adequately serving the public under normal condition.; and

        (f)    That the persons, firms, or corporations holding permits for the operation of taxicabs or automobiles for hire have demonstrated development of and compliance with a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program meeting applicable Federal requirements.

(§ 6, Ord. 117, as amended by § 4, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.07. Owner’s permit restrictive.
        It is unlawful for any owner granted a permit hereunder to conduct any operation or give any service other than the service authorized by the permit granted by the Council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or any service licensed or permitted under other applicable law.

(§ 7, Ord. 117, as amended by § 4, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.08. Power of Council to determine issues.
        The Council shall have power to determine after hearing all issues relative to granting or denying owners’ permits for taxicabs, automobiles for hire, or stands.

(§ 8, Ord. 117)

 

Sec. 4-2.09. Suspension or revocation of permit.
        The Council shall have the power to suspend or revoke any or all of the owner’s permits granted under the provisions of this chapter when it shall have determined that any of the provisions hereof have been violated, or that any holder of such a permit shall have failed to comply with the terms of such permit or the rules and regulations of the Council pertaining to the operation of and to the extent, character, and quality of the service of any such vehicles. Before revocation of any such permit, the owner shall be entitled to a hearing thereon before the Council and shall be notified thereof.

        Notice of hearing on such suspension or revocation shall be in writing, and shall be served at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing thereon, such service to be upon the holder of such permit, or its manager or agent. Said notice shall state the grounds of complaint against the holder of the permit and shall also state the time when and the place where such hearing shall be held. In the event the holder of such permit cannot be found, or service of such notice cannot be made upon it or him in the manner herein provided, a copy of the notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the owner at his last known address at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.

(§ 9, Ord. 117)

 

Sec. 4-2.10. License fees.
        The permits herein mentioned shall entitle the holder thereof to obtain a license to engage in the business described in such permit from the City upon payment of a license fee at the rate set by the City Council by resolution, which fees for taxicabs shall be payable semi-annually in advance. Upon receipt of payment, the City shall issue to the holder of such permit a license which shall set forth the kind of transportation for which the license is issued and the date of issuance and expiration date of the license. A penalty of ten (10%) per cent of the amount of the license tax, for taxicabs, or installment thereof, shall be added to all such license taxes not paid within fifteen (15) days after the due date thereof.

(§ 10, Ord. 117, as amended by § 5, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.11. License to be posted.
        All persons required to secure an owner’s permit and pay a City license fee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall post the license in a conspicuous place in their respective places of business. If any licensee shall not have a regular place of business, he or she shall carry the license in his automobile or taxicab or upon his or her person and exhibit the license to any City official upon demand. All persons licensed to operate a taxicab or automobile for hire in Ventura County by issuance of a permit from another jurisdiction within Ventura County, under Government Code Section 53075.5, shall carry such license in the automobile or taxicab or upon their person and exhibit the license to any City official upon demand.

(§ 11, Ord. 117, as amended by § 6, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.12. Taxicab stands.
        No person may operate a stand without a permit issued by the City Council, upon findings by the City Council that the: (1) proposed location of the stand will not congest or interfere with travel on any public street; (2) proposed stand is not within one hundred (100′) feet of any other stand previously approved by the Council on the same street; and (3) approval of the proposed stand will not be injurious to the public’s health, safety, or welfare. The Council shall designate, in any taxi stand permit granted by it, the exact location of the stand in which taxicabs may park. No such stand shall be wider than twenty (20′) feet on streets where parallel parking is required. Upon the granting of a stand permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, every stand as designated by the Council shall be designated by red paint or other red material upon the entire curb surface with the words, “Taxicabs Only,” in white letters thereon. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to occupy any regularly established taxicab stand unless such vehicle is one being operated by the owner to which such taxicab stand has been assigned.

(§ 12, Ord. 117, as amended by § 7, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.13. Application for taxicab stand permit.
        An application fee in an amount set by the City Council by resolution shall be required to be paid for each application for a stand permit or change of location thereof for which a permit is applied. All such application fees shall accompany the application, on a form issued by the City Manager. All taxi stand permits granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be nontransferable. When any such permit is granted, the City License Tax Collector shall issue to the grantee thereof a certificate giving the name and address of the grantee, the nature of the permit, and the date when the permit was granted.

(§ 13, Ord. 117, as amended by § 8, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.14. Taxicab service.
        Taxicab service shall be available at all times during which service is required by telephone call, Internet-based communication, or wireless communication, by engagement of the taxicab when standing at a regularly assigned taxicab stand, or when properly hailed from the street or curb. It shall be unlawful for any carrier or driver of a taxicab to refuse or neglect to transport any orderly person upon request anywhere in the City when a taxicab of such carrier is standing in a regularly assigned taxicab stand, and such service shall be rendered immediately upon request. It is unlawful for any carrier or driver of a taxicab or driver or owner of an automobile for hire to prejudice, disadvantage, or require different rates or provide different service to a person because of race, national origin, religion, color, ancestry, physical disability, medical condition, occupation, marital status or change in marital status, sex, or any characteristic listed or defined in Section 11135 of the Government Code.

(§ 14, Ord. 117, as amended by § 2, Ord. 469, eff. March 29, 1973, and § 9, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.15. Automobile for hire service.
        The services of an automobile for hire operated pursuant to any permit granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be available only upon telephone call, Internet-based communication, or wireless communication, or upon engagement at the public or private garage from which such vehicle is operated, or at the permitted taxicab stand where the vehicle is parked. It is unlawful for any person to cruise, or cause or permit to be cruised, any automobile for hire. An automobile for hire shall be deemed to be cruising when it solicits or takes on any passenger other than in response to an order given at its garage or in response to a telephone call, Internet-based communication, or wireless communication requesting transportation.

(§ 15, Ord. 117, as amended by § 10, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.16. Revision of permit application.
        In the event any permit holder desires to change his schedule of rates and charges or the color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia used on his automobiles for hire or taxicabs, or to substitute any vehicle for and in place of the vehicle described in the application for a permit, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles used by him as automobiles for hire or taxicabs, he shall make an application for permission to do so to the City, which permission shall be granted by the Council in its discretion if the Council deems the public interest, necessity, and convenience will be subserved by such change and if the permit holder has complied with all the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 16, Ord. 117, as amended by § 11, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.17. Vehicles to be operated by owners and employees only.
        Any motor vehicle for which a permit has been issued hereunder shall be operated by the owner, personally, or his employee, on his or her behalf, and it is unlawful for any owner or driver to enter into any contract, agreement, or understanding between themselves by the terms of which such driver pays to, or for the account of, such owner a fixed or determinable sum for the use of such vehicle.

(§ 17, Ord. 117)

 

Sec. 4-2.18. Insurance required.
        It is unlawful for any owner or driver to drive or operate any taxicab or automobile for hire, or cause the same to be driven or operated unless there is on file with the City Clerk and in full force and effect at all times while such taxicab or automobile for hire is being operated a true copy of a policy of insurance, approved by the Council, in a solvent and responsible company insuring the owner of such taxicab, or automobile for hire (giving the manufacturer’s motor number and serial number thereof), against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from the negligent operation or defective construction of such taxicab or automobile for hire, or from violation of this chapter or of the laws of the State. Said policy may be limited to three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for the injury or death of one person, and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for the injury or death of two (2) or more persons in the same accident, and to one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for injury or destruction of property. The policy of insurance shall guarantee the payment to any and all persons suffering injury or damage to person or property, of any final judgment rendered against such owner, within the limits above mentioned, irrespective of the financial condition or any acts or omissions of such owner, and shall inure to the benefit of such persons. If, at any time, such policy of insurance shall be canceled by the company issuing the same, the Council shall require the owner to replace such policy with another policy or bond as above provided, satisfactory to the Council, and in default thereof may revoke such owner’s permit and license.

(§ 18, Ord. 117, as amended by § 1, Ord. 669, eff. February 23, 1990)

Sec. 4-2.19. Owners to operate own taxicabs.
        It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate any taxicab other than one bearing the color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia set forth in the application for the permit as provided in this chapter. It is unlawful for any person to change the color scheme, name, monogram, or insignia without first having attained the consent of the Council.

(§ 19, Ord. 117)

 

Sec. 4-2.20. Permittee to obey all laws.
        Every person holding a permit issued under the terms of this chapter shall at all times be subject to the laws of the State and all laws of the City not in conflict with this chapter.

(§ 20, Ord. 117)

 

Sec. 4-2.21. Rates.
        The maximum rates of fare which may be charged the public by taxicab carriers and drivers shall be set by resolution of the Council.

(§ 23, Ord. 117, as amended by § 1, Ord. 588, eff. December 25, 1980, and by § 12, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-2.22. Taximeter inspections.
        Each taximeter shall be inspected and tested for accuracy by the carrier at least once every six (6) months. Upon the completion of such inspection and of any adjustment necessary to cause such taximeter to operate within the standards of accuracy approved by the City Manager, the carder shall cause to be placed upon such taximeter a gummed label having printed thereon: “This taximeter was inspected and tested on (date) and found to comply with the standards of accuracy prescribed by the manager of the City of Ojai.” The date on which such inspection was made shall be stamped in the blank space provided for that purpose. No such label shall be removed except at the time a subsequent inspection is made.

(§ 1, Ord. 588, eff. December 25, 1980)

 

Sec. 4-2.23. Advertising prohibited.
        Advertising matter on the outside of any taxicab or automobile for hire shall be prohibited, except for the owner’s trade name, monogram or insignia, and telephone number or numbers.

(§ 1, Ord. 588, eff. December 25, 1980)

 

Sec. 4-2.24. Enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of the City Manager to enforce the provisions of this chapter. In addition to any other penalty or fine under other applicable law, any person who violates a provision of this chapter shall be subject to a civil administrative fine of between one hundred dollars ($100.00) and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). In addition to any other penalty or fine under other applicable law, any person who violates Section 4-2.02 of this chapter by operating a taxicab or automobile for hire substantially located within the City of Ojai without an owner’s permit shall be subject to a civil administrative fine of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), under this section and Government Code Section 53075.5, subdivision (i)(2).

(§ 1, Ord. 588, eff. December 25, 1980, as amended by § 13, Ord. 890, eff. March 25, 2019)

Chapter 3 PUBLIC PARKS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 3, Concealed Weapons and Firearms, consisting of Section 4-3.01, codified from Ord. No. 6, repealed by Section 1, Ord. No. 445, effective December 23, 1971. Chapter 3, Public Parks, consisting of Sections 4-3.01 through 4-4.03, added by said Ord. No. 445, repealed by Part 1, Ord. No. 568, effective December 28, 1978.

 

Article 1. Applicability and Authority
Sec. 4-3.101. Applicability.
        This chapter shall apply to all City parks within the City.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.102. Acts prohibited: Penalties.
        It shall be unlawful for any person within any City park to do any of the acts prohibited by this chapter. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 4-3.201. Scope.
        The definitions set forth in this article apply to all City parks within the City.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.202. City park.
        “Park” shall mean any park, community center, or recreation facility owned by, leased by, or under the control of the City.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.203. Person.
        “Person” shall mean any individual, association, organization, partnership, corporation, or other entity but shall not include any governmental entity.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.204. Council.
        “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.205. City Manager.
        “City Manager” shall mean that person appointed by the Council as the City Manager of the City.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.206. Sound amplification device.
        “Sound amplification device” shall mean any machinery, device, equipment, or amplifier of the human voice, music, or any other sound, including both stationary and mobile equipment, but not including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.207. Refuse.
(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978; repealed by § 3, Ord. 700, eff. November 26, 1993)

 

Sec. 4-3.208. City.
        “City” shall mean the City of Ojai.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.209. Permit.
        “Permit” shall mean a written consent, warrant, or license granted by the City Manager allowing specific functions in a park facility.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Article 3. Powers and Duties of the City Manager
Sec. 4-3.301. Enforcement.
        The City Manager and his designated representatives shall be subject to the direction, authority, and control of the Council. They shall have full authority for the enforcement of all regulations affecting the facilities designated as parks by the Council. Their powers and duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(a)    To promulgate and enforce rules and regulations for the operation and administration of parks;

(b)    To control the time of use for parks;

(c)    To issue advanced reservations for park facilities;

(d)    To collect Council-approved fees and charges for the use of park facilities and deposit such fees and charges with the City Treasurer; and

(e)    To issue the permits set forth in this chapter.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.302. Delegation of authority.
        Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, the City Manager, that power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by the deputy or designated representative of the City Manager or by a person authorized by the Council.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.303. Notices to appear.
        In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this chapter, and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the arresting officer may prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to appear, as prescribed by Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 853.6) of the Penal Code of the State. The provisions of said Chapter 5 shall thereafter apply with reference to any proceeding based upon the issuance of a written notice to appear pursuant to this chapter.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.304. Interference with peace officers.
        No person shall intentionally obstruct or interfere in any manner with a peace officer in the exercise of his duties arising out of this chapter.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Article 4. Permits
Sec. 4-3.401. Permits: Required.
        Whenever a permit is required for the use of a City park, it shall be unlawful for a person to use a City park without first having obtained such a permit.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978.)

 

Sec. 4-3.402. Permits: Applications: Contents.
        Whenever a permit to use a City park is required by the provisions of this chapter, an application shall be filed with the City Manager stating:

(a)    The name and address of the applicant;

(b)    The name and address of the person, group, organization, or corporation sponsoring the activity;

(c)    The nature of the proposed activity;

(d)    The dates, hours, and park facility for which the permit is desired;

(e)    An estimate of attendance; and

(f)    Any other information regarding the public health, safety, and welfare which the City Manager finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.403. Permits: Standards for issuance.
        The City Manager shall issue a permit when he finds:

(a)    That the proposed activity or use of the park will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the public enjoyment of the park;

(b)    That the proposed activity or use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of the public health, welfare, safety, and recreation;

(c)    That all conditions, including, where applicable, the payment of fees, approval of the Council, indemnification and insurance coverage, are met;

(d)    That the proposed activity or use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime, or disorderly conduct;

(e)    That the proposed activity or use will not entail unusual, extraordinary, or burdensome expense or security operation by the City and its Park Department; and

(f)    That the facilities desired have not been reserved for other purposes.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.404. Permits: Exhibition.
        No person shall fail to produce a permit he claims to have upon the request of any Parks Department employee or any peace officer who desires to inspect such permit for the purpose of enforcing compliance with any provision of this chapter.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Article 5. General Regulations
Sec. 4-3.501. Personal conduct.
        It shall be unlawful for persons using City parks to conduct themselves in such a manner so as to interfere with the use of City parks, equipment, and facilities by others.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.502. Entertainment.
        No person shall set up or maintain any exhibition, show, performance, concert, lecture, oration, place of amusement, or concert hall without first obtaining a permit to do so from the City Manager. Special patrols by the City park staff and/or Police Department may be a condition of use for such functions.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.503. Sound amplification device operations.
        No person shall operate any sound amplification device at or near a City park in such a manner that it will be audible at a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound amplifying equipment, unless a sound amplification device permit is first obtained from the City Manager or his designated representative. No person, in any instance, shall operate a sound amplification device in such a manner that the volume is unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing, or a nuisance to persons or domestic animals within any area of audibility.

        Pursuant to Article 4 of this chapter, a permit for sound amplification devices shall be obtained from the City Manager. The application for such permit shall include a general description of the sound amplification device which is to be used, the volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced, and any other information which the City Manager finds necessary will be required to make a fair determination as to whether a sound amplification device permit should be issued. The City Manager shall issue a sound amplification device permit when he finds that the operation of such a sound amplification device will not unreasonably disturb other users of the City park or adjacent residences, even though the sound will be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.504. Activities.
        No person shall operate motorized model airplanes within a City park. No person shall play golf within a City park. No person shall play or engage in any game or activity in open areas in a City park if it is determined by the City Manager that such an activity is a hazard to the health, well-being, or property of other park patrons. No person shall do anything within any City park that is in violation of park deed restrictions.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.505. Soliciting, selling, and advertising.
(a)    No person shall practice, carry on, conduct, or solicit for a trade, occupation, business, or profession without first obtaining a written commercial permit from the City Manager.

(b)    The City Manager shall charge a fee fixed by the Council to cover the administrative costs of the issuance of such permits.

(c)    Whenever a commercial permit is required by the provisions of this chapter, an application shall be filed with the City Manager stating the name and address of the applicant, the nature of the proposed business activity, and the dates, hours, and park facility for which the permit is desired. The City Manager may issue commercial permits when the conduct of such trade, occupation, business, or profession is compatible with the normal City park activities and uses, is convenient and beneficial to City park patrons, and does not conflict with the business of established concessionaires. Commercial permits may be issued by the City Manager on an annual basis.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.506. Camping.
        No person shall camp or sleep overnight within any public park without first obtaining a permit from the City Manager. The terms and conditions of camping permits shall be based upon policies established by the Parks and Recreation Commission and approved by the Council. Any camping permit may be revoked by the City Manager if any term or condition of the permit is violated.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.507. Fees.
        All City park use, entrance, and permit fees set by the Council shall be paid to the City Manager or be collected by persons designated by the City Manager.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.508. Hours.
        No person shall enter, remain upon, or occupy the grounds of a City park, or use any of the facilities or equipment therein, or permit any vehicle to remain therein, except during such periods as set by the Parks and Recreation Commission and posted at conspicuous places at each park. The City Manager may extend the hours in which a City park may be used for special events if he determines that the particular event will not disturb the peace or create undue noise, nuisances, or hazardous conditions by indicating such extension of park hours on the face of the permit of the special event involved.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.509. Park closing.
        A City park may be closed when it has been determined by the City Manager or his designated representative that the continued use of the park could create hazardous conditions detrimental to the health or safety of the public or cause an adverse physical impact on the City park environment.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.510. Regulatory and warning signs.
        All signs, including warning, regulatory, and road markings, placed by order of the City Manager and applicable to the control of vehicles and animals and the health and safety of the public shall be observed by all users of City parks.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Article 6. Public Health and Sanitation
Sec. 4-3.601. Personal conduct.
        It shall be unlawful for persons using City parks to conduct themselves in a manner that will have a detrimental effect on public health and sanitation.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.602. Refuse.
(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978; repealed by § 2, Ord. 700, eff. November 26, 1993)

 

Sec. 4-3.603. Animals.
        No person shall ride, drive, lead, or keep a horse or other animal in any City park, except on such roads, trails, or areas as the City Manager may designate, and subject to such regulations as the City Manager may promulgate.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.604. Dogs.
        No dogs shall be permitted in City parks, except in those areas set by the City Manager and appropriately posted. All such dogs shall be kept on a leash. The owner of any dog creating a nuisance may be requested to remove the dog from the park.

        Notwithstanding the foregoing, sightless persons may be accompanied by a Seeing Eye dog whenever such person visits a City park if such dog is restrained by a leash.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

 

Sec. 4-3.701. Safe conduct.
        It shall be unlawful for persons using City parks to conduct themselves in a manner that is detrimental to the public safety.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.702. Vehicle operation.
        No person shall drive any vehicle within the limits of a City park in a manner other than that which is reasonable and safe and in no event at a speed greater than fifteen (15) miles per hour; provided, however, such speed limits shall not apply to State highways, County roads, and City roads.

(a)    Licenses. No person shall operate a motorized vehicle in a City park without a valid driver’s license.

(b)    Designated roads. No person shall ride or drive a bicycle, motorcycle, automobile, or any other vehicle other than on a designated road or on a trail designated for such vehicle.

(c)    Obstruction. No person shall obstruct the free travel of pedestrians on any road, walkway, or avenue or of any vehicle on automobile roads or designated trails for that purpose, except for park personnel servicing the area.

(d)    Parking. No person shall park any vehicle within a City park, except for the duration of his visit to such City park. Vehicles shall only be parked in such places as are designated for vehicular parking.

(e)    Parking after closing hours. No person shall park any vehicle within a City park or park parking area when the park is closed.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.703. Fire hazards.
        No person shall ignite or kindle a fire in any location in a City park, except in a fire or cooking area provided by the City or as specifically authorized by the City Manager.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.704. Weapons.
        No person shall use, carry, fire, or discharge any firearm, air gun, slingshot, or archery device of any kind across, in, or into a City park.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Article 8. Preservation of City Parks
Sec. 4-3.801. Park preservation.
        It shall be unlawful for persons using City parks to do so in a manner which will damage either the man-made or natural features within the Park.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.802. Vegetation.
        No person shall dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut any part of any tree, plant, shrub, or flower growing in any City park.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.803. Geological features.
        No person shall destroy, disturb, deface, or remove earth, rock, sand, gravel, oil, minerals, or fossils from any City park.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.804. Archaeological sites.
        No person shall disturb any archaeological site or archaeological materials in any City park.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.805. Animals.
        No person shall trap, kill, wound, or mistreat any wild or domesticated animal in any City park.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.806. Special permits.
        The City Manager may grant a permit to remove, destroy, or otherwise disturb plants or animals or geological, historical, or archaeological materials upon finding that such will be in the best interests of the City.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

 

Sec. 4-3.807. Defacement prohibited.
        No person shall in any way deface buildings, monuments, fences, benches, or other structures, apparatus, or property or markings by writing upon any building, monument, fence, bench, or other structure.

(Part 1, Ord. 568, eff. December 28, 1978)

Chapter 4 DANGEROUS WEAPONS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 4, Registration of Certain Persons, consisting of Sections 4-4.01 through 4-4.09, codified from Ord. No. 172, repealed by Section 1, Ord. No. 265, effective May 11, 1960.

 

Sec. 4-4.01. Discharge of firearms.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm within the limits of the City without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not apply to a law enforcement officer in the performance of his duty.

(Part 1, Ord. 500, eff. February 13, 1975)

 

Sec. 4-4.02. Spring guns or air guns.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any spring gun or air gun within the limits of the City without first obtaining a permit from the Chief of Police.

(Part 1, Ord. 500, eff. February 13, 1975)

 

Sec. 4-4.03. Carrying concealed weapons.
        It shall be unlawful for any person, not a peace officer, to wear or carry concealed upon or about his person any firearm, pistol, revolver, dirk, bowie knife, stiletto, slingshot, sand-club, or metallic knuckles without written permission so to do signed by the Chief of Police; provided, however, should the Chief of Police refuse to grant a permit to any person who may apply therefor, such person may apply to the Council which may grant the same at its discretion.

(Part 1, Ord. 500, eff. February 13, 1975)

Chapter 5 CURFEW
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 4-5.01 through 4-5.05, codified from Ord. No. 197, repealed by Section 1, Ord. No. 392, effective December 31, 1967. Section 4-5.05 repealed by Part 4, Ord. No. 508, effective July 24, 1975. Chapter title and Sections 4-5.01 through 4-5.06 amended completely by Section 1, Ord. No. 734, effective January 23, 1999.

 

Sec. 4-5.01. Definitions.
        In this chapter:

(a)    “Curfew hours” means:

(1)    11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and

(2)    12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.

(b)    “Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster or an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

(c)    “Establishment” means any privately-owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

(d)    “Guardian” means:

(1)    A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or

(2)    A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a court.

(e)    “Minor” means any person under eighteen (18) years of age.

(f)    “Operator” means any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or a partnership and the officers of a corporation.

(g)    “Parent” means a person who is:

(1)    A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person; or

(2)    At least eighteen (18) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

(h)    “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

(i)     “Remain” means to:

(1)    Linger or stay; or

(2)    Fail to leave a premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.

(j)     “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss of impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.

(§ 3, Ord. 734, eff. January 23, 1999)

 

Sec. 4-5.02. Violations.
(a)    A minor commits a violation if he or she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.

(b)    A parent or guardian of a minor commits a violation if he or she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.

(c)    The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits a violation if he or she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours.

(§ 3, Ord. 734, eff. January 23, 1999)

 

Sec. 4-5.03. Exceptions.
(a)    The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall not apply to any of the following exceptions when the minor was:

(1)    Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;

(2)    On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, without any detour or stop;

(3)    In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

(4)    Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

(5)    Involved in an emergency;

(6)    On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor’s presence;

(7)    Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and/or sponsored by the City, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity by adults and/or sponsored by the City, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;

(8)    Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly; or

(9)    Married or had been married or is otherwise an emancipated minor in accordance with applicable laws.

(b)    It is a defense to prosecution under Section 4-5.02 that the owner, operator or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave.

(§ 3, Ord. 734, eff. January 23, 1999)

 

Sec. 4-5.04. Enforcement.
        Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that a violation has occurred and that, based upon any response and other circumstances, no exception in Section 4-5.03 is present.

(§ 3, Ord. 734, eff. January 23, 1999)

 

Sec. 4-5.05. Parents: Liability for lack of supervision over minors.
(a)    Civil penalty. Every parent or legal guardian who, by any act or omission, or by threat, contributes to, or induces or endeavors to induce any dependent child or ward to fail or refuse to conform to any lawful order of law enforcement personnel, probation department, or of the juvenile court, or to conform to the requirements this Code concerning loitering, curfew or truancy, shall be subject to a civil penalty. For purposes of this section, a parent or legal guardian to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall have the duty to exercise reasonable care, supervision, protection and control over his or her minor child or ward.

        Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be liable for a civil penalty up to, but not to exceed, Two Thousand Five Hundred and no/100ths ($2,500.00) Dollars for each violation, which shall be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought by the District Attorney or the City Attorney.

(b)    Cost recovery. As determined by the Chief of Police, or his or her designee, the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of a minor committing any public offense amounting to any act of willful misconduct in violation of Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602, where police personnel provide services relating to the detention, processing or supervision of minors that are over and above the normal services usually provided by the Police Department, may be assessed and billed for the cost of providing such personnel for such services beyond those normally provided by said department.

        Any person receiving a bill for police services pursuant to this chapter may, within fifteen (15) days after the billing date, file a written request appealing the imposition of said charges. Any billing sent pursuant to this section shall inform the billed party of the right to appeal said billing. Any appeal regarding billing shall be heard by the City Manager, or his or her designee, as the hearing officer. Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall give written notice of the decision to the appellant. Upon the filing of a request for an appeal, payment of the bill for the police services shall be suspended until notice of the decision of the hearing officer. If the appeal is denied in part or in full, all amounts due to the City shall be paid within thirty (30) days after notice of the decision of the hearing officer.

(§ 3, Ord. 734, eff. January 23, 1999)

 

Sec. 4-5.06. Cumulative Remedies.
        The remedies provided in this section are in addition to the remedies and penalties available under this Code, and all other laws of this state.

(§ 3, Ord. 734, eff. January 23, 1999)

Chapter 6 REMOVAL OF ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 6, Intoxication, consisting of Sections 4-6.01 and 4-6.02, codified from Ord. No. 92, repealed by Ord. No. 320, effective August 7, 1963. Chapter 6, Removal of Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled, or Inoperative Vehicles from Private or Public Property, consisting of Sections 4-6.01 through 4-6.16, as added by Ord. No. 394, effective March 27, 1968, as amended by Ord. Nos. 429, effective June 24, 1971, and 508, effective July 24, 1975, repealed by Ord. No. 649, effective September 24, 1987.

Chapter 7 AMBULANCES
Sec. 4-7.01. Adoption of County provisions by reference.
        Ventura County Ordinance No. 2388 is hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference as though set forth in full in this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 417, eff. January 14, 1971)

 

Sec. 4-7.02. Violations.
        Any violation of the provisions of Ventura County Ordinance No. 2388 shall be an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 417, eff. January 14, 1971, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

Chapter 8 HISTORIC PRESERVATION LAW
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 675, 698, 708, 709 and 843.

 

Sec. 4-8.01. Title.
        This chapter shall be known as “Historic Preservation Law.”

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.02. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to promote the economic and general welfare of the City by preserving and protecting Council approved and designated landmarks, historic districts, structures of merit, and points of historical interest, as defined in this chapter, in consistency with the Conservation Element of the General Plan, be they of public or private ownership, and having a special historical, cultural, or aesthetic character or interest; all this in order to preserve the historic, architectural, cultural, and natural heritage of the City and to make the citizens of the City and visitors to the City mindful of this heritage. It is the City’s intent that the preservation of its landmarks, historic districts, structures of merit, and points of historical interest be guided by the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for the Treatment of Historic Properties as adapted to the particular and best interests of the City.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.03. Historic Preservation Commission.
        There is hereby established a City Historic Preservation Commission, consisting of five (5) members. Each Councilmember shall appoint one Commissioner, ratified by the approval of a majority of the full Council. While it is preferred that all members of the Commission have primary residence and be domiciled within the City, a minimum of three (3) members of the Commission must have primary residence and be domiciled within the City. All members must live within the Ojai Area of Interest, as defined by the Ventura County Local Agency Formation Commission. Members of the Commission shall be appointed for four (4) years on a staggered basis and shall hold office at the discretion of the Council until their successors have been appointed even if their designated term has expired. The first Commission seat to become vacant after passage of the ordinance codified in this section shall be filled by the Councilmember representing City Council District 4. The second seat to become vacant shall be filled by the Mayor. Subsequent appointments shall be made in the following order: City Council District 1, City Council District 2, City Council District 3, City Council District 4, and the Mayor, repeating as terms expire such that the five (5) Commission members correspond to the Mayor and four (4) City Council Districts. If a member resigns before the end of their term, the City Councilmember for the Voting District that appointed that member shall appoint their replacement. The designated terms of all members of the Commission shall expire at the second regular Council meeting of May.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019, as amended by § 1, Ord. 909, eff. September 25, 2020)

 

Sec. 4-8.04. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

        “Alteration” means any act or process that changes one or more of the exterior or interior character-defining elements of a structure, including, but not limited to, the erection, construction, reconstruction, or removal of any structure.

        “Architecture/architectural” means the character and general composition of the structure, including, but not limited to, the kind, color, and texture of the building material and the type, design, and character of all windows, doors, light fixtures, signs, and appurtenant elements.

        “Character-defining elements” means the significant historical, architectural, building, setting, design, or other elements of a landmark or historic district that contribute to the landmark or historic district’s eligibility for designation as a landmark or historic district. The character-defining elements of a landmark or historic district are specified in the Council’s resolution designating the landmark or historic district.

        “Construction” means the act of adding an addition to an existing structure or the erection of a new principal or accessory structure on a lot or property.

        “Contributing structure” is a structure on a landmark property or in an historic district that contains character-defining elements of the landmark or historic district as defined in the Council approved landmark resolution.

        “Council” means the City Council of the City of Ojai.

        “Cultural heritage/cultural landmark” refers to features that are primarily of interest due to their part in the City’s shared traditions or shared identity.

        “Demolition” means any act or process that destroys in part or in whole a landmark, proposed landmark, or point of historical interest. Process includes the act of demolition by neglect.

        “Demolition by neglect” means a situation in which the property owner, or others having legal possession, custody, or control of a property, allow the condition of Council designated or currently nominated landmark structure, structure of merit, or structure still existing within a Council designated point of historical interest, to suffer such deterioration, potentially beyond the point of repair, as to threaten the structural integrity of the structure or its relevant architectural detail to a degree that the structure and its character may potentially be lost to current and future generations.

        “Heritage” means the sum of the City’s collective history and culture that is passed down from the past to present and future generations. This heritage may be of an historical, architectural, cultural or natural significance or interest.

        “Historic district” means an area designated as an “historic district” by ordinance of the Council, and which may contain within definable geographic boundaries one or more landmarks and which may have within its boundaries other properties or structures that, while not of such historic and/or architectural significance to be designated as landmarks, nevertheless contribute to the overall visual characteristics of the landmark or landmarks located within the historic district. An historic district is identified in reference to its historically and architecturally significant character-defining elements.

        “Landmark” means a building, structure, object, site, or district designated as a “landmark” by resolution of the Council, pursuant to procedures prescribed herein, that is worthy of rehabilitation, restoration, reconstruction, or preservation because of its historical, architectural, cultural, and/or natural significance to the City.

        “Landmark property” means the parcel(s) on which a landmark or historic district exists, including all character-defining elements, non-character-defining elements, contributing structures, and non-contributing structures.

        “Natural heritage/natural landmark” refers to features that are part of the natural landscape; that are not man-made.

        “Non-contributing structure” means a structure on a landmarked property or in an historic district that does not contain character-defining elements of the landmark or historic district.

        “Ordinary repair and maintenance” means any work, the sole purpose and effect of which is to correct normal deterioration, decay, or damage, and to restore the same, as nearly as may be practicable, to the condition and visual appearance prior to the occurrence of such deterioration, decay, or damage. Ordinary repair and maintenance does not apply to any new construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration project.

        “Owner of record” means the person, corporation, or other legal entity listed as owner on the records of the County Recorder of Deeds.

        “Point of historical interest” means the site of a building, structure, or object which no longer exists but which was associated with historic events or important persons or embodied a distinctive character or architectural style; or has historic significance but has been altered to the extent that the integrity of the original workmanship, materials, or style has been substantially compromised; or is the site of an historic event which has no distinguishable characteristic other than that an historic event occurred there, and the site is not of sufficient historic significance to justify the establishment of an historic landmark.

        “Removal” means any relocation of a structure on its site or to another site.

        “Secretary of Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for the Treatment of Historic Properties” refers to a booklet published by the U.S. Secretary of the Interior under the National Historic Preservation Act

(NHPA), which establishes professional standards and guidance on the preservation of the nation’s historic properties in four (4) treatment areas: preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, and reconstruction.

        “Structure” means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires permanent or temporary location on or in the ground.

        “Structure of merit” means an individual structure designated by the Council, upon recommendation by the Historic Preservation Commission, of historic, architectural, community, or aesthetic merit which has not been designated as a landmark or point of historical interest but which is deserving of being added to a Council approved special recognition list.

 

 

        “Work permit” means a permit issued by the city after approval by either the Historic Preservation Commission or the Community Development Director for any work performed on a landmark, landmark property, or historic district other than “ordinary repair and maintenance” not affecting any character-defining elements, either physically or visually. All work permits will be issued in compliance with Section 4-8.15.

                “Major work permit” means a permit issued by the City after approval by the Historic Preservation Commission for any work performed on a landmark, landmark property, or historic district that might affect a character-defining element, either physically or visually, in compliance with Section 4-8.15.

                “Minor work permit” means a permit issued by the City after approval by the Community Development Director for any work performed on a landmark, landmark property, or historic district that does not impact a character-defining element, either physically or visually, in compliance with Section 4-8.15.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.05. Historic Preservation Commission—Functions and powers.
The functions and powers of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be:

        (a)    Evaluation. The Historic Preservation Commission or Community Development Director may investigate any structure in the City which the Council or Planning Commission or Historic Preservation Commission has reason to believe should be declared an historical landmark, historic district, structure of merit, or point of historical interest;

        (b)    Inventory. To maintain a current list of all historical, cultural, and natural landmarks, historic districts, structures of merit, and points of historical interest which have been declared as such by the Council. This information shall be made available to the public;

        (c)    Public hearings. To hold public hearings for the purpose of identifying historical landmarks, historic districts, or points of historical interest, with such hearings held ten (10) days or more after the property owner has been notified by registered mail;

        (d)    Recommendations. If the conclusion of the Historic Preservation Commission is that an historical landmark, historic district, structure of merit, or point of historical interest does exist which meets the criteria established in this chapter and should be declared as such, the Historic Preservation Commission shall make its recommendation to the Council for timely deliberation within ninety (90) days and send a copy of such recommendation to the property owner;

        (e)    State registration. The Historic Preservation Commission may recommend to the Council that the City apply to the California Office of Historic Preservation for State registration of landmarks, historic districts, or sites which have historical significance, which meet State registration criteria, and where the registration would assist in preservation. The Historic Preservation Commission may find that a landmark site of historic significance is significant for declaration as a State “point of historical interest” but does not warrant registration as a State “historical landmark.” The Historic Preservation Commission shall investigate and recommend to Council the appropriate State registration;

        (f)    Advise and assist property owners. To advise and assist owners of landmarks and property or structures within historic districts on physical and financial aspects of preservation, renovation, rehabilitation, and reuse, and on procedures for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places;

        (g)    Amendments. To identify issues with this chapter and recommend to the Council consideration of amendments to this chapter when circumstances indicate; and

        (h)    Develop guidelines. To develop and recommend for Council adoption of specific design guidelines for the alteration, construction, or removal of landmarks or property and structures within historic districts;

 

        (i)     Inform citizens. To inform and educate the citizens of Ojai concerning the historic and architectural heritage of the City by publishing appropriate maps, newsletters, brochures, pamphlets, websites, and social media information, and by holding programs and seminars according to a workplan and budget authority approved by Council;

        (j)     Markers. To determine which designated landmarks, historic districts and points of historical interest shall be marked with uniform and distinctive markers;

        (k)    Nominate landmarks. To nominate landmarks and historic districts to the National Register of Historic Places as approved by Council, and to review and comment on any National Register nominations submitted to the Historic Preservation Commission upon request of the Mayor or Council;

        (l)     Preservation of landmarks and points of historical interest. To take the steps necessary to preserve such landmarks and points of historical interest not in conflict with the public health and safety consistent with City policies and protocols. Such steps may include the creation of civic and citizens’ committees; the establishment of a private fund for the acquisition or restoration of declared landmarks and points of historical interest; and the recommendation that such declared landmarks and points of historical interest be acquired by a governmental agency where private acquisition is not feasible;

        (m)   Review Mills Act agreements. To review proposed initial and renewed Mills Act agreements and provide a recommendation to the Council regarding acceptance of Mills Act agreements, under Title 4, Chapter 9 of the Ojai Municipal Code;

        (n)    Review Conservation Element of the General Plan. To periodically review the Conservation Element of the General Plan and to recommend to the Planning Commission and the Council any amendments appropriate for the protection and continued use of landmarks or property and structures within historic districts;

        (o)    Review proposed amendments, etc. At the request of the Council or Planning Commission, review proposed zoning amendments, applications for permits, or applications for zoning variances that affect proposed or designated landmarks and historic districts. Review and comment within thirty (30) days of submission for the public record of any and all historic resources reports prepared for any other development project requiring a design review permit, conditional use permit, development agreement, or other zoning code permit;

        (p)    Rules and regulations. To adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter;

        (q)    Surveys. To conduct surveys of potentially significant properties, structures, or sites according to workplan and budget approved by Council.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.06. Nomination of landmarks and historic districts.
        Any building, property, cultural feature, or natural feature with historic, architectural, cultural, or aesthetic significance or interest within the City of Ojai or Sphere of Influence (LAFCO definition) by agreement with the County of Ventura may be nominated for landmark status if it meets one or more of the criteria in Section 4-8.07. Nominations shall be made to the Historic Preservation Commission on a form prepared by it and may be submitted by a member of the Historic Preservation Commission, owner of record of the nominated property or structure, the City Council, or any other person or organization domiciled within the Ojai Area of Interest as defined by Ventura Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO).

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.07. Criteria for consideration of nomination.
        The Historic Preservation Commission shall, upon such investigation as it deems necessary, make a determination as to whether a nominated property(ies), structure(s), or site(s) meets one or more of the following criteria:

        (a)    Its character, interest, or value as part of the historic development, heritage, or cultural characterization of the community;

        (b)    Its identification with a person or persons who significantly contributed to the development of the community;

        (c)    Its embodiment of distinguishing characteristics of an architectural style valuable for the study of a period, type, method of construction, or use of indigenous materials;

        (d)    Its identification as the work of a master builder, designer, architect, or landscape architect whose individual work has influenced the development of the community;

        (e)    Its embodiment of elements of design, detailing, materials, or craftsmanship that render it architecturally significant;

        (f)    Its embodiment of design elements that make it structurally or architecturally innovative;

        (g)    Its unique location or singular physical characteristics that make it an established or familiar visual feature; and

        (h)    Its suitability for preservation or restoration.

        In addition to the above criteria, any structure, property, or site that meets one or more of the above criteria shall also have sufficient integrity of location, design, materials, and/or workmanship to make it worthy of preservation or restoration.

        A proposed landmark shall have historic, aesthetic, or special character or interest for the community as a whole and not be limited to the benefit of an individual, group, or personal special interest.

        A proposed landmark designation shall not require the expenditure by the City of any amount of public funds not commensurate with the value to the community as a whole of the structure, property, or site to be preserved.

        Proposed landmark designations shall not infringe upon the rights of a private owner thereof to make reasonable uses thereof which are not in conflict with the purposes of this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.08. Report and recommendation of Historic Preservation Commission.
        The Historic Preservation Commission shall, within ninety (90) days from receipt of a completed nomination in proper form, hold a public hearing and adopt, by resolution, a recommendation that the nominated landmark or historic district does or does not meet the criteria for designation in Section 4-8.07 of this chapter. The applicant for a landmark designation may withdraw the application at any time before the start of the public hearing before the Historic Preservation Commission on the proposed landmark designation. The resolution shall be accompanied by a report to the Council containing the following information:

        (a)    Explanation of the significance or lack of significance of the nominated landmark or historic district as it relates to the criteria for designation;

        (b)    Explanation of the integrity or lack of integrity of the nominated landmark or historic district;

        (c)    In the case of a nominated landmark found to meet the criteria for designation:

                (1)    The significant architectural features of the nominated landmark that should be protected as character-defining elements,

                (2)    The types of construction or alteration, other than those requiring a building or demolition permit, that should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to the provisions of Section 4-8.16,

                (3)    The effect of any alteration, construction, or removal of the landmark approved by any land use permits granted under Title 10 of the Ojai Municipal Code but not yet completed, and

                (4)    Any additional character-defining elements that contribute to the landmark’s eligibility for designation;

        (d)    In the case of a nominated historic district found to meet the criteria for designation:

                (1)    The types of significant architectural features of the structures within the nominated historic district that should be protected as character-defining elements,

                (2)    The types of alterations and demolitions that should be reviewed for appropriateness pursuant to specific ordinance criteria developed for the historic district, addressing standards for alterations and new construction within the district,

                (3)    Any additional character-defining elements that contribute to the historic district’s eligibility for designation, and

                (4)    Evidence that at least a majority of the owners of parcels within the proposed district support designation, the owner(s) of each parcel having one vote per parcel with a maximum of one vote per ownership entity (defined as in Section 4-8.09);

        (e)    Proposed design guidelines for applying the criteria for review of work permits to the nominated landmark or historic district;

        (f)    Recommendations as to appropriate permitted uses, special uses, height and area regulations, minimum dwelling size, floor area, sign relations, and parking regulations necessary or appropriate to the preservation of the nominated landmark or historic district;

        (g)    A map showing the location of the nominated landmark and the boundaries of the nominated historic district.

        The recommendations and report of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be sent to the Council and affected property owners within seven (7) days following the vote on the resolution and shall be available to the public in the offices of the City Clerk.

        The recommendations and report of the Historic Preservation Commission shall include an historic resources report, prepared by an historian under contract with the City and in consultation with the Ojai Valley Museum, and other sources, which examines the historical significance of the nominated landmark or historic district, considers the items set forth in this section and the landmark criteria set forth in Section 4-8.07, identifies the character-defining elements of the nominated landmark or historic district, and identifies any changes to those elements over time.

        The historic resources report shall be prepared consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for the Treatment of Historic Properties. The cost of this historic resources report shall be paid by the applicant for the landmark, as set forth in the City’s fee schedule. The historic resources report shall evaluate the effect of any alteration, or construction on the same parcel as the landmark approved by any land use permits granted under Title 10, Chapter 2 of the Ojai Municipal Code but not yet completed and whether this work will adversely affect the landmark’s character-defining elements.

        Interim prohibition: from the time a completed application for a landmark nomination is received by the Historic Preservation Commission until the time the Council either declares the landmark, or determines not to declare the landmark, the time period involved not to exceed ninety (90) days, the property owner shall be prohibited from defacing, demolishing, adding to, altering, or removing the landmark, except for routine repair in the property’s interior.

        Notice and appeal: if the property owner objects to the designation of his property as a landmark, such objection shall be filed with the Council not later than thirty (30) days following the date the Historic Preservation Commission makes its recommendation.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.09. Declaration of landmarks or historic districts.
        The authority to declare cultural heritage landmarks and historic districts shall be vested solely in the Council.

        Upon recommendations of the Historic Preservation Commission, and at least thirty (30) days after such recommendation is made, pursuant to Section 4-8.08, the Council may declare those items set forth in Sections 4-8.08 and 4-8.09 of this chapter as historical, cultural, or natural landmarks, or historic districts.

        If the property owner has filed an objection to the designation of this property as a landmark, the Council shall schedule a public hearing to consider the objection, after which the Council shall determine whether or not to so declare.

        In the case of historic districts, the Council shall not make a designation if a majority or more of the owners of parcels within the proposed district, the owner(s) of each parcel having one vote per parcel with a maximum of one vote per ownership entity, file a written protest against creation of such a district. The definition of an ownership entity shall be any and/or all individuals who own all or part of a parcel in the proposed historic district. If the title of a given parcel does not state the names of the individuals who own it, then the names of the individuals having direct or indirect control of said parcel must be disclosed for that parcel to have its vote counted.

        The Council’s resolution designating the landmark or historic district, shall describe the character defining elements of the landmark or historic district.

        The Council may, by resolution and upon the recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission, update an existing landmark or historic district, designation to include a description of the character defining elements of the landmark or historic district designation.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.10. Acquisition of landmarks or historic districts.
        If the decision is made that the historical significance of any declared landmark or historic district justifies the expenditure of public funds, acquisition proceedings may be initiated. If the Council finds a landmark or historic district to be of historical significance, and public funds are not available, private funds may be used for the acquisition, or other arrangements may be made which are satisfactory to the property.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.11. City funds and incentives.
        (a)    The Historic Preservation Commission or other interested persons, may petition the Council for the funds necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The Council may expend all reasonable amounts of money needed to carry out such purposes or to acquire fee title or such lesser ownership rights or rights of possession or negative easements as the Council deems necessary or expedient to carry out such programs.

        (b)    The Council may, at its discretion, contribute City funds to rehabilitate or restore any designated City landmark it deems worthy of such funding.

        (c)    The Council may, in accord with the General Plan and other applicable law, offer landmark owner’s incentives to preserve, rehabilitate, restore, or adaptively reuse a designated City landmark, which may include such incentives as:

                (1)    Allowing a discretionary lot split;

                (2)    Increasing the maximum allowable size of an accessory dwelling unit;

                (3)    Waiving City permit fees, parking requirements, or signage rules;

                (4)    Adjusting setback and lot coverage requirements;

                (5)    Allowing the use of historic landmark for events or as an interpretive center;

                (6)    Variances for use of an historic property within its zone;

                (7)    Expedited approval.

        These incentives shall only be approved by the City Council when necessary to achieve the goals of historic preservation.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.12. Cooperation.
        All boards, commission, departments, and officers of the City shall cooperate with the Historic Preservation Commission in carrying out the provisions of this chapter and shall notify the Historic Preservation Commission of the discovery of items of historical significance, including, but not limited to, burial grounds, prehistoric artifacts, or historic foundations or structures; inform the Commission of the proposed alteration, demolition, or relocation of designated landmarks.

        The Historic Preservation Commission shall cooperate with all City departments and officers when requested and shall recommend for their consideration matters covered by this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.13. Structures of merit and points of historical interest.
        (a)    Structures of merit. The Historic Preservation Commission may recommend to Council individual structures of historic, architectural, community, or aesthetic merit which have not yet been designated as landmarks, but which are deserving of being added to a Council approved special recognition list. The purpose of such list shall be to recognize and encourage the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of such structures. The Commission may additionally recommend historic structures in the City which have been officially so designated by agencies of the State or Federal government to be added to this special recognition list.

                (1)    The City and the owner of the structure of merit may negotiate placement of an optional City historical plaque.

                (2)    Before any permit is issued by the Building Official for demolition or alteration of a structure designated by Council as a structure of merit, the permit application to the Building Official shall be forwarded to the Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment before issuing the permit. No fee shall be associated with this procedure and the forwarding for review and comment shall be on the agenda at the next Historic Preservation Commission meeting following the referral of a complete permit application from the Building Official to the Historic Preservation Commission for said review and comment.

                (3)    No structure designated as a structure of merit shall be subject to demolition by neglect as determined by the Building Official.

                (4)    Before any permit is issued for a repair of a structure of merit, the application shall be forwarded to the Community Development Director for review and comment with possible forwarding, at the Director’s discretion, to the Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment.

        (b)    Points of historical interest. The Historic Preservation Commission may recommend to the Council individual points of historical interest, as defined in Section 4-8.04, which are deserving of special recognition on a list of City historical resources and marked with a City historical plaque.

                (1)    If the property on which the historical plaque is to be located is not on City-owned property, the City will enter into an agreement with the property owner for placement of a City historical plaque.

                (2)    For a point of historical interest where no related historic building, structure, or object remains the site will only be marked by a City historical plaque.

                (3)    For a point of historical interest where an historic building, structure or object exists but has been altered to the extent that the integrity of the original workmanship, materials, or style has been substantially compromised, the site will be marked by a City historical plaque and the following requirement will be enforced: Before any permit is issued for demolition or alteration of a point of historical interest, the application shall be forwarded to the Community Development Director for review and comment with possible forwarding, at the Director’s discretion, to the Historic Preservation Commission for review and comment.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.14. Expenses.
        The necessary and reasonable expenses for the operation of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be the responsibility of the City. Included shall be the installation and maintenance of markers.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.15. Permits for work affecting landmarks.
        Work permits are City permits granting approval for work performed on a designated historic landmark, landmark property, or historic district that could impact its historic significance or integrity. Using the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines, as adapted by the Council, the applicant and the City work together to ensure as little loss of significance and integrity as possible.

        (a)    Approval of a major work permit by the Historic Preservation Commission, or the Council on appeal, shall be required before any of the following actions may be undertaken for a landmark, landmark property, or historic district that could impact a character-defining element, either physically or visually:

                (1)    New construction, addition, demolition, or relocation;

                (2)    Exterior alteration, reconstruction, restoration, or rehabilitation;

                (3)    Interior alteration, restoration, or rehabilitation if an interior feature has been listed as a character-defining element.

        (b)    Approval of a minor work permit by the Community Development Director, or the Historic Preservation Commission or Council on appeal or referral, shall be required before any of the following actions may be undertaken for a landmark, landmark property, or historic district:

                (1)    Exterior alteration of a landmark, landmark property, or historic district, if the area of alteration is not a character-defining element and will not impact a character-defining element, either physically or visually;

                (2)    Interior alteration or remodeling even if visible from the exterior, unless the structure’s interior elements which are the subject of the application are character-defining elements of the landmark;

                (3)    Ordinary repair and maintenance if the work performed affects a character-defining element, either physically or visually. If the work could result in a loss of historical significance or integrity, the application will be referred to the Historic Preservation Commission by the Community Development Director.

        (c)    Ordinary repair and maintenance on any non-landmarked structure on the same property as a landmark, any non-character-defining element of a landmark, or any non-contributing structure in an historic district, does not require a work permit as defined herein. However, no permit for repair and maintenance activity on a parcel containing a landmark structure shall be issued without prior review by the Community Development Director to confirm valid classification of the activity as ordinary repair and maintenance. Such review shall be performed no longer than twenty-one (21) days from the date of the referral of a complete permit application from the Building Official to the Community Development Director to confirm this classification. No fee will be associated with this procedure.

        (d)    It is a misdemeanor subject to penalties and enforcement as described in Section 4-8.24 for any person to demolish, construct, alter, relocate, or otherwise perform work, except as described above, on any landmark, landmark property, or on any structure(s) in a parcel(s) within an historic district without following the procedures provided for in this chapter.

        (e)    Work permits for work on non-character-defining elements or non-contributing structures are not evaluated for preservation, but only to ensure compatibility and appropriateness with the architectural and historical elements of the landmark so as not to adversely impact the landmark’s historical/architectural significance or integrity.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.16. Major and minor work permit procedures.
        (a)    General procedures for major work permits.

                (1)    The Historic Preservation Commission shall be the review authority for major work permits for any project on a parcel containing a landmark or in any parcel(s) within an historic district subject to the major work permit requirement under Section 4-8.15(a). Any decision by the Historic Preservation Commission may be appealed to the Council under Section 4-8.19.

                (2)    If an application for a major work permit involves a property for which the property owner or applicant has also applied for a land use permit under Title 10, Chapter 2 of the Ojai Municipal Code, then the Historic Preservation Commission shall first consider the application for a major work permit, and if approved, then the Community Development Director, Planning Commission, or Council may consider the application for one or more land use permits under Title 10, Chapter 2 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

                (3)    The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing and approve or disapprove all major work permit applications. In considering the application for a major work permit, the Historic Preservation Commission, or Council on appeal, shall consider any existing historic landmark property agreement (Mills Act agreement) for the subject property containing a landmark, including whether the proposed changes to the subject property are consistent with the historic landmark property agreement and the work plan for the property approved under Title 4, Chapter 9, Historic Landmark Property Agreements, of the Ojai Municipal Code.

                (4)    The application for a major work permit shall include all required plans, materials, and documents from the applicant which are reasonably necessary for the proper review of the proposed project on a property containing a landmark.

                (5)    The application for a major work permit shall include an existing historic resources report, or a new one at the discretion of the Community Development Director.

        The historic resources report considering the application for a major work permit, if newly prepared for the application, shall be prepared by an historian under contract with the City and in consultation with the Ojai Valley Museum and other sources, and shall examine the historical significance of the landmark or historic district, identify the character-defining elements of the landmark or historic district, identify changes to those elements over time, and assess whether the proposed project on the parcel containing a landmark will adversely impact the landmark or historic district and all applicable character defining elements, either physically or visually, taking into account the standards of Section 4-8.18.

 

        The historic resources report shall be prepared consistent with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards and Guidelines for the Treatment of Historic Properties. The historic resources report shall evaluate the effect of any alteration or construction on the landmark, landmark property, or historic district approved by any land use permits granted under Title 10, Chapter 2 of the Ojai Municipal Code but not yet completed, and whether this work will adversely affect the landmark’s character-defining elements, either physically or visually. The cost of an historic resources report, if required, shall be paid by the applicant for the major work permit, as set forth in the City’s fee schedule.

        An historic resources report shall include professional quality photographs of the landmark and its character-defining elements.

                (6)    The application for a major work permit shall identify the character-defining elements of the landmark or historic district as set forth in the landmark designation resolution. If the landmark designation was more than ten (10) years before the application, then the application must include an analysis of whether the original landmark designation resolution appropriately identified the landmark’s character-defining elements and if not, it must then identify the character-defining elements of the landmark.

                (7)    The Historic Preservation Commission’s decision to approve, deny, or conditionally approve the major work permit shall be in writing and shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its decision.

                (8)    The Historic Preservation Commission’s decision shall be final, absent an appeal within the time specified in Section 4-8.19.

                (9)    If an Environmental Impact Report (EIR), mitigated negative declaration or negative declaration is required, the time limits set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21151.5 shall apply.

                (10)  The Historic Preservation Commission may hold a concept review hearing to review a proposed major work permit within thirty (30) days of receipt of a request of the applicant.

                (11)  The Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider and act on a major work permit not less than thirty (30) days after receiving a completed application for a major work permit for construction and reconstruction; alteration, restoration and rehabilitation; relocation; and demolition of any landmark, non-landmarked structure on the same parcel as a landmark, or in a parcel(s) within an historic district.

        This hearing may be continued from time to time if necessary, up to a maximum of six (6) months from the date of the first public hearing. In cases of proposed demolition of any landmark, the Historic Preservation Commission may delay the hearing for up to six (6) months for purposes of negotiation as provided for in Section 4-8.17(c).

        (b)    General procedures for minor work permits.

                (1)    The Community Development Director shall be the review authority for minor work permits for any project on a parcel containing a landmark or in a parcel(s) within an historic district subject to the minor work permit requirement under Section 4-8.15(b). At least fifteen (15) city business days before approving a proposed minor work permit, the Community Development Director shall notify the Historic Preservation Commission and the public via the City’s website and the next Historic Preservation Commission agenda of the permit and project intended for approval. The Community Development Director may refer any application for a minor work permit to the Historic Preservation Commission. Any decision by the Community Development Director may be appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission under Section 4-8.19. Any decision by the Historic Preservation Commission may be appealed to the City Council under Section 4-8.19.

                (2)    If an application for a minor work permit involves a property for which the property owner or applicant has also applied for a land use permit under Title 10, Chapter 2 of the Ojai Municipal Code, then the Community Development Director shall first consider the application for a minor work permit, and if approved, then the Community Development Director, Planning Commission, or City Council may consider the application for one or more land use permits under Title 10, Chapter 2 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

                (3)    The Community Development Director shall approve, disapprove, or refer to the Historic Preservation Commission for approval, all applications for minor work permits. In considering the application for a minor work permit, the Community Development Director shall consider any existing historic landmark property agreement (Mills Act agreement) for the subject property containing a landmark, including whether the proposed changes to the subject property are consistent with the historic landmark property agreement and the work plan for the property approved under Title 4, Chapter 9, Historic Landmark Property Agreements, of the Ojai Municipal Code.

                (4)    If the application for a minor work permit is referred or appealed to the Historic Preservation Commission, the Historic Preservation Commission, or Council on appeal, shall consider any existing historic landmark property agreement for the subject property containing a landmark, including whether the proposed changes to the subject property are consistent with the historic landmark property agreement and the work plan for the property approved under Title 4, Chapter 9, Historic Landmark Property Agreements, of the Ojai Municipal Code.

                (5)    The application for a minor work permit shall include all required plans, materials, and documents from the applicant which are reasonably necessary for the proper review of the proposed action to be taken.

                (6)    The application for a minor work permit may, at the discretion of the Community Development Director, need an historic resources report prepared as required for a major work permit by an historian under contract with the City and in consultation with the Ojai Valley Museum and other sources. The cost of an historic resources report, if required, shall be paid by the applicant for the minor work permit, as set forth in the City’s fee schedule.

                (7)    The application for a minor work permit shall identify the character-defining elements of the landmark as set forth in the landmark designation resolution. If the landmark designation was more than ten (10) years before the application, then the application must include an analysis of whether the original landmark designation appropriately identified the landmark’s character-defining elements and if not, it must then identify the character-defining elements of the landmark.

                (8)    The Community Development Director’s decision to approve, deny, or conditionally approve the minor work permit shall be in writing and shall state the findings of fact and reasons relied upon in reaching its decision.

                (9)    The Community Development Director’s decision shall be final, absent an appeal within the time specified in Section 4-8.19.

                (10)  If an Environmental Impact Report (EIR), mitigated negative declaration or negative declaration is required, the time limits set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21151.5 shall apply.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.17. Major work permit criteria.
        (a)    Construction, reconstruction, alteration, restoration, and rehabilitation. The Historic Preservation Commission, or the City Council upon appeal, shall approve a major work permit for any proposed project on a parcel containing a landmark, or in any parcel(s) within an historic district, subject to the major work permit requirement under Section 4-8.15(a), except demolition and relocation of a landmark, if, and only if, it determines:

                (1)    The proposed project on a parcel containing a landmark, or in any parcel(s) within an historic district, subject to the major work permit requirement under Section 4-8.15(a) will not detrimentally alter, destroy, or adversely affect any architectural feature, character-defining element, either physically or visually, or any other feature which led the historic resource to be designated as a landmark; and

                (2)    In the case of a proposed construction for a new addition to an existing landmark, a new structure proposed for the same parcel as a landmark, or a new structure proposed for a parcel(s) within an historic district, the new improvement or structure will not adversely affect and will be compatible with the appearance of the landmark and existing improvements on the same parcel as the landmark and with the landmark’s character-defining elements, physically and visually.

        (b)    Relocation of landmarks. In considering whether to recommend approval or disapproval of an application for a major work permit to relocate a landmark, the Historic Preservation Commission, or Council on appeal, shall be guided by the following considerations:

                (1)    The historic character and aesthetic interest the setting contributes to the landmark;

                (2)    Whether the landmark can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity and character-defining elements; and

                (3)    Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the landmark, including its character-defining elements, physically and visually.

        (c)    Demolition of landmarks.

                (1)    Economic hardship. Demolition of a landmark constitutes an irreplaceable loss to the quality and character of the City. Therefore, no major work permit shall be issued for demolition of a landmark unless the applicant shows clear and convincing evidence of unreasonable economic hardship or other unusual and compelling circumstances which dictate demolition of the landmark.

                (2)    Balancing required. The Historic Preservation Commission, or Council on appeal, shall be guided in its determination by balancing the historic value of the particular landmark against the merit of the proposed replacement project.

                (3)    Approval of major work permit for demolition of a landmark. Should the applicant for demolition of a landmark satisfy the Historic Preservation Commission, or Council on appeal, that an unreasonable economic hardship will be suffered if a demolition permit is not approved, or, in failing to demonstrate unreasonable economic hardship, the applicant demonstrates unusual and compelling circumstances which dictate demolition of the landmark, the Historic Preservation Commission, or Council on appeal, shall approve the application for a demolition permit.

                (4)    Negotiations prior to demolition application decision. Prior to the Historic Preservation Commission’s decision on the demolition permit for a landmark, the Planning Department shall discuss the proposed demolition informally with the applicant, other City officials and local preservation organizations, to explore whether an alternative to demolition can be found before a formal consideration of the application by the Historic Preservation Commission. The Planning Department shall prepare a report for the Historic Preservation Commission analyzing alternatives to demolition, and request from other City departments or agencies information necessary for the preparation of this report.

                (5)    The negotiation period may take up to six (6) months before the request for a demolition permit is brought to the Historic Preservation Commission. This time period may be further extended by mutual consent of the City and the applicant. If within this period any one of the following three (3) events occur, the demolition application shall be considered to have been withdrawn by the applicant:

                        (i)     The owner enters into a binding contract for the sale of the building or structure;

                        (ii)    Approved arrangements are made for the building or structure to be moved to an approved new location; or

                        (iii)   The City determines to condemn the property and take it by power of eminent domain for rehabilitation or reuse by the City, or other disposition with appropriate preservation restrictions in order to promote the historic preservation purposes of this chapter to maintain the building or structure and protect it from demolition.

        (d)    Showing of hardship. When a claim of unreasonable economic hardship is made due to the effect of this chapter, the owner and/or applicant must prove to the Historic Preservation Commission, or City Council on appeal, that a reasonable return cannot be realized upon the value of the building or structure. The public benefits obtained from retaining the historic resource must be analyzed and duly considered by the Historic Preservation Commission.

        The Historic Preservation Commission may require that an applicant furnish information additional to what was submitted that is relevant to its determination of unreasonable economic hardship.

        (e)    Evidence of hardship. Evidence which may be considered in determining whether unreasonable economic hardship exists, includes, but is not limited to, the following:

                (1)    Bona fide efforts to rent or sell the building or structure have been unsuccessful;

                (2)    Approval or conditional approval to do work permitted by this chapter will not enable the applicant to rent or sell the building or structure at a reasonable rate of return;

                (3)    It is not economically or technically feasible to renovate or undertake an alternative development compatible with the permit criteria outlined in this chapter;

                (4)    Personal or economic circumstances exist which preclude the applicant from performing work in compliance with the permit criteria outlined in this chapter;

                (5)    Land use regulations and development standards, set forth in the City’s zoning ordinance and the City Building Code, preclude necessary renovations or a feasible use of the landmark.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.18. Minor work permit criteria.
        The Community Development Director, or the Historic Preservation Commission upon referral or appeal, or the Council upon appeal, shall approve a minor work permit for any proposed project on a parcel containing a landmark, or in any parcel(s) within an historic district, subject to the minor work permit requirement under Section 4-8.15(b), if, and only if, the Director, Commission, or Council determines:

        The proposed project on a parcel containing a landmark subject to the minor work permit requirement under Section 4-8.15(b) will not detrimentally alter, destroy, or adversely affect any architectural feature, character-defining element, physically or visually, or any other feature which led the historic resource to be designated as a landmark.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.19. Appeal procedure—Historic Preservation Commission’s action.
        (a)    An applicant, or other aggrieved person, may appeal the Community Development Director’s decision approving or disapproving a minor work permit to the Historic Preservation Commission or an Historic Preservation Commission’s decision approving or disapproving a minor or major work permit to the Council by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days from the date of action by the Community Development Director or the Historic Preservation Commission. The notice of appeal shall indicate the grounds for the appeal. Any action of the Historic Preservation Commission may be appealed to the Council during any portion of the review process.

        (b)    The Historic Preservation Commission or Council, as applicable, shall schedule a public hearing to be held no later than thirty (30) days after the notice of appeal is filed and shall render its decision within thirty (30) days of closing the public hearing.

        (c)    In ruling upon the appeal, the Council or Historic Preservation Commission shall consider the same factors as the Historic Preservation Commission or Community Development Director, as applicable, a report of the City Manager or the Community Development Director, which includes a discussion of the Historic Preservation Commission or Community Development Director’s decision, and any other matters presented at the hearing on appeal.

        (d)    If the Council or Historic Preservation Commission, as applicable, approves the application on appeal, it shall direct the issuance of a major work permit or minor work permit, as applicable, for the work covered.

        (e)    If the Council or Historic Preservation Commission, as applicable, disapproves the application, it shall not issue such permit. Such disapproval may indicate what changes in the plans and specifications would meet the conditions for protecting the distinctive historical character of the landmark.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.20. Major and minor work permit time limits and extensions.
        The provisions of Article 32 of Chapter 2 of Title 10 of the Ojai Municipal Code shall apply to the exercise and extension of major work permits and minor work permits, with the following exceptions. Any proposed extension of the time to commence or complete work approved by a major work permit must be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. Any proposed extension of the time to commence or complete work approved by a minor work permit must be approved by the Community Development Director.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.21. Dangerous conditions.
        Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any demolition or rehabilitation necessary to correct or eliminate the unsafe or dangerous condition of any designated or proposed landmark, if such condition has been declared unsafe or dangerous by the City Building Official and where such demolition or rehabilitation is necessary to correct or eliminate such condition and has been ordered by the Building Official.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.22. Duty to keep in good condition.
        (a)    The owner, occupant, designated responsible party, or other person in actual charge of a landmark, or a contributing structure within an historic district, shall keep in good condition all of the exterior portions of such landmark, or contributing structure within an historic district, all of the interior portions thereof when subject to control as specified in the designating resolution or permit, and all interior portions thereof whose maintenance is necessary to prevent deterioration and decay.

        (b)    It shall be the duty of the Building Official and/or Code Enforcement Officer to enforce this section.

        (c)    Demolition by neglect for any structure on a parcel including a landmark, or any structure(s) on a parcel(s) within an historic district, is expressly prohibited subject to penalties specified in Section 4-8.24.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.23. Property owned by public agencies.
        The Community Development Director shall take appropriate steps to notify all public agencies which own or may acquire property in the City, of the responsibilities involved in the ownership of designated landmarks and historic district properties. All publicly owned properties so designated must comply with the provisions of this chapter unless these regulations are preempted by State or Federal law.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-8.24. Enforcement and penalties.
        (a)    Methods of enforcement. In addition to the regulations of this chapter, other chapters of the Municipal Code and other provision of law which govern the approval or disapproval of applications for permits or licenses covered by this chapter, the Community Development Director and the Building Official shall have the authority to implement the enforcement thereof by any, more than one, or all, of the following means:

                (1)    Serving notice requiring the removal of any violation of this chapter upon the owner, agent, occupant, or tenant of the improvement, building, structure, site, or land;

                (2)    Calling upon the City Attorney to institute any necessary legal proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter, and the City Attorney is hereby authorized to institute any actions to that end;

                (3)    Calling upon the Chief of Police and authorized agents to assist in the enforcement of this chapter; or

                (4)    Imposing as a penalty for violation(s) a prohibition on any permits for building or development on a parcel where the violation occurred for a period of up to five (5) years.

        (b)    In addition to any of the foregoing remedies, the City Attorney may maintain an action for injunctive relief to restrain or enjoin or to cause the correction or removal of any violation of this chapter, or for an injunction in appropriate cases.

        (c)    Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding six (6) months or be so fined and imprisoned. Each day that such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.

(§ 2, Ord. 893, eff. April 11, 2019)

Chapter 9 HISTORIC LANDMARK PROPERTY AGREEMENTS
Sec. 4-9.01. Purpose.
(a)    The purpose of this chapter is to implement the provisions of California Government Code Sections 50280, et seq. (the “Mills Act”). The Mills Act authorizes local governments to enter into contracts with owners of private historic landmark property who will rehabilitate, restore, preserve and maintain qualified historic property. In return for a property owner’s commitment to pursue the rehabilitation, restoration, preservation and maintenance of the qualified historic property, the City intends to facilitate certain property tax reductions in accordance with Article 1.9 (commencing with Section 439) of Chapter 3 of Part 2 of Division I of the California Revenue and Taxation Code.

(b)    The City contains numerous historic buildings, which add to its character and identity. Some of these buildings may have not been adequately maintained over time, may be structurally deficient or may need rehabilitation. The costs of properly rehabilitating, restoring, preserving and maintaining historic buildings may be prohibitive for property owners. Implementation of the Mills Act as provided by this chapter is intended to serve as an incentive to property owners to preserve and maintain historic landmark property.

(c)    The procedures established herein are further intended to balance the benefits of the Mills Act to the individual property owners and the historic value of individual buildings proposed for historic landmark property agreements with the potential cost to the City in providing the property tax reductions set forth in the Mills Act.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-9.02. Qualified historic landmark property.
        An owner, or an authorized agent of the owner, of a qualified historic landmark property may apply for a historic landmark property agreement. For purposes of this chapter, “qualified historic landmark property” shall mean privately-owned property which is not exempt from property taxation and which is one (1) of the following:

(a)    Individually listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the California Register of Historic Resources; or

(b)    Designated as a City historic landmark property pursuant to Chapter 8 of Title 4 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-9.03. Application for historic landmark property agreement.
        An owner, or an authorized agent of an owner, of a qualified historic landmark property may submit an application for a historic landmark property agreement to the Community Development Director on forms provided by the Director. (All further references to the “Director” in this chapter are references to the City Community Development Director, or the Director’s designee, unless specifically indicated to the contrary herein.) The property owner shall provide, at a minimum, the following information and documentation on or with the application:

(a)    The address and location of the qualified historic landmark property;

(b)    Evidence that the property is a qualified historic landmark property;

(c)    A legal description of the property;

(d)    A title report or other evidence of the sufficiency of the applicant’s legal or equitable interest in the property;

(e)    The nature and cost of any rehabilitation, restoration or preservation work to be conducted on the property;

(f)    A plan for continued maintenance of the property; and

(g)    Any further information the Director determines necessary to make a thorough evaluation of, and recommendation on, the proposed historic landmark property agreement in accordance with the purposes of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-9.04. Agreement review.
(a)    Historic Preservation Commission review. After the Director determines that the application meets the minimal requirements of Section 4-9.03 and is otherwise complete, the Director shall refer the application to the Historic Preservation Commission (“HPC”) for its review and recommendation. The HPC shall hold a public hearing to review the application for the historic landmark property agreement and shall make its recommendation to the City Council as to the historic value of the qualified historic landmark property, any proposed rehabilitation, restoration or preservation work and any proposed preservation restrictions and maintenance requirements.

(b)    City Council decision. Following review by the HPC, the City Council shall conduct a public hearing to review the HPC recommendation, the information provided by City staff, and any other information the City Council determines to be necessary or desirable in order to decide whether the City should execute an historic landmark property agreement for a particular property. The City Council reserves authority, and shall have full discretion, to determine whether it is in the public interest to enter a Mills Act historic landmark property agreement with the owner of a particular qualified historic landmark property. Following the completion of the public hearing, the Council may approve, disapprove or modify and approve the terms of the proposed historic landmark property agreement or continue its deliberations on the agreement to a subsequent meeting. Upon approval, the City Council shall authorize the City Manager to execute the historic landmark property agreement.

(c)    Recording. No later than twenty (20) days after the City enters into a historic landmark property agreement the City Clerk shall transmit a copy of the agreement to the office of the Ventura County Recorder for recordation.

(d)    Hearings. Notice of the public hearings required by this section shall be given in accordance with the requirements for notice by publication set forth in Government Code Section 65091, as amended from time to time, and to any interested person or organization that has previously submitted a written request for such notice.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-9.05. Terms of the historic landmark property agreement.
(a)    The historic landmark property agreement shall set forth the agreement between the City and the property owner that, as long as the property owner properly rehabilitates, restores, preserves and maintains the qualified historic landmark property as set forth in the agreement, the property shall be eligible for reassessment of valuation in accordance with Article 1.9 (commencing with Section 439) of Chapter 3 of Part 2 of Division 1 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, provided that the Ventura County Assessor determines that those provisions of the Revenue and Taxation Code are applicable to the property in question. A historic landmark property agreement shall further include, at a minimum, the following provisions:

(1)    The term of the agreement, which shall be for a minimum of ten (10) years;

(2)    The owner’s commitment and obligation to preserve, rehabilitate, restore and maintain the historic landmark property in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Office of Historic Preservation of the California Department of Parks and Recreation and the United States Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties;

(3)    Permission for periodic examinations of the interior and exterior of the qualified historic landmark property to be conducted by persons representing the Director and/or the City’s Building Inspector, the Ventura County Assessor, the Office of Historic Preservation of the California Department of Parks and Recreation and the State Board of Equalization as may be necessary to determine the owner’s continuing compliance with the historic landmark property agreement;

(4)    That the historic landmark property agreement is binding upon, and shall inure to the benefit of, all successors-in-interest of the owner;

(5)    An extension to the term of the agreement so that one (1) year is added automatically to the initial term of the agreement on the anniversary date of the agreement or such other annual date as specified in the agreement unless notice of non-renewal is given as provided in the Mills Act and in the historic landmark property agreement;

(6)    Agreement that the City may cancel the agreement, or pursue whatever other legal or equitable remedies it deems necessary or desirable for enforcement of the agreement, when the City Council finds that the owner has breached the terms of the agreement; and

(7)    The property owner’s indemnification of the City for, and agreement to hold the City harmless from, any claims arising from any use of the historic landmark property.

(b)    The City and the qualified historic landmark property owner shall comply with all provisions of the Mills Act, including any amendments thereto that may be enacted from time to time. The Mills Act, as amended from time to time, shall apply to the historic landmark property agreement process and shall be deemed incorporated into each historic landmark property agreement entered into by the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-9.06. Cancellation of the historic landmark property agreement by City.
(a)    The City may cancel any historic landmark property agreement if the City Council determines that the owner has:

(1)    Breached any of the conditions of the agreement; or

(2)    Allowed the landmark property to deteriorate to the point that it no longer meets the standards for a qualified historic landmark property; or

(3)    Failed to pay reasonable inspection fees or otherwise failed to cooperate in allowing periodic inspections of the property as reasonably required to determine that the property continues to meet the standards for a qualified historic landmark property; or

(4)    Failed to restore or rehabilitate the historic landmark property as specified in the agreement.

(b)    A public hearing shall be held by the City Council on a proposed cancellation for any of the reasons listed in subsection (a) of this section. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed to the last known address of each owner of the property at least ten (10) days in advance of the hearing and shall be published in accordance with the requirements for notice by publication set forth in Government Code Section 65091.

(c)    Upon cancellation of the agreement for any of the reasons listed in subsection (a) of this section, the property owner shall pay a cancellation fee of twelve and one-half (12 ½%) percent of the full value of the property at the time of cancellation as determined by the Assessor (or such other percentage or amount as may be authorized by the Mills Act, as it may be amended from time to time), without regard to any restriction on such property imposed by the historic landmark property agreement.

(d)    In the event that a property subject to a historic landmark property agreement under this chapter is acquired in whole or in part by eminent domain or other acquisition by any entity authorized to exercise the power of eminent domain, and the acquisition is determined by the City Council to frustrate the purpose of the agreement; the agreement shall be canceled and no cancellation fee shall be imposed.

(e)    The City’s authority to cancel any historic landmark property agreement in accordance with this section is non-exclusive, and in addition to, all other remedies provided by law or equity relating to contracts.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-9.07. Non-renewal of the historic landmark property agreement.
(a)    If the City Council determines not to renew the historic landmark property agreement, it must serve its written notice of nonrenewal upon the owner at least sixty (60) days prior to the renewal date. The owner may make a written protest of the City’s notice of non-renewal and the City may at any time prior to the renewal date, rescind its notice of non-renewal.

(b)    If an owner chooses to avoid automatic renewal of the agreement, the owner must serve written notice of non-renewal to the Director at least ninety (90) days prior to the renewal date.

(c)    If the City or the owner serves a notice of non-renewal, the existing agreement shall remain in effect for the balance of the agreement term then remaining.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-9.08. Fees.
(a)    The City Council may determine the amount of, and impose, a fee to compensate the City for processing and administering an application for a historic landmark property agreement. The fee shall be no more than one hundred (100%) percent of the amount needed to compensate for the time and materials required to process the application, based upon the estimated actual costs to perform the work, including, but not necessarily limited to, the costs of the Community Development Department, the City Attorney, and the Finance Department.

(b)    The City may also impose a separate fee, following approval of the historic landmark property agreement, to compensate the City for the actual costs of inspecting the qualified historic landmark property and enforcing the historic landmark property agreement.

(c)    Failure to pay any application or inspection fees shall be grounds for rejection of an application for a historic landmark property agreement, or canceling a historic landmark property agreement, as applicable.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-9.09. Other means for preservation of landmarks not foreclosed.
        The incentives provided by this chapter are intended to be but one (1) means of preserving historically significant properties in the City and the City Council reserves its authority to make any other reasonable arrangements to preserve designated historic landmarks. These may include, by way of example, but without limitation, establishment of a private or public fund for preservation of historic landmarks or other contractual agreements with property owners for the maintenance and preservation of facade easements or public access to the structure.

(§ 1, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 10 BINGO GAMES
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 9, Bingo Games, added by Ord. No. 531, effective October 28, 1976, was renumbered to be Chapter 10 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-10.01. Bingo defined.
        As used in this chapter, “bingo” shall mean a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card, which numbers or symbols conform to numbers or symbols selected at random.

(Part 1, Ord. 531, eff. October 28, 1976, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-10.02. Qualified organizations.
        Bingo games may be conducted in the City only by organizations exempted from the payment of bank and corporation taxes by Sections 23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g), and 23701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State and by mobile home park associations and senior citizens organizations provided the proceeds of such games are used only for charitable purposes.

(Part 1, Ord. 531, eff. October 28, 1976, as amended by Part 1, Ord. 559, eff. June 22, 1978, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-10.03. Licenses.
        Each qualified organization desiring to conduct bingo games shall first obtain from the City a license authorizing such organization to conduct bingo games. The application for such license shall be executed under penalty of perjury by two (2) officers of the organization and shall include a statement that the applicant is a qualified organization in good standing, the names of all officers and directors or trustees of the organization, the location of the property owned or leased by the organization to be used for bingo games, and the proposed days and hours each week when such games will be conducted. The license shall be approved for issuance by the Council on an annual basis or such lesser period as the Council deems appropriate. The Council may impose a license fee not to exceed the actual cost of issuing such license.

(Part 1, Ord. 531, eff. October 28, 1976, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-10.04. Regulations.
        Qualified organizations conducting bingo games shall observe the following regulations:

(a)    No person shall receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game.

(b)    No minor shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

(c)    A nonprofit charitable organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized.

(d)    All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the nonprofit charitable organization.

(e)    A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the nonprofit charitable organization which organized the bingo game. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision, or any other phase of such game.

(f)    No individual corporation, partnership, or other legal entity, except the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game, shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.

(g)    All profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund, or account.

(h)    No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted.

(i)     The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.

(Part 1, Ord. 531, eff. October 28, 1976, as amended by Part 1, Ord. 533, eff. November 25, 1976, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-10.05. Nuisances.
        Any bingo game conducted in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a public nuisance and may be enjoined or abated by the City in addition to any other remedies or penalties available for such violations.

(Part 1, Ord. 531, eff. October 28, 1976, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 11 PRESERVATION, CUTTING, AND REMOVAL OF OAK, SYCAMORE, HERITAGE AND OTHER DESIGNATED MATURE TREES
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 10, Cutting and Removal of Oak and Sycamore Trees, consisting of §§ 4-10.01 through 4-10.07, added by Ord. No. 504, effective March 10, 1977; amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 592, effective August 27, 1981; renumbered to be Chapter 11 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-11.01. Purpose and intent.
        This chapter is established to recognize oak, sycamore, heritage and other mature trees as significant historical, aesthetic and ecological resources and to create favorable conditions for the preservation and propagation of this unique irreplaceable plant heritage for the benefit of current and future residents of the City. It is the intent of this chapter to recognize the special value of tree species that are native to the City because they are especially adapted to the local environment, provide important wildlife habitat and contribute to the goals of a sustainable community. An equally important goal of this chapter is to maintain and enhance the public health, safety and welfare through the mitigation of soil erosion and air pollution. In addition, this chapter is designed to preserve and enhance property values by enhancing the distinctive and unique aesthetic character of many areas of the City in which oak, sycamore, heritage and other mature trees live.

(§ 1, Ord. 592, eff. August 27, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 689, eff. November 29, 1991 and § 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.02. Scope.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all oak, sycamore, heritage and designated mature trees, as those terms are defined in Section 4-11.03, on all public and private property.

(§ 1, Ord. 592, eff. August 27, 1981, as amended by § 3, Ord. 661, eff. March 14, 1989, § 2, Ord. 689, eff. November 29, 1991, and § 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.03. Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

 

        “Diameter” shall mean that area equal to the full breadth of the tree measured on the tree’s trunk at four and one-half (4-½′) feet from its basal root crown. Limb diameter is measured at the limb or trunk from which it originates.

        “Director” shall mean the Community Development Director in a matter involving private property and the Public Works Director in a matter involving public property or property to be dedicated for public use.

        “Drip line” shall mean the area around a tree that encompasses a series of points formed by the vertical dripping of water from the outward branches and leaves of a tree, plus five (5′) feet beyond those points.

        “Emergency” shall mean a situation in which a tree and/or its limbs are determined by the Director or public safety officers to pose an imminent threat to public safety, property or to the health of a protected tree.

        “Heritage tree” shall mean any tree of any genus, whether a species or hybrid of any size, which is designated as such by a resolution of the City Council based on its historical, cultural or other value as determined by the City Council.

        “Mature tree” shall mean shall mean any tree species designated as such by a resolution of the City Council based on its historical, cultural or other value as determined by the City Council, and which is equal to or greater than twelve (12″) inches in diameter as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown or, in the case of a tree with more than one (1) trunk, any such tree for which the sum of its two (2) largest trunks equals or is greater than fourteen and one-half (14-½″) inches as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown. “Mature tree” shall not apply to any tree grown or held for sale in a licensed nursery nor to the first removal or transplanting of a tree pursuant to the operation of a licensed nursery business.

        “Oak tree” shall mean any single trunked tree of the quercus genus equal to or greater than eight (8″) inches in diameter as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown or, in the case of an oak with more than one (1) trunk, any such tree for which the sum of its two (2) largest trunks equals or is greater than eleven (11″) inches as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown. “Oak tree” shall not apply to any tree grown or held for sale in a licensed nursery nor to the first removal or transplanting of a tree pursuant to the operation of a licensed nursery business.

        “Preservation” shall mean the acts of keeping or saving a tree from harm or destruction by proper maintenance, pruning and treatment and other means of safeguarding trees.

        “Private property” shall mean land owned by individuals, partnerships, corporations, firms, churches, fraternities and the like to which land access by the public is generally restricted.

        “Pruning” and “trimming” shall mean the cutting of any limb, branch, twig or other stem.

        “Public property” shall mean land owned by a public or governmental entity and generally accessible to the public.

        “Replacement trees” shall mean a list of trees adopted by the City Council that are native and/or well-suited to the local environment that have been approved as replacement plantings to mitigate the impacts caused by the removal, relocation or destruction of trees protected by this chapter.

        “Root crown” shall mean that portion of a tree trunk from which roots extend laterally into the ground.

        “Sycamore tree” shall mean any tree of the platanus genus equal to or greater than eight (8″) inches in diameter as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown or, in the case of a sycamore with more than one (1) trunk, any such tree for which the sum of its two (2) largest trunks equals or is greater than ten (10″) inches as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown. “Sycamore tree” shall not apply to any tree grown or held for sale in a licensed nursery nor to the first removal or transplanting of a tree pursuant to the operation of a licensed nursery business.

(§ 1, Ord. 592, eff. August 27, 1981, as amended by §§ 4, 5, Ord. 661, eff. March 14, 1989, § 3, Ord. 689, eff. November 29, 1991,  § 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, and § 2, Ord. 870, eff. March 17, 2017)

 

Sec. 4-11.04. When permits are required.
(a)    Single-family zoned properties with an existing dwelling. A permit shall be required when any person wishes to perform the following acts on property which is zoned single-family residential:

(1)    Remove, cut down, destroy or relocate an oak or a sycamore or heritage tree;

(2)    Prune live limbs over four (4″) inches in diameter of an oak or a sycamore or heritage tree;

(3)    Trench, grade, fill, compact or place construction material of any type in the drip line of an oak or a sycamore or heritage tree.

(4)    Remove more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the canopy of an oak, sycamore, or heritage tree.

(b)    All other vacant and developed properties. Except as otherwise set forth herein, a permit shall be required when any person wishes to perform the following acts on all vacant and developed property other than property which is zoned single-family residential:

(1)    Remove, cut down, destroy or relocate an oak or a sycamore, heritage or mature tree;

(2)    Trench, grade, fill, compact or place construction material of any type in the drip line of an oak or a sycamore, mature or heritage tree;

(3)    Prune live limbs over four (4″) inches in diameter of an oak or a sycamore or heritage tree;

(4)    Remove more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the canopy of an oak, sycamore, heritage or mature tree.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, and amended by § 2, Ord. 870, eff. March 17, 2017)

 

Sec. 4-11.05. Application requirements.
        Prior to the granting of a permit, an application for a permit shall be submitted to the Director. The basic form, content, instructions, procedures and requirements of the application deemed necessary for the proper enforcement of this chapter shall be established by the Director.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.06. Arborist’s reports.
(a)    Applications for a permit for removal, destruction or relocation of a tree. Applications for a permit to remove, destroy or relocate an oak or a sycamore, mature or heritage tree shall be accompanied by a report to be prepared by an arborist certified by the International Society of Arboriculture (“ISA”) at the applicant’s expense. The applicant shall deposit funds with the City for this purpose.

(1)    The arborist’s report shall include an assessment of the health of the affected tree(s) and recommended mitigation measures and/or conditions of approval. The report should also note if there are active birds nests observed in the tree.

(2)    The arborist’s report shall include a monetary valuation of the tree using the ISA’s method for appraising trees.

(3)    The arborist who prepares the report shall not participate in or profit from the removal, destruction or relocation of the tree.

(4)    If the report determines that the tree is hazardous or in a serious state of decline due to pest infestation or other cause by no fault of the owners, the permit fee shall be waived by the City. In addition, no replacement mitigation shall be required.

(b)    Applications involving tree pruning or trimming (applies to oaks, sycamores and heritage trees).

(1)    If the pruning work is going to be performed by an ISA-certified arborist or under the direct field supervision of an ISA-certified arborist, no arborist’s report shall be necessary and permit fees shall be waived. However, the certified arborist shall be required to complete and submit a permit application with proof of current ISA certification. The certified arborist shall state on the application whether active birds nests are present.

(2)    If the pruning work is to be performed by a certified tree worker or similar certification deemed acceptable to the Director, a report from a certified arborist shall be required. The applicant shall either submit the tree report with the application or deposit funds so that the City may arrange for the arborist’s report at the applicant’s expense. The arborist’s report shall include the number and location of affected trees and the standards to which the pruning shall be conducted to promote the health of the tree. The standards may include, but are not limited to, the maximum size of the limb or branch which may be pruned and the percentage of the tree limbs and branches which may be removed. The report should note if active birds nests are present.

(c)    Applications involving grading, trenching, filling or placing construction materials in the drip line of a tree. Applications for a permit involving grading, trenching, filling or placing materials in the drip line of a tree shall be accompanied by a report prepared by an ISA-certified arborist pursuant to Section 4-11.04(a) or deposit funds so that the City can arrange for an arborist’s report at the applicant’s expense.

        The report shall list each of the oak, sycamore, heritage and mature trees located on the site, show their location on a development plan and recommend a program for protecting the trees prior to, during and after construction. The tree protection plan may include such things as the installation of fencing around drip lines, the application of mulch or wood chips in sensitive areas, restrictions on construction, trenching and/or grading within the drip line area and other mitigations and conditions designed to protect the entire tree and its root system.

(d)    Applications involving routine maintenance work performed by public utilities. All public utilities whose retained maintenance includes the pruning or trimming of trees within the City shall, on June 30th of each year, submit to the Director an Annual Notification of Maintenance Activities. This notification shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1) map of facilities to be maintained; (2) schedule of work to be performed; (3) site plan of protected trees that might be affected; (4) a report from a certified arborist describing tree trimming methods and standards to be used; and (5) certifications and qualifications of tree workers and supervisors. All such work shall require an annual permit and shall be governed by the performance standards and restrictions of this chapter. Applicants will be required to pay a fee for monitoring of routine maintenance by a City retained ISA-certified arborist, which shall be set by resolution, and shall not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per year.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, and amended by § 2, Ord. 870, eff. March 17, 2017)

 

Sec. 4-11.07. Permit approval or denial.
(a)    Administrative review. Upon the review of an application for a permit required by this chapter duly filed in accordance with the approved procedures and requirements and after an on-site inspection by the Director or his designated representative if deemed necessary, the Director shall grant or deny such permit on the basis of the standards set forth in this chapter. The Director may deny, without further action, an application which does not contain the required information.

(b)    Review by Planning Commission. Where more than five (5) oak, sycamore or heritage trees, or a combination thereof, are to be cut down, removed or relocated upon a single parcel of real property, the application shall be referred to the Planning Commission for recommendation to the Director. Unusual cases where less than five (5) such trees are involved may be referred to the Planning Commission by the Director.

(c)    Application review criteria. The granting or denial of a permit shall be subject to the discretion of the Director and/or the Planning Commission, as the case may be, whose decision shall be based on criteria, including, but not limited to, the following:

(1)    The condition of the tree with respect to disease, danger of falling and the proximity to existing or proposed structures.

(2)    The necessity to remove the tree in order to construct proposed improvements to prevent economic hardship to the owner of the property. The applicant shall have the burden of proof to demonstrate the hardship as part of the application process.

(3)    The topography of the land and the effect of the tree removal on erosion, soil retention and the diversion or increased flow of surface waters.

(4)    The number of oak, sycamore, heritage and mature trees, or any one (1) or combination thereof, existing in the neighborhood on improved property. Decisions shall be guided by the standards established in the neighborhood and the effect of the removal of such trees upon property values in the area.

(5)    Good forestry practices, such as the number of healthy oak, sycamore, heritage or mature trees which a given parcel of land or area can support.

(d)    Performance conditions. The Director and/or the Commission, as the case may be, may grant a permit subject to such conditions as deemed necessary and appropriate to ensure the proper enforcement of this chapter which shall be made a part of the permit, including, but not limited to, the following:

(1)    All pruning or trimming activities for which a permit is necessary shall be performed by either (i) a certified tree professional who has been certified as, at a minimum, a “tree worker” by the ISA or a similar certifying organization acceptable to the Community Development Director, or (ii) under the direct field supervision of a certified arborist.

(2)    All pruning and trimming activities shall be performed in a manner consistent with ISA guidelines and recommendations. Excessive pruning or topping of trees is prohibited and may result in the assessment of tree replacement costs.

(3)    The name of the certified professional or supervising field arborist shall be provided to the City, along with proof of certification, prior to final authorization by the City and commencement of the tree work.

(4)    Climbing spurs and spikes shall not be used during tree pruning and trimming activities, except in cases of emergency, such as emergency utility work covered under Section 4-11.10

(5)    Anyone using explosives in connection with the destruction, removal or trimming of a tree protected by this chapter shall furnish such bond or insurance as the Director shall deem necessary for the protection of the public and the property owner from any possible damage as a result of such work.

(6)    Any permit which authorizes an encroachment on a street, highway or right-of-way shall require compliance with the permit and other requirements of Title 7, Chapter 1 of this Code.

(e)    Special mitigation measures. The Director and/or Planning Commission, as the case may be, may condition the grant of a permit issued in accordance with this chapter, subject to the compliance with, but not limited to, the following mitigation measures:

 

(1)    If a protected tree is proposed for removal primarily for reasons of convenience, personal taste or to facilitate new construction where alternative site layouts are feasible that could avoid the tree impact, the following shall apply:

(i)     The tree(s) to be removed shall be replaced with trees of suitable type, size and number. Oaks and sycamores shall generally be required to be replaced with like species; other mature trees shall be replaced with trees from the approved replacement tree list.

(ii)    The number, type and size of the replacement tree(s) shall either be (A) equivalent to the appraised value of the tree based on ISA standards; or (B) the total sum of the diameters of all trunks of all replacement trees as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown shall be equal to or greater than the total sum of the diameters of the trunks of all removed trees as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown. No replacement tree, however, shall be less than two (2″) inches in diameter as measured four and one-half (4-½′) feet above the root crown.

(iii)   If a site cannot accommodate the number of replacement trees required, the dollar value of those replacement trees may be paid as an in-lieu fee to the City’s tree fund at the discretion of the Director or Planning Commission.

(2)    If a tree is proposed for removal for construction purposes, where no feasible alternatives exist, or for another purpose, where preserving the tree is not realistic or would not achieve the goals of this chapter, the Director may require one (1) of the mitigation measures described above, or any other mitigation deemed

 

appropriate given the unique circumstances of the permit request, the recommendations from the certified arborist, the purpose and goals of this chapter and the site’s environmental setting.

(3)    If the report from a certified arborist indicates a tree is hazardous or in a serious state of decline due to pest infestation or other cause, by no fault of the owner, no mitigation shall be required.

(f)    Appeal process. Any decision issued by the Director on a permit application, including required mitigations and conditions, may be appealed to the Planning Commission within ten (10) days after the decision has been rendered by submitting the appropriate administrative appeal fees and a written statement describing the reason for the appeal.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.08. Concurrent reviews.
        When an application is filed for a conditional use permit, variance, zone change, tentative tract map, minor land division or any other discretionary permit concurrently with an application for a permit as provided by this chapter, the Planning Commission may consider and approve such application for a permit concurrently with such other approvals. The Planning Commission, in making its findings, shall consider each case individually as if separately filed.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.09. Expiration.
        An approved permit which is not used within the time specified in the approval or, if no time is specified, within one (1) year after the granting of such approval, shall become null and void and of no effect, except where an application requesting an extension is filed prior to such expiration date, the Director may extend such time for a period not to exceed one (1) year.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.10. Exemptions.
(a)    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to cases of emergency caused by a tree protected by the provisions of this chapter being in a hazardous or dangerous condition as determined by the Director or any member of the Sheriff’s Department, Fire Department or an affected utility company. Persons requesting a hazardous tree exemption shall pay a fee based on the amount of City staff time required to process and review the exemption request. If the tree is determined to be hazardous, no permit removal fee or mitigation will be required.

(b)    Utility companies may take emergency action with respect to protected trees without giving advanced notice to the City, when immediate action is required in order to protect the public or the utilities’ employees, prevent damage or destruction of facilities and property or to effect expeditious reinstatement of service following an interruption. The utility shall notify the City of the emergency action taken at the first reasonable opportunity.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.11. Fees.
        Applications for permits shall be accompanied by appropriate fees as established by resolution of the City Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.12. Mandatory disclosure during real estate transactions.
        Any person leasing, transferring or selling any or all portions of an interest in real property in the City shall be required to disclose in writing the number and species of trees on the property protected and/or regulated by this chapter to the lessee, buyer or transferee as part of the real estate transaction. Providing a complete copy of this chapter, or, in the alternative, a pubic informational brochure describing the provisions of this chapter prepared by the City, to the lessee, buyer or transferee prior to the conclusion of the real estate transaction shall also be considered an acceptable form of disclosure.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as amended by § 1, Ord. 744, eff. March 24, 2000, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-11.13. Enforcement.
(a)    Violation—Penalty. Any person who cuts, damages, moves or removes any oak, sycamore, heritage or other designated mature tree within the City or encroaches into the drip line of such tree in violation of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, may be punished as set forth in Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(b)    Violation—Restitution. It has been determined that the oak, sycamore, heritage and other designated trees within the City are valuable assets to the citizens of the City and to the citizens of the Ojai Valley and, as a result, of the loss or damage to any of these trees, the public should be recompensed. In addition to any penalties provided by subsection (a) above, any person who cuts, damages or removes any tree in violation of the terms of this chapter is responsible for property restitution and may be required to do any or all of the following:

(1)    Replace the oak, sycamore, heritage or other designated mature tree or trees so removed or damaged by the donation of or by replanting two (2) or more of such trees of reasonably equivalent size and value to the tree damaged or removed. The number, size and location of said equivalent replacement tree shall be determined by the Director.

(2)    Pay double the customary tree permit application fee and provide for replacement of the damaged or removed trees in an amount that is double their value using the appraisal standards of the ISA or other method of valuation acceptable to the Director.

(§ 1, Ord. 738, eff. July 22, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 12 ARCADES AND AMUSEMENT MACHINES
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 11, Arcades and Amusement Machines, added by Ord. No. 600, effective January 26, 1982, was renumbered to be Chapter 12 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-12.01. Amusement machine defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, “amusement machine” shall mean any device, game, or contrivance, including, but not limited to, pinball machines, video games, computer games, electronic games, shuffleboards, slot machines, juke boxes, and mechanical music boxes, for which a charge or payment is received for the privilege of playing, using, or operating the same and which, as the result of such use, operation, or playing, does not entitle the person using, operating, or playing such device, game, or contrivance to receive the same return in market value in the form of tangible merchandise each time such device, game, or contrivance is used, operated, or played.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.02. Arcade defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, “arcade” shall mean any business or establishment which has located on its premises four (4) or more amusement machines which are kept thereon for the purpose of being played, operated, or used by the patrons of the arcade for money or money’s worth deposited in the amusement machine played, operated, or used or any premises wherein not less than twenty-five (25%) percent of the public floor area is devoted to amusement machines, whether or not such amusement machines constitute the primary use or accessory use of the premises.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.03. Arcades—Conditional use permits required.
(a)    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor to establish an arcade within the City without first obtaining a conditional use permit.

(b)    Arcades shall be permitted only in the C-1 Zone, subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Title 10 of this Code. This requirement shall be in addition to other permits, licenses, or certificates required by law or this Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.04. Nonconforming businesses—Amortization.
        Any arcade or amusement machine in existence in any zone in the City as of November 24, 1981, shall, on or before March 27, 1982, either comply with the provisions of this chapter or be terminated as a nonconforming use.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.05. Development standards.
        The following development standards and regulations shall apply to all arcades located in the City and shall be included in the conditions imposed upon the granting of any conditional use permit for such establishments:

(a)    All amusement machines within the premises shall be visible to and supervised by an adult attendant who shall be present at all times when any amusement machine is being operated.

(b)    The supervision of the patrons on the premises shall be adequate to insure that there is no conduct which is detrimental to the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(c)    During the school year, persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall not be allowed to operate amusement machines Monday through Friday, except legal school holidays, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., unless accompanied by an authorized agent of the school district or such person’s parent or guardian. It shall be the responsibility of the adult attendant to enforce this regulation.

(d)    Outside security lighting shall be provided under the direction and upon the recommendation of the Police Department.

(e)    Adequate parking and bicycle racks shall be provided.

(f)    Public restrooms shall be provided.

(g)    A minimum of two (2) footcandle illumination generally distributed shall be maintained in all parts of the premises at all times when the arcade is open and when the public is permitted to enter or remain therein.

(h)    Provision shall be made to reduce noise caused by the operation of the amusement machines and the patrons thereof.

(i)     No amusement machine shall be situated in such a way that its use will violate any applicable fire regulation or hinder the reasonable egress from and ingress to the premises of the public.

(j)     The initial approval for a conditional use permit shall be for a period of six (6) months. Prior to the expiration of the conditional use permit, the applicant may request renewal, subject to reevaluation. The Planning Commission may extend the conditional use permit for successive one (1) year periods if all the conditions of approval have been complied with and no complaints have been received. If complaints have been received, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing to determine if the standards have been complied with and renewal should be approved.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.06. Development plans required.
        All applications for arcade conditional use permits shall be accompanied by a development plan which complies with the provisions of subsection (e) of Section 10-2.1705 of Article 17 of Chapter 2 of Title 10 of this Code, sufficient in detail to indicate how the applicant proposes to comply with the conditions set forth in Section 4-12.05 of this chapter, and indicating thereon the proposed location on the premises of each amusement machine.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.07. Licenses—Arcades and amusement machines.
(a)    It shall be unlawful for any arcade to conduct business without, in addition to obtaining all conditional use permits required by this Code and all other permits or certificates required by law, obtaining a license and paying the license fee as required by Chapter 6 of Title 6 of this Code.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain amusement machines on his premises without, in addition to complying with the provisions of this chapter and all other permits and certificates required by law, obtaining a license for each amusement machine and paying the licensee fee as required by Chapter 6 of Title 6 of this Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.08. Limitations on location of arcades and amusement machines.
(a)    Unless specific approval is first obtained from the Planning Commission, no arcade shall be maintained or operated within fifty (50′) feet from the border line of the zone in which such arcade is lawfully permitted.

(b)    No amusement machine shall be maintained, operated, conducted, or used, nor kept for such purposes, in or on the premises of any establishment whose primary business is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages within ten (10′) feet of the liquor retail department of any multi-department business establishment. This subsection shall not prohibit the operation of amusement machines in bona fide clubs, bars, saloons, taverns, or restaurants which are licensed to sell alcoholic beverages.

(c)    No amusement machine shall be maintained, operated, conducted, or used, nor kept for such purposes, within any place which is closer than 300 feet from any public or private school which conducts classes for any of the grades from kindergarten through the twelfth (12th) grade.

(d)    No amusement machine, except one (1) maintained for private use, shall be permitted within the City other than in zones designated C-1, C-R, or M-1.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.09. Revocation of arcade conditional use permits.
        All conditional use permits issued pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 2 of Title l 0 of this Code shall be subject to revocation proceedings instituted by the Chief of Police, Planning Commission, or Council for violations of any of the terms or provisions of this chapter or the conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or if the Chief of Police finds that the arcade permitted thereby may no longer conduct business, or that amusement machines may no longer be installed and used at the premises covered by the conditional use permit without danger to the public peace, health, or safety. Such revocation proceedings shall be in conformance with subsection (d) of Section 10-2.2002 of Article 20 of Chapter 2 of Title 10 of this Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.10. Licenses and conditional use permits nontransferable.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, all amusement machine and arcade licenses or arcade conditional use permits to which reference is made in this chapter shall be valid only for the place and operator stated in the license or permit and shall not be transferred to any other place, person, business, or establishment without the consent of the Planning Commission first had and obtained.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-12.11. Enforcement.
        It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to enforce this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 600, eff. January 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 13 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 12, Alcoholic Beverages, added by Ord. No. 603, effective July 22, 1982, renumbered to be Chapter 13 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-13.01. Consumption of alcoholic beverages in public and private areas.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverage consisting of malt, spirituous, or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one (0.5%) percent of alcohol by volume:

(a)    Upon any public street, sidewalk, highway, or alley;

(b)    Upon any public school ground, bleacher, or stadium;

(c)    In any place open to the public;

(d)    Upon any private street, building, or other private property without the consent of the person or entity in possession or control of such private street, building, or other private property; or

(e)    In any public park; provided, however, this section shall not apply where the consumption is upon any premises licensed for the consumption of such beverages upon such premises at or within a location for which a permit has been granted by the City for the consumption of such beverages at such location.

(§ 1, Ord. 603, eff. July 22, 1982, as amended by § 1, Ord. 716, eff. December 12, 1996, § 1, Ord. 727, eff. May 28, 1998, and § 1, Ord. 786, eff. November 25, 2005, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-13.02. Penalties.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the actions prohibited by Section 4-13.01 of this chapter. Any person who shall violate any provision of Section 4-13.01 of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(§ 1, Ord. 603, eff. July 22, 1982, as amended by § 4, Ord. 741, eff. November 23, 1999, and § 2, Ord. 786, eff. November 25, 2005, repealed and replaced by § 1, Ord. 788, eff. February 24, 2006, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-13.03. Parties with underage drinking declared public nuisance.
        Except as permitted by Article 1, Section 4 of the California Constitution, any party, gathering, or event (“assemblage”) where five (5) or more persons under the age of twenty-one (21) are present and alcoholic beverages are in the possession of, or are being consumed by, any person under the age of twenty-one (21), is declared to be a public nuisance.

(§ 3, Ord. 786, eff. November 25, 2005, repealed and replaced by § 1, Ord. 788, eff. February 24, 2006, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Sec. 4-13.04. Authorization for citation.
        A peace officer charged with the enforcement of this Code shall have the authority, pursuant to Section 1-6.103 hereof, to issue an administrative citation for the violation of Section 4-13.03 of this chapter to the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property and/or the person responsible for the assemblage. The citation shall either be personally served on the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property and/or the person responsible for the assemblage or if the officer is unable to identify immediately any such person, mailed certified by the next business day to the owner of the property as identified on the tax assessor’s roll.

(§ 1, Ord. 788, eff. February 24, 2006, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-13.05. Dispersal of gathering.
(a)    Whenever a peace officer charged with the enforcement of this Code determines that a violation of Section 4-13.03 of this chapter has occurred, the peace officer shall, pursuant to Section 5-6.05 of this Code, direct the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property and/or the person responsible for the assemblage, to disperse immediately the assemblage, or if the officer is unable to identify immediately the owner, the person in charge of the property, or the person responsible for the assemblage, shall command all those attending the party, gathering or event to disperse immediately.

(b)    When a police response pursuant to subsection (a) of this section occurs, the senior peace officer at the scene, in addition to the issuance of any citation, administrative fine, or arrest that he or she may feel is appropriate, shall either (1) at that time, personally notify the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property and/or the person responsible for the assemblage that such person or persons shall be held personally liable, jointly and severally, for the City’s cost of providing any follow-up or additional police response during the next twelve (12) months for violation of Section 4-13.03 of this chapter; or (2) thereafter, mail such notification in writing by certified mail to the owner as identified on the tax assessor’s roll.

(§ 1, Ord. 788, eff. February 24, 2006, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-13.06. Administrative fines and cost of special police services.
(a)    The amount of the fine for violation of Section 4-13.03 of this chapter, the increased fines for repeat violations, and the amount of late payment charges imposed for the payment of a fine after its due date, shall be specified by schedule pursuant to Section 1-6.105 of this Code.

(b)    Follow-up or additional police responses by the police services within twelve (12) months of the initial violation of Section 4-13.03 of this chapter to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare caused by the continuing or additional violation(s) of Section 4-13.03 of this chapter shall be deemed to be on a special security assignment over and above normal police services. The owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property where such assemblage occurs and/or the person responsible for such assemblage shall be personally responsible for the cost of such follow-up or additional responses by the police services in an amount determined upon a cost accounting basis by the City, per administrative guidelines adopted by the City and approved by resolution of the City Council. The cost of such special police security shall include damage to City property and/or injuries to City personnel. The fee charged shall not be in excess of One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars for a single follow-up or additional response. In addition to the foregoing, the City reserves its right to elect any other legal remedies.

(§ 1, Ord. 788, eff. February 24, 2006, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 14 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
Note
*       Editor’s note: Chapter 13, Drug Paraphernalia, added by Ord. No. 605, effective August 26, 1982, renumbered to be Chapter 14 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-14.01. Findings.
        The Council has been aware of and is concerned about the existence of “head shops” and other establishments engaged in the sale of paraphernalia associated with drug use. Recent legal decisions, including a decision of the United States Supreme Court, have indicated that local regulations may be effectively adopted to deal with this situation. The Council finds that such establishments serve to entice young people and others to abuse substances which are known to be harmful and unsafe for human consumption. The Council further finds that this situation creates a problem of such proportion within the community as to require further legislation on this subject. For the foregoing reasons, among others, regulation in this area is deemed necessary and desirable in the interests of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(§ 1, Ord. 605, eff. August 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-14.02. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)      “Controlled substance” shall mean marijuana, hashish, PCP, and any controlled substance defined in the Controlled Substances Act.

(b)      “Controlled Substances Act” shall mean the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (commencing with Section 11000 of the Health and Safety Code of the State).

(c)      “Drug paraphernalia” shall mean all equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of the Controlled Substances Act. “Drug paraphernalia” shall include, but shall not be limited to:

(1)      Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;

(2)    Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances;

(3)    Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance;

(4)    Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances;

(5)    Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances;

(6)    Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances;

(7)    Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designed for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana;

(8)    Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;

(9)    Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances;

(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;

(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body; and

(12)  Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish, or hashish oil into the human body, such as:

(i)     Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls;

(ii)    Water pipes;

(iii)   Carburetion tubes and devices;

(iv)   Smoking and carburetion masks;

(v)    Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;

(vi)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;

(vii)  Chamber pipes;

(viii) Carburetor pipes;

(ix)   Electric pipes;

(x)    Air-driven pipes;

(xi)   Chillums;

(xii)  Bongs; and

(xiii) Ice pipes or chillers.

        In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following:

(1)    Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use;

(2)    Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, under any State or Federal law relating to any controlled substance;

(3)    The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation of the Controlled Substances Act;

(4)    The proximity of the object to controlled substances;

(5)    The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object;

(6)    Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the Controlled Substances Act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct violation of the Controlled Substances Act, shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or designed for use, as drug paraphernalia;

(7)    Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use;

(8)    Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or depict its use;

(9)    National and local advertising concerning its use;

(10)  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;

(11)  Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;

(12)  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the object to the total sales of the business enterprise;

(13)  The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and

(14)  Expert testimony concerning its use.

(d)    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, or unless the context otherwise requires, in interpreting or applying the provisions of this chapter, words which are used in this chapter and which are defined in Chapter 1 of the Controlled Substances Act shall have the meaning ascribed to them in Chapter 1 of the Controlled Substances Act.

(§ 1, Ord. 605, eff. August 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-14.03. Display of drug paraphernalia.
        Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful:

(a)    For any person to wilfully maintain or operate any business knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that drug paraphernalia is displayed at such business; and

(b)    For any person who is the owner of a business, an employee thereof, or a person who works at such business as an agent of the owner to wilfully display drug paraphernalia at such a business.

(§ 1, Ord. 605, eff. August 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-14.04. Distribution of drug paraphernalia.
        Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully distribute to another drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 605, eff. August 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-14.05. Exceptions.
        No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, either directly or indirectly, to authorize any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the State or to require any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the State. No provision of this chapter is intended to, or shall be interpreted to, either directly or indirectly, prohibit any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 605, eff. August 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-14.06. Violations—Infractions.
        Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction, shall be punishable by (a) a fine not exceeding Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) Dollars for a first violation; (b) a fine not exceeding One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars for a second violation within one (1) year; and (c) a fine not exceeding Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars for each additional violation within one (1) year. A person who violates the provisions of Section 4-14.03 of this chapter shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues. A person who violates the provisions of Section 4-14.04 of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each item of drug paraphernalia which is distributed.

(§ 1, Ord. 605, eff. August 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-14.07. Public nuisances.
        The operation or maintenance of any business or establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which, in addition to or in lieu of criminal proceedings, may be abated, removed, or enjoined by appropriate legal action brought by the City Attorney.

(§ 1, Ord. 605, eff. August 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-14.08. Severability.
        If any section, sentence, clause, phrase, or provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions or provisions of this chapter or their applicability to distinguishable situations or circumstances. In enacting this chapter, it is the desire of the Council to regulate validly to the full measure of its legal authority in the public interests, and, to that end, the Council would have adopted this chapter, and each section, sentence, clause, phrase, and portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, sentences, clauses, phrases, or portions thereof might be invalid, in whole or in part, as applied to any particular situation or circumstance, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are intended to be severable.

(§ 1, Ord. 605, eff. August 26, 1982, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 15 ABATEMENT OF CLOSED, VACANT, AND INOPERATIVE AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATIONS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 14, Abatement of Closed, Vacant, and Inoperative Automobile Service Stations, added by Ord. No. 622, effective June 21, 1984, renumbered to be Chapter 14 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-15.01. Purpose.
        The regulations contained in this chapter are intended to provide for the orderly abatement and disposition of closed, vacant, and inoperative automobile service stations constituting non-user and which are determined by the application of the provisions contained in this chapter to constitute a public nuisance.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.02. Declared public nuisances.
        Any closed, vacant, and inoperative automobile service station constituting non-user as defined by subsection (c) of Section 4-15.05 of this chapter and covered by this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.03. Authorization for abatement.
        Upon the discovery of facts that there exist conditions constituting a public nuisance as defined in Section 4-15.02 of this chapter, the duly constituted authorities of the City are hereby authorized to immediately commence the proceedings authorized by this chapter to cause the abatement, removal, and/or enjoinment of such public nuisance in the manner prescribed by this chapter or otherwise prescribed by law.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.04. Notification to future applicants.
        All permits relating to the use, occupancy, construction, or repair on or in any real property of any automobile service station, and any permit relating to any activity to be pursued thereon or therein, and all zone variances granted after May 1, 1984, for real property on which an automobile service station is located

shall contain in bold-face type the following statement: “This permit is granted subject to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Ojai Municipal Code. A violation of said provisions may result in enforcement by proceedings for bringing about the removal of all buildings, including all underground equipment and foundations. Such a violation may also result in enforcement by prosecution for a misdemeanor. Nothing contained in Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Ojai Municipal Code shall prevent the application of other provisions of said Code.”

        The Planning Director, the Director of Public Works, and the Planning Commission shall cause such statement to be incorporated into permits which fall within their jurisdictions to grant in connection with automobile service station uses.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.05. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Automobile service station” shall mean any site where the buildings are designed and built for dispensing and selling fuels for internal combustion engines of any automotive vehicles.

(b)    “Building” shall mean any physical improvement or structure finished or unfinished on or in real property which building is designed, built, or adapted for use as or in connection with an automotive vehicle service station, regardless of its size, shape, height, location, age, or state of repair. “Building” shall include all main buildings, pumps, pump islands, underground storage tanks, pumps, mechanical equipment, wells, cesspools, septic tanks, foundations, paving, and any other materials originally placed in connection therewith on or at any depth beneath the surface of the real property.

(c)    “Non-user” shall mean:

(1)    Conditions. When all of the subsurface tanks which are used for the storage of flammable substances at an automobile service station site have been permanently filled or removed, the Council, upon making a finding that the site can no longer be reasonably used for an automobile service station, may declare the site and all buildings thereon and therein to be closed, vacant, and inoperative, and the conditions constitute non-user.

(2)    Discontinuance of nonconforming use. Pursuant to Section 10-2.503 of Article 5 of Chapter 2 of Title 10 of this Code, after a voluntary discontinuance of an automobile service station as a nonconforming use, the Council may find that such discontinuance constitutes non-user and a public nuisance.

(d)    “Duly constituted authorities” shall mean the officers, agents, or employees of the City to whom the authority is delegated by this chapter to carry out its provisions.

(e)    “Abatement” shall mean and be accomplished in either of the following ways:

(1)    Reoccupation by the owner, or any tenant, lessee, or other party entitled to possession, and the reinstitution of the previously permitted automobile service station uses after having obtained an inspection and all permits required by this Code, including, but not limited to, building permits; or

(2)    The demolition and removal of all buildings on and in the premises and the filling of all excavations after having obtained the applicable permits required for such work, including, but not limited to, building and grading permits.

        Prior to any reoccupation or reuse of any building on or in the premises, the person intending to occupy the buildings shall first apply to the Department of Public Works for an inspection. The inspection shall be conducted for the purpose of determining the suitability of the buildings for occupancy from the standpoint of health and safety. The inspection shall be conducted according to such of the standards expressed in the adopted Uniform Building Code, 1970 Edition, of the City relating to requirements for occupancy as were applicable to the buildings as they existed prior to the state of non-use. Applicants shall remit applicable fees for such inspections.

        Any reoccupation or reuse of any building on or in the premises shall also comply with all applicable zoning regulations of the City.

        Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, any determination made by any City official, agent, or employee under this section may be appealed according to the provisions of Article 5 of Chapter 6 of Title 10 of this Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.05.1. Applicability.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons or entities who claim or hold an interest in the building or in the real property, except as may be prohibited by law.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.06. Procedures for enforcement.
        Upon the discovery of conditions constituting a public nuisance as defined in Section 4-15.02 of this chapter, the duly constituted authorities as hereafter designated are hereby delegated the authority to initiate the proceedings authorized by this chapter to cause the abatement, removal, and/or enjoinment of such public nuisance. The Director of Public Works shall cause notification to be personally served or sent by certified mail to all persons, farms, corporations, and other entities which the records of the County Recorder disclose claim an interest in the real property. The notification shall be in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF VIOLATION

 

DECLARATION OF VIOLATION OF CHAPTER 15 OF TITLE 4 OF THE OJAI MUNICIPAL CODE RELATING TO THE STATE OF NON-USE OF CLOSED, VACANT, OR INOPERATIVE SERVICE STATIONS

 

        NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that as of the ______ day of ____________, 20___, the Planning Director of the City of Ojai, California, has found and determined that conditions exist on the real property described as Ventura County Assessor’s Parcel No.____________, commonly known as ____________, Ojai, California, which constitute a public nuisance and a violation of the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Ojai Municipal Code in that the _______________ on said real property is in a state of non-use;

        That, notwithstanding any other provision of said Municipal Code, failure to abate the nuisance by reoccupation and reinstitution of the use of the premises or by the demolition and removal of all structures, according to the provisions of Section 4-15.07 of the Municipal Code, within sixty (60) days from the date of delivery of this notice, enforcement proceedings for the abatement, removal, and/or enjoinment of said public nuisance shall be commenced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Municipal Code;

        That if any demolition, dismantling, moving, removal, addition to, or restoration or repair of any building or the reoccupancy of the premises is to be accomplished, or if any excavation of earth is to be performed by persons or entities affected by this notice, other than City officials, agents, or employees, appropriate permits will be required to be obtained prior to the commencement of any work; and

        Notice of any further proceedings to be pursued by the City to abate the aforesaid conditions shall be given in the manner prescribed in Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Municipal Code.

 

Dated: __________________________

 

___________________________________________________

Planning Director

City of Ojai, California

P.O. Box 1570

Ojai, California 93023

 

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.07. Effect of voluntary abatement.
        If the public nuisance is abated by the person to whom the City looks for compliance within the sixty (60) day period allowed in the notice of violation, the Planning Director shall cease further abatement proceedings.

        Before reoccupancy or reuse will be permitted, the person seeking to reoccupy or reuse the buildings shall first request an inspection and adhere to the procedures prescribed in subsection (e) of Section 4-15.05 of this chapter.

        If the building is found by the inspector to be in satisfactory condition, and any deficiencies discovered are corrected, and any required zone clearance has been issued or compliance with the zoning regulations has been acknowledged by the Planning Department, the Director of Public Works shall then either issue a certificate of occupancy, if required, and/or notify the person in writing by personal service or by certified mail that reoccupancy may be permitted for the reinstitution of the automobile service station uses.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.08. Notice of further proceedings.
        Further abatement proceedings shall be pursued as provided in Section 4-15.09 of this chapter when the notice of violation, as provided in Section 4-15.06 of this chapter, has been served, and the abatement of the public nuisance has not been accomplished within the sixty (60) day period as prescribed in said Section 4-15.06. However, if the abatement of the public nuisance has been commenced within the sixty (60) day period, the Planning Director is hereby delegated the authority to grant a single extension of time for thirty (30) days for good cause shown, such as delays beyond the control of the affected person.

        In the event the person to whom the City looks for abatement fails to abate the public nuisance within the time allowed by said Section 4-15.06, the Planning Director shall cause notification to be personally served or sent by certified mail to the persons, firms, corporations, and others which the records of the County Recorder disclose claim an interest in the real property. The notification shall be in the following form:

 

NOTICE

 

HEARING ON ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

        NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on the _______ day of ____________, 20 ___, at the hour of ___________ of said day, the City Council of the City of Ojai, California, will hold a public hearing in the Council Chambers of the Ojai City Hall located at 401 South Ventura Street, Ojai, California, to ascertain whether closed, vacant, or inoperative facilities on certain premises in the City of Ojai described as Ventura County Assessor’s Parcel No. ____________, commonly known as ____________, Ojai, California, constitute non-use and a public nuisance as defined in Chapter 15 of Title 4 of the Ojai Municipal Code and require abatement as prescribed in said Chapter;

        The conditions which shall be the subject of the public hearing are as follows: __________________________________________________________________________________;

        That if the state of non-use is found to constitute a public nuisance as defined in Section 4-15.02 of said Code, and the public nuisance has not been abated by the parties responsible therefor, such public nuisance may be ordered by the City Council to be abated by the persons claiming an interest in the real property or may be ordered to be abated by the duly constituted authorities of this City and the cost thereof charged to the parties responsible or placed as a lien against the real property; and

        That all persons having any objection to or interest in said matters are hereby notified to attend the meeting stated in this notice where their testimony and evidence will be heard and given due consideration; that all proceedings hereunder are categorically exempt under this City’s adopted Environmental Guidelines and Procedures.

 

Dated: __________________________

 

______________________________________________________

Planning Director

City of Ojai, California

P.O. Box 1570

Ojai, California 93023

 

        The Planning Director shall also cause a copy of the notice of hearing to be posted conspicuously on each of the premises and buildings affected.

        The Planning Director shall cause a copy of the notice of hearing to be served personally or by certified mail and to be posted at least fifteen (15) days before the time fixed for the hearing. Proof of the service and posting of such notice shall be made by written declaration under penalty of perjury and be filed with the Council.

        Notice of the hearing shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with Section 65854 of the Government Code of the State.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.09. Abatement hearing procedures.
        The procedure for hearings for abatement shall be as follows:

(a)    A quorum for the hearing shall consist of at least three (3) members. Any act or decision shall require the concurrence of a majority of the members of the Council.

(b)    At the hearing, after the City, the Planning Director, and other officials as the Council shall require, shall have stated their case and presented their evidence, any interested person, firm, corporation, or other entity may state its evidence, objections, and protests and give testimony relative to the alleged public nuisance or to the proposed abatement.

(c)    After all such testimony, if the Council finds and determines that the alleged state of non-use on the real property exists, and that it constitutes a public nuisance as defined in Section 4-15.02 of this chapter, and that the public nuisance requires abatement, the Council may allow the abatement by means of the reinstitution of previously permitted automobile service station uses within a stated period of time, including rehabilitation and repair, or order the demolition and removal of all closed, vacant, and inoperative buildings and by the filling of all excavations as prescribed in subsection (e) of Section 4-15.05 of this chapter within a stated period of time. Demolition or removal may include the removal of all subsurface items described in subsection (b) of Section 4-15.05 of this chapter. The order of the Council may also include the revocation of any permit or variance previously granted, notwithstanding any other provision of this Code.

(d)    The order of the Council may also provide that if abatement is not commenced within the period of time the Council has found and determined to be reasonable under the circumstances (but in no event less than thirty (30) days after the date of the order) that further City-initiated proceedings shall be implemented according to law, including demolition and removal by the City or through contract. The order may also include as an alternative an instruction to the City Attorney that, if abatement is not commenced and accomplished as prescribed, he is to institute appropriate court proceedings for the demolition, removal, and/or enjoinment of the public nuisance.

(e)    Any cost incurred by the City in bringing about the required demolition and removal of buildings and the filling of excavations may be ordered by the Council to be charged to the persons claiming by virtue of the records of the real property to be the owners thereof or to be charged as a lien against the real property itself.

(f)    The procedures provided in this section shall be addition to any other remedies otherwise provided by law.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.10. Limitation on time for actions.
        Any person aggrieved with the proceedings, decision, or action taken by the Council pursuant to this chapter in ordering the abatement of a public nuisance or other order shall bring an action to contest such proceeding, decision, action, or order within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision, action, or order of the Council.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-15.11. Service of resolutions.
        Any action taken or order made by the Council pursuant to this chapter shall be by resolution. A copy of the resolution shall be served personally or by certified mail on all parties who were entitled to notice under Section 4-15.06 of this chapter not later than fourteen (14) calendar days following the decision of the Council.

(§ 3, Ord. 622, eff. June 21, 1984, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 16 PUBLIC ARTS
Note
*       Editor’s note: Chapter 15, Public Arts, added by Ord. No. 622, repealed and replaced in its entirety by Ord. No. 765, effective May 22, 2003, renumbered to be Chapter 16 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Article 1. Arts Commission
Sec. 4-16.101. Arts Commission created.
        There is hereby established an Arts Commission consisting of seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council, or by a majority vote of the total voting membership of the Council. The members shall be selected from among those in the community who have a special knowledge of and a demonstrated interest in the arts and who are interested in promoting such activity. In making such appointments, the Mayor may consider representation on the Commission from a number of arts-related disciplines and activities, including, but not limited to, the following:

 

(a)    Performing arts, such as drama, music and dance;

(b)    Visual arts, such as painting, sculpture, photography, graphics, video art and applied art;

(c)    Literary arts, such as literature, poetry and journalism;

(d)    Communications arts involving film, television and radio;

(e)    Arts education, such as schools, libraries and community education; and

(f)    Funding, such as fund raisers, representatives of public and private funding agencies and art patrons.

        No more than three (3) members of the Commission shall be nonresidents of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-16.102. Terms.
        Members of the Commission shall be appointed to terms of four (4) years. The terms of all members of the Commission shall expire at the second regular City Council meeting of May, as provided below. The terms of all members of the Commission shall expire at the second regular City Council meeting of May. Terms shall be staggered for all members such that the terms of the three (3) members of the Commission whose terms began in May 2014 shall expire in May 2018 and those four (4) members whose terms began in May 2013 shall expire in May 2016, notwithstanding the provisions of this Code in effect when those members were appointed. Thereafter, appointments will be for four (4) years.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, and amended by § 3, Ord. 843, eff. August 22, 2014)

 

Sec. 4-16.103. Removal.
        Any member of the Commission may be removed at any time, with or without cause, by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council, or by a majority vote of the total voting membership of the Council. Vacancies for the remainder of unexpired terms as a result of removal, resignation or any other cause shall be filled in the same manner in which original appointments were made.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-16.104. Organization.
        The Commission shall annually elect a chairperson, vice-chairperson and such other officers deemed necessary, including a secretary who need not be a member of the Commission. In the absence or disability of either the chairperson or vice-chairperson, the Commission may designate a chairperson pro tempore. Regular meetings of the Commission shall be public and shall be held at least quarterly at such times and places as the Commission may fix.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-16.105. Minutes of meetings—Compensation.
        Minutes of meetings of the Commission shall be kept of all meetings, and copies thereof shall be delivered by the secretary of the Commission to the City Clerk for filing and distribution to the members of the Council within fifteen (15) days after the Commission’s approval. No member of the Commission shall receive compensation for his or her services as such a member, but the Council may fix the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the secretary.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-16.106. Rules of procedure.
        Except as provided in this chapter, the Commission shall have the power to prescribe its own rules of order and procedure. Four (4) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and a simple majority of the votes of a quorum shall be required to pass a motion. In the absence of specific rules of order and procedures, the conduct of such meetings shall be governed by the latest revised edition of Roberts’ Rules of Order.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-16.107. Powers and duties.
        The Commission shall exercise the powers reasonably necessary to perform and carry out its delegated responsibilities. The duties of the Commission include the following:

(a)    Advise the Council on all matters pertaining to the arts in the community;

(b)    Make recommendations to the Council concerning the resources and needs of the community on the subject of the arts, opportunities for participation of artists and performers in City-sponsored activities, and ways to encourage community involvement;

(c)    Work cooperatively with City boards and commissions and other public and private organizations in promoting art and cultural activities within the City;

(d)    Encourage public and private partnerships to assure the survival of the arts and artists in the City;

(e)    Encourage the flow of art into the City and stimulate art and cultural activities among residents of the City;

(f)    Review and evaluate submitted City art grant proposals and submit funding recommendations to the Council;

(g)    Carry out the duties necessary to oversee the Ojai Public Arts Program as specified in Article 2 of this chapter; and

(h)    Prepare and submit to the Council at least every two (2) years a five (5) year arts project plan. Prior to submission, the Arts Commission shall review all ongoing and future capital improvement and development projects for public art opportunities.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 2. Public Arts Program
Sec. 4-16.201. Purpose.
(a)    The purpose of the Public Arts Program is to enrich the built environment of the City. The program will increase the understanding and enjoyment of art by residents and visitors, add to the economic viability of the City, encourage artistic cooperation among various disciplines and invite public interaction with public spaces. The Public Arts Program, among other things, requires that public art be included as part of certain private and public development projects in the City. It represents a partnership between the City, developers and the arts community that serves to enhance Ojai’s built environment both now and in the future.

(b)    The Council finds and declares as follows:

(1)    Enhancement of the quality of life for City residents, workers and visitors is provided by the development of cultural and artistic resources;

(2)    Development and maintenance of a Public Arts Program improves the quality of the urban environment and increases real property values;

(3)    Nurturing alternative sources for cultural and artistic outlets improves the environment, image and character of the community;

(4)    Those whose developments diminish these resources should make provision for new opportunities for public art in order to preserve and enhance cultural and artistic resources in the City;

(5)    Establishing the Public Arts Program will promote the general welfare by balancing the City’s physical growth and revitalization with its cultural and artistic resources.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008; § 1, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

 

Sec. 4-16.202. Program execution.
        The Commission shall carry out the duties established by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-16.203. Definitions.
        For purposes of this article:

        “Accession” shall mean the assignment of a basic number to the objects acquired for the permanent art collection. The accession number is composed of two (2) figures, one (1) indicating the year of the receipt and the other the number of the accession within the year. The source of the acquisition is also noted. Numbers are assigned in order of the acquisition and a master list maintained of all acquisitions.

        “Acquisition” shall mean inclusion of an artwork in the City’s art collection whether by purchase, commissioning or donation.

        “Arts consultant” shall mean an arts professional with demonstrated education, experience and training in the development of public art projects.

        “Committee to Approve Public Art” (CAPA) shall mean a public body comprised of five members: three members of the Arts Commission (or others appointed by the Arts Commission), one Planning Commission representative appointed by the Planning Commission, and one member of the community with arts knowledge, appointed by the Arts Commission. The Committee shall be responsible for conceptual reviews of artwork covered by this Article, and recommendations to the Arts Commission for final review and approval or denial.

        “Covered project” shall mean all new residential development consisting of five (5) or more units, all remodeling, repair or reconstruction of residential housing consisting of five (5) units or more the cost of which is Three Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($300,000.00) Dollars or more, and all commercial, manufacturing, institutional recreation, village mixed use (commercial portion only, unless residential portion of such development consists of five (5) or more units) and public/institutional construction, remodeling, repair or reconstruction exceeding Three Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($300,000.00) Dollars in value.

        “Deaccessioning” shall mean the removal of an artwork from the City art collection, whether by sale or otherwise. Such action shall be taken only on the recommendation of the Arts Commission with the official permission of the Council.

        “Public Art” shall mean artwork created by artists for spaces accessible to the public for specified time periods. It may include, but is not limited to, works of sculpture, painting, tile work, street furniture, murals and place-making and arts programming. The installations may be either permanent or temporary.

 

        “Public Art Jury” shall mean a Jury comprised of seven (7) members composed of: a representative of the Arts Commission, two arts professionals, at least one with public art experience, a representative of the Planning Commission, a community member-at-large, Representative of the developer (e.g. architect or landscape architect or, if there is no developer for the project, a member selected at the discretion of the Arts Commission), and an artist.

        “Responsible party” shall mean the person or entity which is administering or managing a covered project and is the party responsible for complying with the requirements of the Public Arts Program as set forth in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008,  as amended by § 2, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014, and § 2, Ord. 908, eff. October 8, 2020)

 

Sec. 4-16.204. Public Arts Fund.
(a)    Creation. There is hereby established the Public Arts Fund into which shall be deposited all funds as may be appropriated by the Council or contributed to the City for expenditures in conjunction with the Public Arts Program.

(b)    Endowments. The Public Arts Fund shall be used as a depository for endowments, bequests, grants, contributions or fees. Such endowments, bequests, grants, contributions or fees may be expended as set forth in Section 4-15.204(e) and as approved by the Commission.

(c)    Accounting. A Public Arts Fund shall be maintained by the City’s Finance Director, with accounting records established to sufficiently identify and control these funds. Expenditures shall be processed through the City’s established warrant payment procedure.

(d)    Use of Public Arts Fund. The Public Arts Fund shall be used solely for the Public Arts Program expenses outlined below as (e) Permissible Expenses.

(e)    Permissible expenditures. The following constitute permissible expenditures of Public Arts Fund moneys:

(1)    The cost of artwork, including artist’s fees, and its installation, exhibition or display;

(2)    Any required permit fees and legal and other costs directly related to the project;

(3)    The cost of purchase or lease of art sites;

(4)    Waterworks, landscaping, lighting and other objects which are commissioned from an artist as an integral aspect of a structure or site or which are necessary for the proper aesthetic presentation and structural placement of the artwork;

(5)    Frames, mats, pedestals and other objects which are necessary for the proper presentation of the artwork;

(6)    Expenditures for maintenance and repair of artwork;

(7)    Promotion of art education within the City, either separate from or complementary to art programs of schools, museums or other nonprofit organizations; and

(8)    Costs of administering the Public Arts Program.

(f)    Ineligible expenditures. Public Arts Fund moneys may not be expended on the following:

(1)    Reproductions of original artwork except an artwork from an artist-signed limited edition unless approved by the Arts Commission;

(2)    Unlimited editions of original artwork;

(3)    Mass-produced art objects;

(4)    Artworks that are decorative, ornamental or functional landscape or architectural elements except when commissioned from an artist or a skilled artisan or craftsperson, as an integral aspect of a structure or site;

(5)    Architectural rehabilitation of historical buildings; and

(6)    Expenses not directly related to the purchase, design, fabrication and installation of the artworks, including site construction costs not directly related to the costs of the artwork.

(g)    Replacement. For those artworks that have been purchased with moneys from the Public Arts Fund or contributed to the City, the Council may determine to deaccess existing artworks for replacement artworks. Any funds obtained from the sale of artwork shall be credited to the Public Arts Fund.

(h)    Alteration, replacement or relocation. Permanently installed public works of art may not be modified, altered, relocated or removed without the prior review of the Arts Commission. Any alteration, replacement or relocation of the artwork shall be subject to the California Art Preservation Act and the Federal Visual Arts Rights Act of 1990.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 3, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

 

Sec. 4-16.205. Projects subject to Public Arts Program requirements.
(a)    Requirements. Except as provided below in Section 4-16.205(b), the requirements of this article shall apply to all covered projects.

(b)    Exceptions. The requirements of this article shall not apply to the following:

(1)    Projects undertaken by any agency of the State, County, the Ojai Unified School District or any governmental entity other than the City;

(2)    Remodeling, repair or reconstruction of structures to comply with earthquake seismic safety code standards or buildings damages to which have been immediately occasioned by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other calamity;

(3)    Nonprofit social service projects;

(4)    Housing projects for “low to moderate income persons and families” as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093;

(5)    Affordable housing developments receiving City, State or Federal assistance, unless permissible under City, State or Federal regulations;

(6)    Construction, remodeling, repair or reconstruction of residential projects consisting of four (4) or fewer units whether or not such residential project is a part of a mixed-use development; and

(7)    Architectural rehabilitation or historical preservation of properties which are designated as historic sites by the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 4, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

 

Sec. 4-16.206. Requirement to provide artwork; waiver or modification.
(a)    The responsible party shall be deemed to have satisfied his, her or its obligations under this article through the placement of artwork at the site of a covered project and in a manner consistent with this article.

(b)    Other provisions of this article notwithstanding, the Arts Commission may waive the strict compliance, in whole or in part, in respect to any covered project otherwise subject to the provisions of this article and instead permit the responsible party to meet the intent and purpose of this article through compliance with subsections (1), (2), or (3) of Section 4-16.206(c), below. In authorizing such alternative compliance, the Arts Commission shall make findings on the basis of substantial evidence, that the responsible party achieves the goals and aims of this article in substantially the same manner as strict compliance would. The Arts Commission may also waive the requirements for covered projects which are also City projects when it determines it would be in the public interest to do so.

(c)    Acceptable alternative methods of fulfilling Public Art Requirement, if approved pursuant to (b) above, are as follows:

(1)    Contribution of approved off-site public artwork;

(2)    Donation of an approved artwork to the City Art Collection; or,

(3)    Monetary contribution to the Public Art Fund.

(§ 5, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014, as amended by § 2, Ord. 908, eff. October 8, 2020)

 

*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 835, Section 5, effective Jan. 10, 2014, repealed the former Section 4-16.206 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former Section 4-16.206 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Section 1, Ord. No. 765, effective May 22, 2003, and Section 2, Ord. 800, effective Aug. 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-16.207. Compliance required.
        No final City approval, such as final inspection or a certificate of occupancy, for any covered project shall be granted or issued unless and until full compliance with this article is achieved in one of the following ways:

(a)    The approved artwork has been placed in an approved on-site or off-site location in a manner satisfactory to the Arts Commission;

(b)    Donation of an approved artwork to the City Art Collection in a manner approved by the Arts Commission;

(c)    The Public Art Program allocation amount determined in accordance with Section 4-16.208, is credited to the Public Arts Fund to be used as provided herein.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 6, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

 

Sec. 4-16.208. Program allocation.
        The Public Art Program allocation, as used in this article, shall be the percentage of the building cost which is set aside for the acquisition and installation of approved artwork and shall be an amount equal to two (2%) percent of the first one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) and one percent of any excess over one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) of the total building valuation for a covered project. The total building valuation shall be computed using the latest building valuation data as set forth by the International Code Council (ICC) unless, in the opinion of the Arts Commission, a different valuation measure should be used.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 7, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

 

Sec. 4-16.209. Art site acceptability.
        The responsible party shall place artwork equal in value to the applicable program allocation for the project in outdoor areas of the covered project that are accessible to and used by the public. Interior spaces, including lobbies, courtyards, malls, etc., may be eligible if they are accessible to the public a minimum of eight (8) hours per day and visible from the nearest public right-of-way. When selecting the location for art, preference shall be given to libraries, parks, office buildings, sidewalks, traffic islands, etc. Lobbies, plazas, adjacent open spaces or exterior treatment of buildings shall be potential sites, but the offices themselves shall not be considered acceptable sites. Final location of art shall be subject to the approval of the Arts Commission.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 8, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

Sec. 4-16.210. Criteria for artwork selection.
        Eligibility requirements for each project shall be established by the Arts Commission. Specifically excluded are artworks created by students under the supervision of art instructors to satisfy course requirements, and artists who are members of the Arts Commission. The following criteria shall be considered in the selection of artwork:

(a)    Quality. The quality of the artwork.

(b)    Media. All visual art forms may be considered, subject to limitations set by the Arts Commission.

(c)    Style. Artworks of all schools, styles and tastes should be considered for the City collection.

(d)    Environment. Artworks and art places should be appropriate in scale, material, form and content for the immediate, general, social and physical environments to which they relate.

(e)    Permanence. Other than for temporary installations of artwork, consideration should be given to structural and surface integrity, permanence and protection against theft, vandalism, weathering and excessive maintenance and repair costs.

(f)    Elements of design. Consideration should take into account that public art, in addition to meeting aesthetic requirements, also may serve to establish focal points, terminate areas, modify, enhance or define specific spaces or establish identity.

(g)    Diversity. The Public Arts Program should strive for diversity of style, scale, media, artists and equitable distribution of artworks and art places throughout the City.

        (h)    Limitation. Previously commissioned or acquired artists shall not be eligible until three years from the date of the Arts Commission’s approval of the project or acquisition.

        (i)     Murals. Mural applications shall meet the criteria in this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 9, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014, and § 2, Ord. 908, eff. October 8, 2020)

 

Sec. 4-16.211. Method of artwork selection for private and public development.
        The following methods may be used to select artwork at the option of the responsible party:

(a)    Direct purchase. A completed work of art may be purchased for a specific project or location.

(b)    Direct commission. An artist may be chosen directly and paid to submit a proposal. Artists will be selected on the basis of their qualifications for a particular project and its probability of successful completion.

(c)    Limited competition. A small number of artists may be invited and paid to submit proposals.

(d)    Open competition. Any artist may apply subject to project specifications. A Public Art Jury shall be called to review applications and qualifications, select an artist, and recommend approval to the Arts Commission. Chosen finalists may be asked to submit project proposals for which a fee is paid. The Public Art Jury shall make a recommendation to the Arts Commission for final approval or denial.

(e)    Recommendation. CAPA, except when a Public Art Jury has been called, will recommend private and public development projects to the Arts Commission for final review and approval or disapproval.”

(§ 10, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

 

*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 835, Section 10, effective January 10, 2014, repealed the former Section 4-16.211 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former Section 4-16.211 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Section 1, Ord. No. 765, effective May 22, 2003; and Section 2, Ord. No. 800, effective Aug. 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-16.212. Community Development Director review.
        The Community Development Director shall review the artwork and its placement and landscaping elements and may refer the artwork to the Planning Commission for approval pursuant to Section 9-4.07 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-16.213. Application procedures for placement of artwork on private property.
(a)    Any artwork placed on private property as part of the Public Arts Program shall be a one-of-a-kind piece conceived by and executed through an artist. The responsible party shall retain the services of a qualified art consultant to manage the art project and present the project to CAPA. The fee for the art consultant is considered a legitimate expense of the public art project allocation. The City shall maintain a list of qualified arts consultants. Early selection of an art consultant is required. The responsible party shall submit an artwork proposal to be reviewed at a public meeting by CAPA (the Committee to Approve Public Art) prior to issuance of a building permit for the project. The Arts Commission shall consider the recommendation of the CAPA and give final approval for the proposed project.

(b)    The completed arts application shall include:

(1)    Preliminary sketches, photographs or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork including, but not limited to, artist resume, images of previous artwork, and material samples;

(2)    An appraisal, budget or other evidence of the value of the proposed artwork, including acquisition and installation costs;

(3)    Preliminary plans containing such detailed information to adequately evaluate the location of the artwork in relation to the proposed development, and its compatibility with the proposed including compatibility with the proposed site.

(4)    Evidence that the artwork will be displayed in an open area and accessible to the public in accordance with Section 4-16.209

(5)    Maintenance factors required to ensure its permanence.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 11, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014, and § 2, Ord. 908, eff. October 8, 2020)

 

Sec. 4-16.214. Approval procedures for inclusion of artwork on private property.
(a)    The application for the proposed artwork and its inclusion will be considered by CAPA, which shall recommend approval or denial to the Arts Commission. The Community Development Director shall also review the artwork and its placement in relation to architecture and landscaping elements and may refer the application to the Planning Commission for design review approval pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 2, Article 20 of the Ojai Municipal Code. Any changes, questions or recommendations shall be conveyed in writing to the responsible party. The Arts Commission will review the CAPA recommendation for the approved artwork and approve or disapprove the recommendation. The applicant will be notified in writing.

(b)    If the responsible party proposes significant revisions to the architecture or physical design and layout of the proposed project subsequent to the receipt of the Commission’s approval, the application shall, if legally permitted, be returned to the CAPA for further review and recommendation concerning the revised proposal prior to final approval by the Arts Commission.

        (c)    If the responsible party has not applied for a building permit within three (3) years of the date of the Arts Commission’s approval of the project, the project will be considered null and void and the responsible party must resubmit a public art proposal to the CAPA (Committee to Approve Public Art).

        (d)    A contract between the City and the responsible party spelling out all requirements for the artwork, including budget, insurance and maintenance, shall be executed by the Community Development Department prior to the City’s formal acceptance of the artwork proposal as approved by the CAPA and the Arts Commission.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 12, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014, and § 2, Ord. 908, eff. October 8, 2020)

 

Sec. 4-16.215. Application procedure for donation of artwork to the City.
(a)    The prospective donor shall submit to the CAPA:

(1)    Sketches, photographs or other documentation of sufficient descriptive clarity to indicate the nature of the proposed artwork in relation to the site.

(2)    Additional samples of the artist’s work other than the proposed donation.

(3)    Background information on the artist who created the proposed donation.

(4)    Proof of valuation (previous sales receipt or similar) of the Artist’s work.

(5)    The estimated design, site preparation, fabrication and installation costs.

(6)    Maintenance factors required to ensure its permanence.

(b)    The proposed donation will be considered by the Arts Commission. A personal appearance by the artist may be requested. The Commission will determine when all issues have been addressed and recommend acceptance or rejection of the artwork to the City Council.

(§ 13, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

 

*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 835, Section 13, effective January 10, 2014, repealed the former Section 4-16.215 and enacted a new section as set out herein. The former Section 4-16.215 pertained to application procedure for contribution of artwork to the City and derived from Section 1, Ord. No. 765, effective May 22, 2003, and Section 2, Ord. No. 800, effective Aug. 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-16.216. Reserved.
 

*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 835, Section 14, effective Jan. 10, 2014, repealed Section 4-16.216, which pertained to review and acceptance of artwork contributed to the City and derived from Section 1, Ord. No. 765, effective May 22, 2003, and Section 2, Ord. No. 800, effective Aug. 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-16.217. Maintenance of artwork on public and private property.
(a)    Public artwork on public property. Procedures for accession, maintenance and conservation of artworks shall be established by the Arts Commission, as well as a maintenance schedule. Specific instructions for care of each work shall be kept on file as part of the collection management. Maintenance provisions shall be included in the artist’s contract stipulating the length of time (typically one (1) year) the artist will be responsible for repairs. The artist shall be required to provide to the City a maintenance manual outlining procedures, methods and products needed to preserve the condition of the artwork. The artist shall be offered a right of first refusal on repair contracts within a fair market rate of remuneration. Regular inspection-for-condition reporting shall be conducted as supervised by designated City personnel so that the collection is maintained in the best possible condition. When necessary, a conservation plan will be established prioritizing the work which is to be done.

(b)    Public artwork on private property. For artwork on private property, the obligation to provide all maintenance necessary to preserve the artwork in good condition shall remain with the owner of the site. Art installed on or integrated into a construction project pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not be removed or altered without the approval of the Commission. If the Public artwork is not integrated into the architecture, landscape or affixed to the property, any future owner of the property may remove artwork will

have the option of (1) replacing the original piece(s) with a new commission of equal fair market value (subject to the approval of the CAPA); or (2) depositing in the Public Art Fund a dollar amount equal to the fair market value of the artwork in which case the owner may remove the artwork.

(c)    Maintenance of artwork. Artwork installed pursuant to this article shall be maintained as specified in the written agreement between the City and the private property owner with regard to that artwork. Maintenance of artwork, as used in this article, shall include, without limitation, preservation of the artwork in good condition to the satisfaction of the City, protection of the artwork against physical defacement, mutilation or alteration and securing and maintaining fire and extended coverage insurance and insurance for coverage of vandalism and other similar acts in an amount to be determined by the City Attorney. Evidence of said insurances shall be provided to the City on an annual basis. Prior to placement of an approved artwork, the responsible party and owner of the site shall execute and record a covenant in a form approved by the City for maintenance of the artwork. Failure to maintain the artwork as provided herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. If the artwork is not maintained in the manner prescribed, or is removed or altered without approval of the Commission, in addition to all other remedies provided by law, the City may, upon reasonable notice, perform all necessary repairs, maintenance, secure insurance or take such legal or other action deemed necessary to have the artwork maintained and, if necessary, restored, and the costs therefore shall become a lien against the real property.

(§ 1, Ord. 765, eff. May 22, 2003, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008, as amended by § 15, Ord. 835, eff. January 10, 2014)

Chapter 17 OUTDOOR GATHERINGS
Article 1. Definitions
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 16, Outdoor Gatherings, added by Ord. No. 666, effective October 26, 1989, renumbered to be Chapter 17 by Ord. No. 800, effective August, 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-17.101. Scope.
        For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, words and phrases are defined as set forth in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.102. Applicant.
        “Applicant” means a person or organization who sponsors an outdoor gathering as hereinafter defined and requests, in writing from City, the approval of a permit for such outdoor gathering.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.103. Outdoor gathering.
        “Outdoor gathering” means any assembly, music festival, carnival, show, circus, dance, exhibition, lecture, concert, rally, party, celebration or similar event or activity which is:

(a)    Open to the public or to which members of the public are invited or admitted, either for a charge or free of cost; and

(b)    Held out-of-doors or other than in a permanent structure that was constructed for the purpose of or constructed so that it could be used for conducting such event or activity; provided, however, that the incidental use of any patio, courtyard, deck or other area adjacent to and outside a permanent structure (that is authorized as a permitted primary or conditional use) by participants at the event or activity shall be considered use of the permanent structure for the purpose of this provision.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.104. Permit.
        “Permit” means a written consent, warrant or license granted by the City Manager allowing specific functions.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 2. General Provisions
Sec. 4-17.201. Scope of regulations.
(a)    No permit required. No outdoor gathering to be held within City’s corporate limits which is reasonably expected to be attended by a total of 4,000 or more persons or by 1,000 or more persons at any one (1) time during the course of the event shall be held unless a permit has first been obtained by the sponsor thereof.

(b)    Exemptions. Events to be held on City, County of Ventura or other governmental agency (including school or other special district) streets, rights-of-way, parks or other property for which a valid facility use or other permit or approval has been issued are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.202. Application.
        An application for a permit to hold an outdoor gathering shall be submitted to the Planning Director no less than thirty (30) days prior to the event on a form provided for such purpose setting forth the following:

(a)    Location. The location and legal owner of the premises on which the outdoor gathering is to be held;

(b)    Number of people. The number of people applicant will admit to the outdoor gathering, his plans on how he intends to limit attendance to the outdoor gathering to such number and the date(s) and time period within which the outdoor gathering is to be held;

(c)    Facilities. Applicant’s plans for facilities for the handicapped, where physically feasible, provisions for potable water, toilet facilities, solid waste disposal, and, if required by the Ventura County Health Department, emergency medical treatment;

        (d)    Off-street parking. Applicant’s plans for provision of off-street parking, including the location, the number of spaces and/or the dimensions of the parking area or areas, internal circulation pattern and provisions for handicapped parking;

(e)    Circulation. Applicant’s plans for access to and from the outdoor gathering, including vehicular circulation along public streets and highways beginning at least one (1) mile from the event and plans for pedestrian and vehicular ingress to and egress from the event, including service and emergency vehicles. Use of public transportation and park and ride facilities shall be encouraged;

(f)    Signs. A description of all signage to be used by applicant in connection with the outdoor gathering including the location, size, height, color and the like as provided in Chapter 6 of this title;

(g)    Lighting. Applicant’s plans for illuminating the premises if any part of the outdoor gathering is to be held within one (1) hour before sunset or after dark;

(h)    Sound equipment. A description of all sound amplification equipment which applicant plans to use and intensity in decibels at the property line of the premises upon which the outdoor gathering is to be held;

(i)     Fire control. Applicant’s plans for provision of fire code devices and services;

(j)     Applicant. The name of the person, firm or corporation which is sponsoring the outdoor gathering and has submitted and is applicant for the permit;

(k)    Address and telephone number. The location of the principal place of business and the telephone number of applicant;

(l)     Principal officers. The names and addresses of the principal officers of applicant;

(m)   Tax status. Whether applicant is a “for profit” or “not-for-profit” organization; and

(n)    Property owner. The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the property on which the outdoor gathering is to be held if different from applicant.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.203. Application fee.
        Applicant shall pay to City at the time that he files his application for permit an application fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.204. Insurance.
        Applicant shall furnish evidence that a public liability insurance policy in the amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any one accident and insurance for property damage in the amount of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) is in force and effect during all times for which the permit is issued.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.205. Cash deposit.
        Applicant shall deposit with the Finance Director a cash bond in a sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) conditioned upon saving City harmless from any and all liabilities or causes of action which might arise by virtue of the granting of the permit and conditioned further that no damage will be done to the streets, sewers, trees or adjoining property and that no dirt, paper, litter or other debris will be permitted to remain upon city streets or upon any private property by those attending the outdoor gathering. The exact amount of such cash bond shall be determined by City; shall be in addition to and not in lieu of the insurance set forth in Section 4-17.204 hereinabove; and shall be returned to applicant upon certification by the Chief of Police and the Public Works Director that applicant has complied with all conditions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.206. Permit issuance.
        A permit for an outdoor gathering shall be issued upon and subject to such reasonable terms and conditions as City deems appropriate; provided, however, that the City finds that the issuance of the permit, together with those outdoor gathering permits which have been previously issued and are pending issuance, will not cumulatively cause substantial detrimental health and safety effects on the community; and, provided further, that City finds that the provisions of this chapter are complied with or will be complied with by applicant, including, but not limited to, the following:

(a)    Owner’s consent. Applicant is the owner of said property on which the outdoor gathering is to be held or the owner of the property has consented to the use of the property for the outdoor gathering;

(b)    Security plans. The chief of police, or his designee, has approved applicant’s plans to limit the outdoor gathering to the number of people set forth in the application, maintain order and assure compliance with all applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the provisions of this chapter and the conditions of the permit under which the outdoor gathering is held. The Chief of Police, or his designee, will make recommendations as to the necessary security which recommendations must be adhered to for security approval. The responsibility of the applicant’s security plans security officers will be to limit attendance, maintain order and enforce all laws and regulations;

(c)    Sanitary facilities. The Ventura County Health Department and/or the Public Works Director has approved applicant’s plans, including facilities for the handicapped where physically feasible, for provisions of potable water, toilet facilities, solid waste disposal and, if required, emergency medical treatment;

(d)    Off-street parking. The Public Works Director has approved applicant’s plans for provision of parking spaces, including provision for spaces for the handicapped where physically feasible. The Public Works Director shall not approve applicant’s parking plan unless it provides, at a minimum, either that sufficient parking spaces are provided for one (1) of each four (4) persons applicant will admit to the outdoor gathering or such other parking arrangements which are, in the opinion of the Public Works Director, equivalent to such minimum standard, safe access to and from such parking spaces and such parking spaces will be graded, marked and separated by a physical device from all pedestrians;

(e)    Circulation plan. The Public Works Director has approved applicant’s plan for pedestrian and vehicular circulation both to and from the outdoor gathering. The Public Works Director shall not approve applicant’s circulation plan unless he finds that the proposed circulation will not cause a threat to the health and safety of the citizens of City, will not constitute an undue burden on City’s normal pedestrian and vehicular circulation or create undue delays and detours with respect thereto and that all permits from other agencies, including the California Department of Transportation, if required, have been obtained;

(f)    Lighting. The Public Works Director has approved applicant’s plans for illuminating the premises upon which the outdoor gathering is to be held if any part of the outdoor gathering is expected to occur within one (1) hour before sunset or after dark;

(g)    Sound equipment. The Planning Director has approved applicant’s plans for any use of sound amplifying equipment. The Planning Director shall approve sound amplification plans that limit noise levels to no more than 60 Ldn or CNEL (db) at the property line of the premises upon which the outdoor gathering is to be held, if such premises is zoned or is lawfully used for residential purpose or abuts property zoned or lawfully used for residential purpose and no more than 70 Ldn or CNEL (db) at the property line of the premises upon which the outdoor gathering is to be held, if such premises is neither zoned nor used for residential purpose; provided, however, that the Planning Director shall not approve any sound amplification plans that call for the use of sound amplification equipment between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.;

(h)    Fire protection. The Ventura County Fire Protection District has approved applicant’s plans for provisions for fire control devices and services and plan(s) for vehicular and pedestrian ingress to and egress from the event, including service and emergency vehicles and has issued a Uniform Fire Code Permit with any other pertinent conditions as applicable; and

(i)     Compliance with conditions. Adequate assurances have been made by applicant that he will comply with all additional requirements, conditions and restrictions imposed by City as it deems necessary for the safety of persons and property.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

 

 

Article 3. Violations, Enforcement and Penalties
Sec. 4-17.301. Permit required.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit an outdoor gathering without the issuance of a permit therefor.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.302. Compliance with permit.
        If City determines that an outdoor gathering is being held in violation of any of the provisions of the permit or this chapter, it may revoke the permit by written notice to applicant of such revocation.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.303. Appeal.
        Any person, firm or corporation may appeal the issuance or revocation of a permit within ten (10) days after such issuance or revocation to the City Council for a hearing thereon and the decision of the City Council in this regard shall be final. If no appeal is taken within such ten (10) day period, the action of City in issuing or revoking the permit shall be final.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.304. Right of entry.
        With the consent of the owner of the property upon which the outdoor gathering is to be held or under an inspection warrant issued pursuant to the California Code of Civil Procedure, City or any of its deputies, assistants, employees or agents may enter, at all reasonable times, the property upon which the outdoor gathering is being conducted in order to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant hereto.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.305. Penalties.
        Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant hereto shall be guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of City authorizes as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.03 of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided therein. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter or any permit issued pursuant hereto is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable as provided in this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as amended by § 5, Ord. 697, eff. June 25, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-17.306. Remedies cumulative.
        The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive.

(§ 1, Ord. 666, eff. October 26, 1989, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 18 GRAFFITI
Article 1. Declaration of Policy
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 17, Graffiti, added by Ord. No. 695, repealed and replaced in its entirety by Ord. No. 701, effective November 26, 1993, renumbered to be Chapter 18 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-18.101. Intent and purpose—Findings.
        Section 53069.3 of the Government Code authorizes the City to provide for the removal of graffiti or other inscribed material from public or privately owned permanent structures located on public or privately owned real property located within the City. The City Council finds that graffiti, on public and private properties, is a blighting factor on the neighborhood, encourages other acts of malicious vandalism, causes an increase in crime and depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties.

        The Council further finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious, is inconsistent with the City’s property maintenance goals, aesthetic standards and unless it is quickly removed from public and private properties, other properties soon become the target of graffiti. Such defacement of property is most often committed by persons under the age of eighteen (18) years using aerosol or pressurized containers of paint, indelible markers and pens and done in connection with gang activities.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 2. Definitions
Note
*       Editor’s note—The words, phrases and terms, used in this chapter, shall have the meanings set forth in this article.

 

Sec. 4-18.201. Aerosol paint container.
        “Aerosol paint container” shall mean any aerosol container six (6) ounces or less net weight contents, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substances capable of defacing property with permanent, indelible or waterproof ink, paint or other liquid.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.202. Glass etching tool.
        “Glass etching tool” shall mean any professional etching tool or glass cutter.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.203. Graffiti.
        “Graffiti” shall mean:

(a)    Any act which results in altering or defacing of any real or personal property through the use of paint, spray paint, markers, objects or other substances capable of destroying property, which acts shall include, but not be limited to, the writing, defacing, marring, inscribing, scratching, painting or affixing of other markings on buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways, walkways, sidewalks, curbs, curbstones, street lamp posts, hydrants, trees, electric light or power or telephone or telegraph poles, fire alarms, drinking fountains, parking meters or trash receptacles.

(b)    Any act which results in the altering or defacing of any real or personal property through the use of paint, spray paint, markers, objects or other substances capable of destroying property, which is offensive to a reasonably sensitive person.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.204. Graffiti implement.
        “Graffiti implement” shall mean an aerosol paint container, an indelible marker, a paint stick, a glass etching tool, or any similar device.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.205. Indelible marker.
        “Indelible marker” shall mean any marker, pen or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-quarter (¼) inch, containing a fluid which is not soluble in water.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.206. Paint stick.
        “Paint stick” shall mean a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance which is not water soluble, capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and upon application, leaving a mark at least one-quarter (¼) of an inch in width, visible from a distance of twenty (20′) feet.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.207. Responsible adult.
        “Responsible adult” shall mean a parent or guardian of an individual under the age of eighteen (18) years. A responsible adult may also include an agent of the parent or guardian provided said agent is over eighteen (18) years of age.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 3. Prohibition of Graffiti
Sec. 4-18.301. Application of graffiti.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti upon any wall, rock, street, bridge, building, fence, gate, structure, tree or other real or personal property, whether owned publicly or privately, without the permission of the owner, lessee or operator of such property.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.302. Allowance of graffiti.
        It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or is otherwise in control of any real property within the City to permit or allow graffiti to be placed upon or remain on any permanent structure located on such property when the graffiti is visible from the street or other public or private property.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.303. Violation.
        Any individual who is found guilty of violating any provisions of this chapter shall pay restitution to the property owner, in addition to authorized penalties. If the violator is a minor, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for payment of restitution.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 4. Furnishing Graffiti Implements to Minors
Sec. 4-18.401. Prohibited.
        It shall be unlawful for any person other than a responsible adult to sell, exchange, give, loan or in any way furnish to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years any graffiti implement.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 5. Wrongful Display for Sale
Sec. 4-18.501. Standards for display and sale of graffiti implements.
        No person, firm or entity engaged in a commercial enterprise (“seller”) shall display for sale, trade or exchange, any graffiti implement capable of defacing property except in an area which may be viewable by, but from which the public shall be securely precluded without employee assistance. Two (2) such acceptable methods for displaying such items for sale shall be by containment in:

(a)    A completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a building or building structure and which shall, at all times except during access by authorized representatives, remain securely locked; or

(b)    In an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which the public is precluded from entry.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 6. Wrongful Storage
Sec. 4-18.601. Standard for storage of graffiti implements.
(a)    No person, firm or entity engaged in a commercial enterprise shall store any graffiti implement capable of defacing property except in an area which may be viewable by, but is not accessible to, members of the public because it is either:

(1)    A completely enclosed room which shall, at all times except during access or substantial occupancy by the owner or an authorized adult representative of the owner remain securely locked; or

(2)    A completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a building or building structure and which shall, at all times except during access by the owner or an authorized adult representative of the owner, remain securely locked.

(b)    For the purposes of this article, an owner or authorized representative of the owner shall be deemed to have substantial occupancy of a room even during short periods of absence if the room is part of a larger structure which is occupied by the owner.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 7. Civil Responsibility for Damages for Wrongful Display or Storage
Sec. 4-18.701. Penalties.
        Any person who displays or stores any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of this chapter and thereby directly contribute to any incident of graffiti shall be personally liable for any and all costs incurred by any party in connection with the removal of graffiti, or the repair of any property containing graffiti, caused by a minor who shall use any graffiti implement in violation of the provisions of Section 594 of the California Penal Code and for all attorney’s fees and court costs incurred in connection with the civil prosecution of any claim for damages.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 8. Possession by Minors
Sec. 4-18.801. Prohibited.
        It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is not accompanied by a responsible adult to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement:

(a)    Upon public property, unless the person is attending or traveling to or from a school at which the person is enrolled, and the person is participating in a class at said school which has, as a written requirement of the class, the need to use such a graffiti implement.

(b)    Upon private property without the consent of the owner, tenant or operator of such private property.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 9. Signs Required
Sec. 4-18.901. Signs required.
        Any person, organization, company, firm or association engaged in the retail sale of glass etching tools, paint sticks, indelible markers, aerosol containers of paint and other liquid substances capable of defacing property must display at the location of retail sale a sign, in letters at least three-eighths (3/8) of an inch high, clearly visible and legible to employees and customers which states as follows:

 

IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO SELL OR GIVE TO ANY INDIVIDUAL UNDER THE AGE OF EIGHTEEN YEARS, WHO IS NOT ACCOMPANIED BY A RESPONSIBLE ADULT, ANY GLASS ETCHING TOOL, PAINT STICK, INDELIBLE MARKER, AEROSOL CONTAINER OF PAINT OR OTHER LIQUID SUBSTANCE CAPABLE OF DEFACING PROPERTY.

 

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 10. Removal
Sec. 4-18.1001. General.
        Any person applying graffiti within the City shall have the duty to remove same in a manner approved by the City within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the City or the public or private owner of the property involved. The notice to the person applying graffiti shall be in writing and shall be addressed and served in the manner provided in Section 4-18.1003(b) of this article. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Consistent with Section 1714.1 of the Civil Code where graffiti is applied by minors, the parent or guardian shall be responsible for such removal or payment for the cost thereof.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.1002. Public property.
        Whenever the Director of Public Works or his designated representative determines that graffiti exists upon property owned by the City, it shall be removed as soon as possible. When property is owned by a public entity other than the City, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized by the Director of Public Works or his representative and removal undertaken by City personnel or independent contractor only after securing written consent of the public entity having jurisdiction over the property.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.1003. Private property.
(a)    Duty to remove. It is the duty of every owner of property to remove promptly therefrom any and all graffiti and to do so in a manner acceptable to the City. Where graffiti is located upon private property, which is capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public right-of-way or sidewalk within the City, the City may cause a written notice to be served upon the owner of the affected premises requesting the removal of that graffiti. Unless additional time is granted by the City, due to a hardship in complying, the property owner shall have ten (10) calendar days after the date of the City’s notice to remove the graffiti. Failure to remove shall be a violation for each day the graffiti is not removed and deemed to authorize the City’s removal and assessment of costs of such removal as a lien on the subject property.

(b)    Notice. Notice to private property owners by the City shall be addressed to the name and address as it appears on the last tax assessment roll by depositing a copy of the notice in the United States mail, certified, with postage fully affixed, or by personally delivering a copy of the notice to the owner of the property. The service shall be complete at the time of deposit in the mail or when personal service is effectuated. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any legal proceedings regarding removal of the graffiti.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.1004. Use of public funds.
        Whenever the City becomes aware, or is notified and determines that graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi public place within the City, the City shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located, unless the City Manager, or his designee, determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the responsible party agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 11. Non-Liability for Consensual Removal
Sec. 4-18.1101. Securing owner consent.
        Prior to entering upon private property or property owned by a public entity other than the City for the purpose of removal of graffiti, the City shall attempt to secure the consent of the property owner and a release of the City from liability for private or public property or liability damage.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.1102. Failure to obtain owner consent.
        If a responsible party fails to remove the offending graffiti within the time herein specified, or if the City shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the responsible party shall have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable to the City consistent with the terms of this section, the City shall commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 12. Nuisance
Sec. 4-18.1201. Nuisance declared.
        It is hereby declared that graffiti is obnoxious and a nuisance.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 13. Reporting Graffiti
Sec. 4-18.1301. Reward.
        City may pay to any person who provides information which leads to the arrest and conviction of any person who applies any drawing, inscription, figure or mark, commonly known as graffiti, to a surface of real or personal property, a reward as established from time to time by Council resolution. The amount of any reward paid pursuant to this article may be sought from the person arrested and convicted as restitution in addition to any other restitution associated with the removal of graffiti.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.1302. Claims for rewards.
(a)    Contents. Claims for rewards under this article shall be filed with the City. Each claim shall:

(1)    Specifically identify the date, location and kind of property damaged or destroyed;

(2)    Identify by name the person who was convicted or confessed to the damage or destruction of City property;

(3)    Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred or the place and the date of the confession.

(b)    Investigation and verification. No claim for reward shall be allowed by the City Council unless an authorized representative of the City investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and recommends that it be allowed.

(c)    Liability. The person committing the graffiti, or if an unemancipated minor, the custodial parent of said minor, shall be liable for reward paid pursuant to this article.

(d)    Multiple contributors. In the event of multiple contributors of information, the reward amount shall be divided by the City in the manner it shall deem appropriate.

        For the purposes of this article, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program or a plea bargain to a lesser offense shall constitute a conviction.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 14. Criminal Action
Sec. 4-18.1401. Violation.
        Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 2, Title 1 of this Code. These penalties are cumulative with and in addition to other provisions of this Code, Section 53069.3 of the Government Code and other remedies available at law.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-18.1402. Community service.
        Community service in the City may be imposed in lieu of any penalties and punishments where there has been a conviction or guilty or nolo contendere plea to a misdemeanor.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 15. Abatement Procedures
Sec. 4-18.1501. Abatement procedures—Costs.
        The Building Official, as defined in Section 9-1.203(c) of this Code, or the authorized representative, may institute procedures for abatement of property upon which graffiti exists. The procedures set forth in the Uniform Housing Code as referenced in Article 4, Chapter 1 of Title 9 of this Code, shall apply to any such abatement. Costs for any abatement performed by, or on behalf of, the City may be recovered by the City from the property owner in accordance with the procedures established in the Uniform Building Code, as adopted in this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 16. Administrative Fee
Sec. 4-18.1601. Established.
        An administrative fee as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council shall be added as part of any abatement proceedings.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Article 17. Severability
Sec. 4-18.1701. Severability.
        If any provision, clause, sentence or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable.

(§ 1, Ord. 701, eff. November 26, 1993, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 19 PARADES
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 18, Parades, added by Ord. No. 712, effective April 11, 1996, renumbered to be Chapter 19 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-19.101. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, “parade” shall mean any march or procession of persons, animals, or vehicles, or combination thereof, upon any public street, sidewalk, alley or other public place, which does not comply with normal traffic regulations or controls.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.102. Permit—Required.
        No person shall conduct, manage, lead, or participate in any parade unless a permit therefor shall have been previously issued, as provided for in this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.103. Application.
        Any person desiring to conduct or manage a parade shall, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date on which it is proposed to conduct such parade, file with the City Manager a written application for a parade permit setting forth the following information:

(a)    The name, address, and telephone number of the person requesting the permit;

(b)    The name and address of the person, group, organization, corporation or other entity sponsoring the activity, if any;

(c)    The nature and purpose of the proposed parade;

(d)    The date, time and place of the start of the parade, the time when parade participants will begin to assemble at the starting place, and the time and place the parade shall finish;

(e)    The route the parade shall travel, described by street names and travel directions, including a description of the starting point and termination point;

(f)    The estimated number of persons who will participate in the parade; where applicable, the number and type of animals and the proposed method of their control, and the number and kinds of vehicles and their proposed speed;

(g)    Any other information regarding the public health, safety and welfare which the City Manager finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should be issued.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.104. Permit—Issuance conditions.
        The City Manager shall act on an application for a parade within ten (10) days after said application is filed. The City Manager shall issue said permit unless the City Manager finds:

(a)    The parade will substantially interfere with the safe and orderly movement of vehicular traffic along, crossing, or contiguous to its proposed route; or

(b)    The proposed time or estimated size of the parade, the manner in which it is proposed to be conducted or its proposed route will require so great a diversion of police officers to secure the line of movement and areas contiguous thereto such that the remainder of the City will be left without adequate police protection; or

(c)    The proposed parade route will substantially interfere with the ability of emergency vehicles or equipment to move from the locations where normally parked when not in use to the scene of an emergency; or

(d)    The proposed time and route of the parade will substantially interfere with a previously scheduled and publicly announced activity involving or available to the general public; or

(e)    The estimated concentration of persons, animals or vehicles or combinations thereof at the parade’s assembly or termination points will substantially interfere with fire and police protection of or ambulance service to these points and contiguous areas in the event of an emergency; or

(f)    The conduct of such parade will obstruct any construction or maintenance work scheduled to take place upon public roads.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.105. Alternative dates, times and routes.
        If a proposed parade is found by the City Manager to conflict with any of the requirements of this chapter, the City Manager may suggest an alternate date, time, route and associated terms and conditions. If the applicant wishes to accept the proposed date, time, route and associated terms and conditions, the applicant may, within three (3) days, file a notice of acceptance and the City Manager shall proceed to issue the permit upon said terms and conditions.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.106. Permit contents.
        The permit shall contain:

(a)    The starting time and route of the parade;

(b)    The maximum length of such parade in miles or kilometers, or fractions thereof;

(c)    The minimum and maximum permissible speeds of the parade;

(d)    The maximum number of persons, animals and vehicles which will be allowed to participate in the parade, provided that said numbers shall not be less than the estimated numbers in the permit application without the prior written consent of the applicant.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.107. Permit—Rejection—Notice.
        If the City Manager finds that a parade permit should not be issued, he or she shall notify the applicant by mail within ten (10) days after the date on which the application was originally filed with the City and state in general terms the reason for the denial of the permit.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.108. Appeals.
        Interested persons shall have the right to appeal to the City Council from determinations made by the City Manager with respect to parade permits. Such appeals shall be controlled by the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.109. Revocation of permit.
        Any permit for a parade may be revoked by the City Manager at any time because of a disaster, public calamity, or other emergency, because the permit was issued through mistake or inadvertence, or because the safety and convenience of the public or property requires such revocation, as determined by the City Manager.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-19.110. Interfering with activity prohibited.
        No person shall:

(a)    Knowingly join or participate in any parade conducted pursuant to a permit under this chapter in violation of the terms of such permit;

(b)    Knowingly join or participate in any permitted parade without the consent and over the objection of the permittee;

(c)    Interfere with the progress or orderly conduct of any such parade, including but not limited to:

(1)    Physically blocking the progress of parade participants,

(2)    Running or walking across the parade route while it is in progress, or

(3)    Pushing or shoving parade participants; or

(d)    Throw or project objects or materials at parade participants or spectators.

(§ 1, Ord. 712, eff. April 11, 1996, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 20 CONDUCT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 19, added by Ord. No. 726, effective April 23, 1998, renumbered to be Chapter 20 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-20.01. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:

(a)    “Obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic” means to walk, stand, place an object, sit or lie in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or a driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact.

(b)    “Public place” means any area generally visible to public view and includes alleys, bridges, buildings, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, and streets open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.

(§ 3, Ord. 726, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-20.02. Obstruction of movement in public places.
        It shall be unlawful for a person in a public place to intentionally obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

(§ 3, Ord. 726, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-20.03. Sitting or lying down on public sidewalks in designated City zones.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to sit or lie down upon a public sidewalk, sidewalk curb, biking-walking path or any other public right-of-way, or doorways, common stairwells and entrances to buildings or dwellings; or to sit or lie down upon a blanket, chair, stool, or any other object placed upon a public sidewalk, sidewalk curb, biking-walking path, or doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings in the Downtown Area which is depicted and described in the map attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit “A” which is hereby incorporated by this reference.

(§ 3, Ord. 726, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-20.04. Exceptions.
        Sections 4-20.02 and 4-20.03 shall not apply in the following cases and to the following persons:

(a)    Persons standing or sitting on the curb or portion of any sidewalk or street while attending or viewing any parade, festival, performance or similar event permitted under the provisions of this Code;

(b)    Persons sitting upon benches or other seating facilities provided or authorized for such purposes by municipal authorities;

(c)    Any conduct which is in conformity with the terms of any permit granted pursuant to this Code;

(d)    Any conduct in public places that are privately owned where such conduct is in conformity with permission granted by the owner of said premises or by the person entitled to the possession of said premises;

(e)    Persons sitting or lying down due to a medical emergency;

(f)    Persons who, as the result of a disability or injury certified as such by a licensed medical practitioner, utilize a wheelchair or similar device to move about; and

(g)    Any conduct which is in conformity with the standards for outdoor dining uses in the public right-of-way pursuant to this Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 726, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-20.05. Labor dispute.
        It is not the intent of this chapter to prohibit protesting, picketing, demonstrating, leafleting, or any other lawful activity permitted under the laws of the State of California or by the National Labor Relations Act in connection with a labor dispute.

(§ 3, Ord. 726, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-20.06. Public urination and defecation prohibited.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate or defecate in any public place except when using a urinal, toilet or commode located in a bathroom, rest room or other structure enclosed from public view.

(§ 3, Ord. 726, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-20.07. Penalties.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the acts prohibited by this chapter. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(§ 5, Ord. 741, eff. November 23, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 21 SOLICITATION
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 20, Solicitation, added by Ord. No. 724, effective April 23, 1998, renumbered to be Chapter 21 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-21.01. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:

(a)    “Solicitation” or “solicit” is any request made in person seeking an immediate donation of money, food, cigarettes or items of value. Purchase of an item for an amount far exceeding its value, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the purchase is in substance a donation, is a donation for the purpose of this chapter. A person is not soliciting for the purpose of this chapter when he or she passively displays a sign or gives any other indication that he or she is seeking donations, and where he or she does not address his or her solicitation to any specific person other than in response to an inquiry by that person.

(b)    A “person” includes both individual persons and organizations.

(c)    “Aggressively solicit” means to solicit with intent to intimidate another person into giving money, food, cigarettes or items of value.

(d)    “Intimidate” means to engage in conduct which would make a reasonable person fearful or feel threatened.

(e)    “Commercial parking area” shall mean privately owned property which is designed or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one (1) or more commercial establishments.

(§ 3, Ord. 724, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-21.02. Place of solicitation.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit in any of the following places, or for any person to solicit when the person solicited is in any of the following places:

(a)    At any bus stop;

(b)    On private property, unless the solicitor has permission from the owner or tenant;

(c)    Within fifty (50′) feet of an automated teller machine;

(d)    Outdoor dining areas of restaurants or other dining establishments serving food for immediate consumption;

(e)    A queue waiting to gain admission to a place or vehicle, or waiting to purchase an item or admission ticket; or

(f)    While standing in any portion of the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public streets, highways, sidewalks and driveways, to solicit from any person traveling in a vehicle along a public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, public streets, highways or driveways.

(§ 3, Ord. 724, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-21.03. Prohibition of solicitation in unauthorized locations within commercial parking areas.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit from a location within a commercial parking area other than an area within or served by such parking area which is authorized by the property owner or the property owner’s authorized representative for such solicitations. This section shall not apply to a solicitation to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants of the subject premises.

(§ 3, Ord. 724, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-21.04. Exceptions.
        The prohibitions set forth in Section 4-21.03 shall only apply to commercial parking areas where the following occurs:

(a)    The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area establishes a written policy which provides area(s) for lawful solicitation in locations which are accessible to the public and do not interfere with normal business operations of the commercial premises;

(b)    The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such commercial parking area not less than eighteen (18″) by twenty-four (24″) inches in size with lettering not less than one (1″) inch in height. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:

 

NO SOLICITING EXCEPT IN DESIGNATED AREAS OF PARKING LOT. OMC SEC. 4-21.03.

 

(§ 3, Ord. 724, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-21.05. Manner of solicitation.
        It shall be unlawful for a person to intentionally aggressively solicit.

(§ 3, Ord. 724, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-21.06. Penalties.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to do any of the acts prohibited by this chapter. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, or by imprisonment in the County jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(§ 6, Ord. 741, eff. November 23, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 22 SLEEPING AND CAMPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 21, Sleeping and Camping on Public Property, added by Ord. No. 725, effective April 23, 1998, renumbered to be Chapter 22 by Ord. No. 800, effective August 8, 2008.

 

Sec. 4-22.01. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply:

(a)    “Camp” means to pitch or occupy camp facilities, to live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors or to use camp paraphernalia.

(b)    “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters.

(c)    “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, quantities of clothing and other personal effects, hammocks or non-City designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

(d)    “Park” means the same as defined in Section 4-3.202 of this Code.

(e)    “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

(f)    “Street” means the same as defined in Section 1-3.13(t) of this Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 725, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-22.02. Sleeping or camping in certain areas.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep, camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided for:

(a)    Any street; and

(b)    Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved.

(§ 3, Ord. 725, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-22.03. Exceptions.
        This chapter shall not prohibit sleeping or camping in areas designated for such purposes, which are permitted by a governmental entity, or in a caretaker’s residence.

(§ 3, Ord. 725, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-22.04. Signs.
        The Chief of Police, or a designated representative thereof, is hereby authorized to construct, maintain, and post such markings and signs as are determined to be necessary or desirable to give public notice of the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 725, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Sec. 4-22.05. Storage of personal property in public places.
        It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the City Council:

(a)    Any park;

(b)    Any street; and

(c)    Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved.

(§ 3, Ord. 725, eff. April 23, 1998, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

 

Sec. 4-22.06. Penalties.
        It is unlawful for any person to do any of the acts prohibited by this chapter. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(§ 7, Ord. 741, eff. November 23, 1999, as renumbered by § 2, Ord. 800, eff. August 8, 2008)

Chapter 24 PROHIBITION ON ADVERTISING FOR UNLAWFUL SHORT-TERM, TRANSIENT, AND VACATION RENTALS
Sec. 4-24.01. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the proliferation of the illegal land use of unlawful short-term, transient, and vacation rentals and the associated negative effects caused by this illegal land use on the City’s residents, businesses, and visitors, including excessive traffic, reductions in available parking, unlawful conversions of residential property, unlawful conversions of existing affordable housing units into illegal short-term vacation rentals, and inundation of the City’s low-density, quiet residential neighborhoods with commercial visitors and activity that adds traffic, noise, and destroys their quiet, low-density residential character. The City intends this prohibition on advertisements for unlawful short-term, transient, and vacation rentals will apply to the extent of, but not beyond, the limit of the City’s power, consistent with the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 2 of the California Constitution, and any preemptive State or Federal laws.

        This advertising ban applies to advertisements for short-term, transient, and vacation rentals, which are prohibited under the following sections of the Ojai Municipal Code:

(a)    The Ojai Municipal Code provides that any short-term, transient, or vacation rentals of property or a portion thereof for less than thirty (30) days in exchange for any form of compensation is prohibited in all residential zones as this land use is not provided for in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.402, Table 2-2 which lists all allowable land uses in residential zones. Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.302, subdivision (a) requires that any proposed land use be expressly identified as allowed in the applicable requirements for a zone. Under the principle of permissive zoning, any land use not expressly allowed or permitted via a determination of substantially similar use under Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.303 is prohibited. Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.303 provides for the City to approve a land use that is substantially similar to a listed land use, but only after finding that the land use is consistent with the General Plan, would not adversely affect the City’s public health, safety, and general welfare, and that the proposed use meets all other requirements of Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.303. Short-term, transient, or vacation rentals are not consistent with the General Plan’s designated land uses for residential zones.

(b)    The Ojai Municipal Code provides that any short-term, transient, or vacation rentals of property or a portion thereof for less than thirty (30) days in exchange for any form of compensation is prohibited in all commercial and manufacturing zones as this land use is not provided for in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.503, Table 2-4, with the following exceptions:

(1)    Lawfully approved hotels, motels, and timeshare facilities operated in full compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local rules and regulations including all required permits from the City, which are a permitted use in the Commercial-1, Business-Professional, and Village Mixed Use zones as stated in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.503, Table 2-4; and

(2)    Lawfully approved bed and breakfasts operated in full compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local rules and regulations including all required permits from the City, which are a permitted use in the Business-Professional zone and are a conditionally permitted use subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in the Commercial-1 and Village Mixed Use zones as stated in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.503, Table 2-4. A bed and breakfast is not permitted in any single-family or residential zoning district under Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.1703, subdivision (a). A lawfully operated bed and breakfast must conform to the standards of Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.1703, the definition of bed and breakfast in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.3602, the parking requirements of Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.1405, Table 3-5, which requires one parking space for each guest room, plus two (2) parking spaces for the resident family, and all other applicable rules and regulations.

(c)    The Ojai Municipal Code provides that any short-term, transient, or vacation rentals of property or a portion thereof for less than thirty (30) days in exchange for any form of compensation is prohibited in all special purpose zoning districts as this land use is not provided for in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.603, Table 2-6, with the following exception:

(1)    Lawfully approved hotels and motels operated in full compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local rules and regulations including all required permits from the City, which are permitted in the Institutional-Recreational-3 zone as stated in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.603, Table 2-6.

(§ 2, Ord. 862, eff. September 23, 2016)

 

Sec. 4-24.02. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter the following definitions apply:

(a)    “Advertisement” means any writing, picture, video, or other communication in fixed form shown, made available, or presented to the public for the purpose of soliciting a buyer or user of a service, to help sell a product, or to announce the availability of a product or service for purchase or rental by the public.

(b)    “Broker or property manager” means person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind who offers to rent or arranges for persons to rent an unlawful short-term rental or otherwise oversees and facilitates the operation of an unlawful short-term rental.

(c)    “Person” shall mean any person, individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind.

(d)    “Property owner” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind with a beneficial ownership interest in a property.

(e)    “Tenant” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind with a leasehold interest in a property.

(f)    “Unlawful short-term rental” means any short-term, transient, or vacation rental of property or a portion thereof located in the City of Ojai for less than thirty (30) days in exchange for any form of compensation except for lawfully approved hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, and timeshare facilities operated in full compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local rules and regulations including any and all required permits from the City.

(§ 2, Ord. 862, eff. September 23, 2016)

 

 

Sec. 4-24.03. Prohibition on advertising for unlawful short-term, transient, and vacation rentals.
(a)    All persons, including property owners, tenants, and broker or property managers, are prohibited from displaying, transmitting, sending, or posting anywhere, whether online, in a newspaper, or in any other writing, any advertisement or commercial solicitation for an unlawful short-term rental.

(b)    This prohibition does not apply to any advertisement or commercial solicitation for lawfully approved hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, and timeshare facilities located in the City and operated in full compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and local rules and regulations including any and all required permits from the City.

(§ 2, Ord. 862, eff. September 23, 2016)

 

Sec. 4-24.04. Penalties and enforcement.
(a)    Any person, including property owners, tenants, and broker or property managers, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.03 of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided therein. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable as provided in this section.

(b)    In addition to the remedies provided in subsection (a) of this section, the City shall have the power to enforce violations of any provision of this chapter by any lawful means permitted by this Code or by applicable law, including, but not limited to, by imposing administrative remedies under Chapter 6 of Title 1 of this Code and by seeking a civil injunction from a court of competent jurisdiction against any unlawful advertisement maintained in violation of any provision of this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 862, eff. September 23, 2016)

Chapter 25 BEEKEEPING
Sec. 4-25.01. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to provide reasonable regulations for the keeping of bees within the City. The City intends that all beekeeping within the City be conducted in compliance with all State regulations governing bee management and honey production as provided in Division 13 of the California Food and Agriculture Code, Section 29000 et seq.

(§ 2, Ord. 864, eff. November 10, 2016)

 

Sec. 4-25.02. Beekeeping generally allowed.
        It is unlawful for any person to keep bees in the City except in a manner in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 864, eff. November 10, 2016)

 

Sec. 4-25.03. Conditions for beekeeping.
        Each person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind maintaining one or more colonies of honey bees, apis mellifera, shall comply with all of the following conditions:

(a)    Each colony shall be maintained in movable-frame hives.

(b)    A water source with an adequate supply of water shall be provided for the bees at all times.

(c)    Adequate space shall be maintained in the hive to prevent over-crowding and swarming or aggressive behavior. For purposes of this ordinance, “aggressive bee behavior” shall be defined as more than one bee repeatedly striking, but not necessarily stinging, any person or domestic animal at a distance of fifteen (15) feet or more from the front of the hive entrance or a distance of five (5) feet or more from the side or rear of the hive.

(d)    Each colony shall be registered with the County Agricultural Commissioner and kept in compliance with all State regulations governing bee management and honey production as provided in Division 13 of the California Food and Agriculture Code, Section 29000 et seq. Those regulations are enforced by the County Agricultural Commissioner.

(§ 2, Ord. 864, eff. November 10, 2016)

 

Sec. 4-25.04. Number and location of hives.
        Notwithstanding any other provision of the Ojai Municipal Code, beekeeping shall be permissible in all zoning districts and on all property types in accordance with the following restrictions:

(a)    No more than one hive shall be maintained on lots having less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area.

(b)    On lots having at least five thousand (5,000) but less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, no more than two (2) hives shall be maintained.

(c)    On lots having more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in area, no more than one hive shall be maintained for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of additional lot area.

(d)    Hives shall not be placed within twenty (20) lineal feet of any public street, sidewalk, or other public thoroughfare.

(e)    Hives shall not be placed within five (5) lineal feet of a property line.

(f)    Hive entrances shall be directed away from the nearest property line if the hive entrance is closer than twenty (20) lineal feet of a property line.

(§ 2, Ord. 864, eff. November 10, 2016)

 

Sec. 4-25.05. Neighbor notification.
        Upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and before any new hive is installed, a prospective beekeeper shall be required to notify, in writing, all property owners within a one hundred (100) lineal-foot-radius of the hive’s intended location.

(§ 2, Ord. 864, eff. November 10, 2016)

Chapter 26 CANNABIS USE AND CULTIVATION
Sec. 4-26.01. Definitions.
        (a)    “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis or industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code and Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code.

        (b)    “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabinoid preparations to a customer. “Delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer or independently licensed under California law that enables customers to arrange for or facilitate the commercial transfer by a licensed retailer of cannabis or cannabinoid preparations.

        (c)    “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part thereof; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” does not include:

                (1)    Industrial hemp, as defined in Section 11018.5 of the California Health and Safety Code and Section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code; or

                (2)    The weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other products.

        (d)    “Cannabis, adult-use” means cannabis or cannabis products intended to be sold for use by adults twenty-one (21) years of age and over who do not possess physician’s recommendation for the use of cannabis issued in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (California Health and Safety Code; Section 11362.5).

        (e)    “Cannabis accessories” is defined as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.2.

        (f)    “Cannabinoid preparations” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

        (g)    “Medical use” of cannabis or cannabinoid preparations means the use permitted by the Compassionate Use Act (California Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.5) and the Medical Marijuana Program Act (California Health and Safety Code, Section 11362.7 et seq.).

        (h)    “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

        (i)     “Primary caregiver” is defined as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, subdivision (d).

        (j)     “Qualified patient” means a seriously ill person who obtains a written recommendation from a physician licensed to practice medicine in the State of California to use cannabis for personal medical purposes. In addition, persons currently under the care of a physician for a “serious medical condition” as that term is defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, subdivision (h) are presumed to be “qualified patients.”

        (k)    “Adult use” of cannabis or cannabinoid preparations means the use permitted by Section 11362.1 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        (l)     “Manufacture” means the production, preparation, or compounding of cannabis products, including extraction processes, infusion processes, the packaging or repackaging of manufactured cannabis or cannabis products, and labeling or relabeling the packages of manufactured cannabis or cannabis product.

        (m)   A “manufacturing” or “manufacturing operation” means all aspects of the manufacture, extraction and/or infusion processes, including processing, preparing, holding, storing, packaging, or labeling of cannabis products. “Manufacturing” shall also include any processing, preparing, holding, or storing of components and ingredients.

        (n)    A “volatile solvent” shall mean any solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or vapor that, when present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive or ignitable mixtures.

        (o)    A “non-volatile solvent” shall mean any solvent used in the extraction process that is not a volatile solvent, including carbon dioxide.

        (p)    A “microbusiness” shall mean any commercial adult-use cannabis business that engages in commercial manufacturing, distribution, and retail sales of cannabis for adult-use and medical purposes.

        (q)    Any term defined in this section also means the very term as defined in the California Business and Professions Code or the California Health and Safety Code, unless otherwise specified.

(§ 2, Ord. 867, eff. November 15, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 879, eff. December 28, 2017, § 2, Ord. 884, eff. June 21, 2018, § 2, Ord. 886, eff. August 9, 2018, § 2, Ord. 898, eff. June 27, 2019, and § 2, Ord. 903, eff. October 10, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-26.02. Smoking or consumption of cannabis prohibited in public places.
        Within the City’s limits, no person may smoke or ingest cannabis or cannabinoid preparations in any public place or in any location where smoking tobacco is prohibited.

(§ 2, Ord. 867, eff. November 15, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 879, eff. December 28, 2017, § 2, Ord. 884, eff. June 21, 2018)

 

Sec. 4-26.03. Prohibited cannabis and industrial hemp activities.
        (a)    Except as specifically allowed by Sections 4-26.04, 4-26.06, 4-26.08, and 4-26.09 of this Code and applicable State law, all cannabis activity, cultivation, and businesses shall be prohibited within the City of Ojai, regardless of any licenses issued under State law. This prohibition shall not prevent indoor cultivation of cannabis for personal use by a person over twenty-one (21) years of age, conducted in accord with applicable State law and inside a private residence or inside an accessory structure to a private residence located upon the grounds of the private residence. No person may cultivate industrial hemp for personal use.

        (b)    Outdoor cultivation prohibited. No person may cultivate cannabis or industrial hemp outdoors in any zoning district of the City. No conditional use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether ministerial or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity.

        (c)    Commercial indoor cannabis or industrial hemp cultivation prohibited. No person may cultivate cannabis or industrial hemp for any commercial purposes indoors or within a building, structure, shed, or other enclosure anywhere in any zoning district of the City. No conditional use permit, building permit, variance, or any other permit or entitlement, whether ministerial or discretionary, shall be approved or issued for any such use or activity. (§ 2, Ord. 867, eff. November 15, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 879, eff. December 28, 2017, § 2, Ord. 884, eff. June 21, 2018, § 3, Ord. 898, eff. June 27, 2019, and § 2, Ord. 903, eff. October 10, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-26.04. Deliveries and dispensaries.
(a)    To the extent such a prohibition is permitted under California law, delivery of cannabis or cannabinoid preparations within the City for adult use is prohibited absent a City-issued commercial adult-use cannabis delivery license, regardless of any license or other authorization a person may have to engage in any commercial activity related to adult use cannabis outside of the City.

(b)    A person may deliver cannabis or cannabinoid preparations within the City for medical use if he or she first obtains a license from the City to do so. The City Manager or designee shall issue applications and processing guidelines and operating and security regulations for the City medical cannabis delivery license. No such license shall be issued prior to the release of these guidelines, and no license shall be granted that has not complied fully with the application and processing requirements.

(c)    A person may operate a medical cannabis dispensary if the person obtains a license from the City for such facility. The City Manager or designee shall issue applications and processing guidelines for the City medical cannabis business license. No such license shall be issued prior to the release of these guidelines, and no license shall be granted that has not complied fully with the application and processing requirements. The business in question must operate as a medical cannabis delivery service and/or medical dispensary service, providing cannabis to qualified patients and their primary caregivers. The business in question may not engage in any commercial activities related to adult use cannabis within the City’s limits, unless the licensee also obtains a City license to operate a commercial adult-use cannabis dispensary. This is intended as a temporary measure, notwithstanding any other provision of the Ojai Municipal Code, to ensure the City’s residents have safe and reliable access to medical cannabis while the City Council considers a more permanent cannabis policy. This section creates no vested right to engage in any such activity or business.

(d)    A person may operate a commercial adult-use cannabis dispensary or delivery service if the person obtains a license from the City for such facility. The City Manager or designee shall issue applications and processing guidelines for the City commercial adult-use cannabis business license. No such license shall be issued prior to the release of these guidelines, and no license shall be granted that has not complied fully with the application and processing requirements. The business in question must operate only as a commercial adult-use dispensary and/or delivery service for off-site consumption, without any on-site cannabis use or consumption. The business in question shall only sell cannabis and cannabis accessories to persons who are twenty-one (21) years of age or older, and who are in possession of a valid government-issued identification card proving their age. The commercial adult-use cannabis dispensary shall not allow cannabis, cannabis products, or cannabis accessories on the dispensary site to be visible from the public right-of-way, the unsecured areas surrounding the buildings on the site, or the site’s main entrance and lobby. A commercial adult-use cannabis dispensary or delivery service shall display at all times during business hours, its current valid commercial adult-use dispensary and/or delivery service City and State issued licenses in a conspicuous place so that they may be readily seen by all persons entering the business. All commercial adult-use cannabis dispensaries and/or delivery services shall comply with operating and security regulations issued by the City Manager or designee. Only three licenses for commercial adult-use cannabis dispensary and/or delivery services shall be issued. The City Manager shall only issue initial commercial adult-use cannabis dispensary and/or delivery service licenses to existing lawfully operating City and State licensed medical cannabis dispensaries and/or delivery services. This is intended as a temporary measure, notwithstanding any other provision of the Ojai Municipal Code, to ensure the City’s residents have safe and reliable access to commercial adult-use cannabis while the City Council considers a more permanent cannabis policy. This section creates no vested right to engage in any such activity or business.

(e)    All cannabis deliveries and dispensaries, whether medical, adult-use, or both, must comply with the City of Ojai’s application, operating, and security regulations, as adopted by the City Manager, all other applicable local laws, and all applicable State laws and regulations.

(f)    A City licensee shall operate as either a medical cannabis delivery and/or dispensary service or a medical and adult use cannabis delivery and/or dispensary service, if the licensee obtains all required State and City licenses. A commercial adult use cannabis delivery and/or dispensary service alone, without also providing medical cannabis, is prohibited.

(§ 2, Ord. 867, eff. November 15, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 879, eff. December 28, 2017, § 2, Ord. 884, eff. June 21, 2018, and § 2, Ord. 886, eff. August 9, 2018)

 

Sec. 4-26.05. Violations.
(a)    Every act prohibited or declared unlawful by this chapter, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter, shall be punishable as a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney, in accord with Ojai Municipal Code Section 1-2.03. In addition, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided in this Code or under California law.

(b)    No conduct which is protected from criminal liability under State law shall be made criminal by this Code. Conduct or uses which violate the requirements of this chapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and shall be subject to non-criminal remedies, including, but not limited to, administrative citations and abatement.

(§ 2, Ord. 867, eff. November 15, 2016, as amended by § 2, Ord. 879, eff. December 28, 2017, and § 2, Ord. 884, eff. June 21, 2018)

 

Sec. 4-26.06. Cannabis testing laboratories.
(a)    A person may operate a cannabis testing laboratory only if the person obtains a valid cannabis testing laboratory license from the City and obtains a valid cannabis Type 8 Testing Laboratory license from the State. The City Manager or designee shall issue applications and operating regulations for the City cannabis testing laboratory license. No such license shall be issued prior to the release of these regulations, and no license shall be granted that has not complied fully with the application and operating regulations.

(b)    A cannabis testing laboratory permittee shall only test cannabis in a fully enclosed building with adequate ventilation as determined necessary by the Building Official. A cannabis testing laboratory permittee shall not allow cannabis or cannabis products on the laboratory site to be visible from the public right-of-way, the unsecured areas surrounding the buildings on the site, or the site’s main entrance and lobby and shall display its current valid cannabis testing laboratory permit issued in accordance with this section inside the lobby or waiting area of the main entrance to the laboratory site. The permit shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the lobby of the laboratory site. Cannabis testing laboratories shall not have any signage indicating the nature of their operations, except as may be required by applicable law.

 

(c)    No cannabis testing laboratory licensee shall open their laboratory site to the public and no cannabis testing laboratory permittee shall allow anyone on the laboratory site, except for managers, staff, and

 

other persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being there, including contractors, inspectors, and cannabis transporters.

(d)    No person shall conduct any retail sales of any good or services on or from a permitted cannabis testing laboratory site. As required by State law, including Business and Professions Code Section 26053, subdivision (b), the owners and operators of a cannabis testing laboratory are prohibited from owning or operating any other cannabis business or entity, except another cannabis testing laboratory, and are prohibited from possessing any other State or local cannabis license, except for another cannabis testing laboratory license.

(e)    No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume cannabis in any form on or within the laboratory site or possess, consume, or store any alcoholic beverage on the laboratory site.

(f)    Cannabis testing laboratories must comply with the City of Ojai’s operating regulations, as adopted by the City Manager, all other applicable local laws, and all applicable State laws and regulations.

(§ 2, Ord. 884, eff. June 21, 2018)

 

Sec. 4-26.07. Permit fees.
        The City Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for cannabis license applications, amendments, inspections, renewals and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees may be changed or modified by resolution of the City Council. None of the above fees shall be prorated, or refunded in the event of a denial, suspension or revocation of the permit. Failure to pay the applicable fees is grounds for denial of an application.

(§ 2, Ord. 884, eff. June 21, 2018)

 

Sec. 4-26.08. Cannabis microbusinesses.
(a)    A person may operate a cannabis microbusiness if the person obtains an annual valid cannabis microbusiness license from the City and obtains a valid Type 12 Microbusiness license from the State and limits their commercial cannabis activities to manufacturing, distribution, and retail sales. Commercial cannabis cultivation for any purpose is prohibited in any zoning district in the City, even if permissible under a State-issued Type 12 Microbusiness license. A maximum of three (3) licenses for cannabis microbusinesses shall be issued and only to existing cannabis dispensaries lawfully operating in the City. The City Manager or designee shall issue applications and operating regulations for the City cannabis microbusiness licenses. No such license shall be issued prior to the release of these regulations, and no license shall be granted that has not complied fully with the application and operating regulations.

(b)    A microbusiness licensee shall only manufacture cannabis in a fully enclosed building with adequate and safe ventilation as determined necessary by the Building Official. A microbusiness licensee shall not allow cannabis or cannabis products on the manufacturing site to be visible from the public right-of-way, the unsecured areas surrounding the buildings on the site, or the site’s main entrance and lobby, and shall display its current valid microbusiness license issued in accordance with this section inside the lobby or waiting area of the main entrance to the microbusiness site. The license shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the lobby of the manufacturing site. All cannabis manufacturing facilities within a microbusiness shall have a site security plan approved by the City Manager and Chief of Police.

(c)    No microbusiness licensee shall open their manufacturing site to the public and no persons shall be allowed on the site except for managers, staff, and other persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being there, such as contractors, inspectors, and State-licensed cannabis distributors.

 

(d)    No person shall conduct any retail sales of any good or services on or from a cannabis manufacturing site except as a part of a microbusiness operating under a valid State-issued Type 12 license and a valid City-issued microbusiness license. A City microbusiness license will only be issued to an applicant who, at the time of their application, possesses a valid City-issued commercial adult-use or medical cannabis dispensary license.

(e)    No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be on the manufacturing site or operate a cannabis microbusiness in any capacity, including, but not limited to, as a manager, staff, employee, contractor, or volunteer.

(f)    No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume cannabis in any form on, or within fifty (50) feet of, the cannabis microbusiness and no person shall possess, consume, or store any alcoholic beverage on the cannabis microbusiness site.

(g)    Each cannabis microbusinesses shall be limited to a maximum of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet of area to conduct all of the businesses authorized under the microbusiness license, including the previously City licensed cannabis dispensary. Microbusiness facilities shall not have any signage indicating the nature of their operations, except as may be required by applicable law. Cannabis microbusinesses may only be located in the M-1 and MPD Zones and may not be located in any other zone in the City.

(h)    Cannabis manufacturing facilities, cannabis retail facilities, and cannabis distribution facilities within a microbusiness must comply with the City of Ojai’s application, operating, and security regulations, as issued by the City Manager and approved by the City Council, all other applicable local laws, and all applicable state laws and regulations. Applicants for initial and renewal applications for City cannabis microbusiness licenses must pay an application fee, set in the amount adopted by the City Council by resolution. Applicants for cannabis manufacturing licenses will be subject to City Manager approval and the City Manager shall develop application forms and guidelines along with specific criteria to review and approve applications for cannabis manufacturing businesses in the City. The City Manager shall have the discretion to approve only those applicants for available cannabis microbusiness licenses who meet all applicable requirements and who have demonstrated that the proposed cannabis microbusiness will not be adverse to and will best protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare.

(§ 4, Ord. 898, eff. June 27, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-26.09. Cannabis manufacturing.
(a)    A person may operate a cannabis manufacturing business if the person obtains an annual valid cannabis manufacturing license from the City and obtains a valid Type 6, 7, N, or P cannabis manufacturing license from the State. A maximum of two (2) licenses for cannabis manufacturing businesses shall be issued and only to new applicants who do not possess any other cannabis business license issued by the City. A cannabis manufacturing business licensed under this section may only operate as a manufacturing and distribution or manufacturing-only facility and its licensees may not possess any cannabis delivery or dispensary licenses in the City. The City Manager or designee shall issue applications and operating regulations for the City cannabis manufacturing licenses. No such license shall be issued prior to the release of these regulations, and no license shall be granted that has not complied fully with the application and operating regulations.

(b)    A manufacturing licensee shall only manufacture cannabis in a fully enclosed building with adequate and safe ventilation as determined necessary by the Building Official. A manufacturing licensee shall not allow cannabis or cannabis products on the manufacturing site to be visible from the public right-of-way, the unsecured areas surrounding the buildings on the site, or the site’s main entrance and lobby, and shall display its current valid manufacturing license issued in accordance with this section inside the lobby or

waiting area of the main entrance to the manufacturing site. The license shall be displayed at all times in a conspicuous place so that it may be readily seen by all persons entering the lobby of the manufacturing site. All cannabis manufacturing facilities shall have a site security plan approved by the City Manager and Chief of Police.

(c)    No manufacturing licensee shall open their manufacturing site to the public and no persons shall be allowed on the site except for managers, staff, and other persons with a bona fide business or regulatory purpose for being there, such as contractors, inspectors, and State-licensed cannabis distributors.

(d)    No person shall conduct any retail sales of any good or services on or from a cannabis manufacturing site.

(e)    No person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall be on the manufacturing site or operate a cannabis manufacturing business in any capacity, including, but not limited to, as a manager, staff, employee, contractor, or volunteer.

(f)    No person shall smoke, ingest, or otherwise consume cannabis in any form on, or within fifty (50) feet of, the manufacturing site and no person shall possess, consume, or store any alcoholic beverage on the manufacturing site.

(g)    Each cannabis manufacturing business shall be limited to a maximum of four thousand (4,000) square feet of area. Cannabis manufacturing businesses shall not have any signage indicating the nature of their operations, except as may be required by applicable law. Cannabis manufacturing businesses may only be located in the M-1 and MPD Zones and may not be located in any other zone in the City.

(h)    Cannabis manufacturing facilities must comply with the City of Ojai’s application, operating, and security regulations, as issued by the City Manager and approved by the City Council, all other applicable local laws, and all applicable State laws and regulations. Applicants for initial and renewal applications for City cannabis manufacturing licenses must pay an application fee, set in the amount adopted by the City Council by resolution. Applicants for cannabis manufacturing licenses will be subject to City Manager approval and the City Manager shall develop application forms and guidelines along with specific criteria to review and approve applications for cannabis manufacturing businesses in the City. The City Manager shall have the discretion to approve only those applicants for available cannabis manufacturing licenses who meet all applicable requirements and who have demonstrated that the proposed cannabis manufacturing business will not be adverse to and will best protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare.

(§ 5, Ord. 898, eff. June 27, 2019)

Chapter 27 SHARED ON-DEMAND MOTORIZED SCOOTERS
Sec. 4-27.01. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to declare that unless specifically permitted by this Code, shared on-demand motorized scooters are prohibited from being placed in the public right-of-way or on public property, operated in the public right-of-way or on public property, or offered for use anywhere in the City, so as to allow for adequate pedestrian traffic flow and to promote public safety. This chapter is intended to be a proper exercise of the City of Ojai’s police power, to operate only upon persons and entities acting within the City’s boundaries, and not to regulate inter-city or interstate commerce. It shall be construed in accordance with this purpose and intent.

(§ 2, Ord. 902, eff. October 10, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-27.02. Definitions.
“Abandon” means leaving an item unattended for any length of time.

“Public area” means any outdoor area that is open to the public for public use, whether owned or operated by the City or a private party.

“Public right-of-way” means any public alley, parkway, public transportation path, roadway, sidewalk, plaza, or street that is owned, granted by easement, operated, or controlled by the City, state, or any other governmental agency.

“Scooter” means any wheeled device that has handlebars and a floorboard designed to be stood upon when riding.

“Shared on-demand motorized scooter” means any wheeled scooter that is designed to either be powered by an electric motor or other power source, or to be powered by human propulsion, that is accessed via an on-demand electronic or other portal, whether through a smart-phone, access code, I.D. card, or similar method, and is operated by a private entity that owns, manages, maintains and insures the devices for shared use by its customers or members, which are available to its customer or members in unstaffed, self-service locations.

(§ 2, Ord. 902, eff. October 10, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-27.03. Prohibited conduct.
It is unlawful to:

(a)    Display, place, offer, or make available for rent or use any shared on-demand motorized scooter within the City of Ojai.

(b)    Park, leave standing, leave lying, abandon, or otherwise place a shared on-demand motorized scooter in a public area, public right-of-way, public park, or on public property anywhere within the City in a manner that:

(1)    Obstructs travel upon or blocks access to a public right-of-way;

(2)    Poses an immediate public safety hazard; or

(3)    Is otherwise not expressly permitted by applicable laws or administrative regulations.

(c)    Operate a shared on-demand motorized scooter in a sidewalk, public right-of-way, public area, public park, or on public property anywhere within the City.

(d)    Operate a shared on-demand motorized scooter on any bicycle path, trail, public park, or bikeway anywhere within the City.

(e)    Provide or offer for rent or use a shared on-demand motorized scooter anywhere within the City.

(§ 2, Ord. 902, eff. October 10, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-27.04. Impoundment of devices.
(a)    A shared on-demand motorized scooter that is placed, displayed, offered, or made available for rent or use, or abandoned, in a public area, public right-of-way, public park, public property, or other public location in violation of this chapter shall be subject to immediate impoundment by the City.

(b)    Peace officers, traffic control officers, parking enforcement officers, code enforcement officers, those other City officials designated by the City Manager, and any party contracted by the City to impound shared on-demand motorized scooters are authorized to impound any shared on-demand motorized scooter placed, displayed, offered, or made available for rent or use, or abandoned, in a public area, public right-of-way, public park, public property, or other public location in violation of this chapter.

(c)    The City Council may adopt impound fees by resolution, which shall reflect the City’s enforcement, investigation, storage and impound costs.

(d)    No person shall retrieve any impounded shared on-demand motorized scooter from the City except upon demonstration of proper proof of ownership of the device and payment of applicable impound fees.

(§ 2, Ord. 902, eff. October 10, 2019)

 

Sec. 4-27.05. Enforcement.
(a)    Peace officers, traffic control officers, parking enforcement officers, code enforcement officers, and other persons designated by the City Manager shall enforce this chapter and may publish written regulations in the manner required by law for the publication of ordinances and may take any and all other actions rational and necessary to enforce this chapter.

(b)    Any person or entity violating or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable pursuant to Sections 1-2.02 and 1-2.03 of this Code. Each separate shared on-demand motorized scooter maintained or abandoned in violation of this chapter constitutes a separate violation.

(c)    In addition to any other remedies available by law and under this Code, a violation of this chapter is subject to the administrative enforcement provisions of Section 1-2.03 of this Code. Each separate shared on-demand motorized scooter maintained or abandoned in violation of this chapter and each separate day or portion thereof wherein the violation continues constitutes a separate and distinct violation.

(d)    The remedies specified in this chapter shall be cumulative and the City may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation.

(e)    The city attorney may seek injunctive, legal, or other equitable relief to enforce this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 902, eff. October 10, 2019)

Title 5 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Chapter 1 INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT
Chapter 2 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Chapter 3 SEWER SYSTEM
Chapter 4 ANIMALS
Chapter 5 NORDHOFF CEMETERY
Chapter 6 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
Chapter 7 GROUNDWATER CONSERVATION
Chapter 8 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 9 PUBLIC HEALTH PERMITS AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 10 SMOKING REGULATED OR PROHIBITED
Chapter 11 NOISE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 12 STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Chapter 13 SINGLE-USE CARRYOUT BAGS
Chapter 14 ENVIRONMENTALLY ACCEPTABLE PACKAGING MATERIALS
Chapter 15 SMALL ENGINE REGULATIONS

Chapter 1 INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT
Sec. 5-1.01. General provisions.
        This chapter is adopted in accordance with Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution and California Public Resources Code Section 40059 in order to protect public health, safety and well-being, to control the spread of vectors and to limit sources of air pollution, noise and traffic within the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.02. Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by Division 30, Part I, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code Sections 40105—40201, and the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, if defined therein, and if not, as defined in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 6901, et seq., and the regulations implementing the Resource Conservation Recovery Act, as they may be amended from time to time.

(a)    “AB 939” or “Act” means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in part at Public Resources Code Sections 40000, et seq., as it may be amended from time to time.

(b)    “Bulky waste” or “bulky goods” shall mean, without limitation, large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses, white goods, tires and oversized yard waste such as tree trunks and large branches not larger than two (2) feet in diameter and four (4) feet in length, discarded from residential premises in the City.

(c)    “CCR” shall mean the California Code of Regulations.

(d)    “CERCLA” shall mean the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act as set forth at 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601 et seq., as amended.

(e)    “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager or designee.

(f)    “Civic litter containers” shall mean City-owned receptacles located in public areas for disposal of waste generated by the public, which meet the standards of 14 CCR Section 17830, et seq.

(g)    “CIWMB” shall mean the California Integrated Waste Management Board.

(h)    “Collection” shall mean the act of collecting solid waste, at or near the place of generation or accumulation or from any City street, by the City or a franchisee who or which arranged with a responsible person for collection of solid waste.

(i)     “Commercial bins” shall mean bins provided by the City or a franchisee, generally having a volume of three (3) cubic yards designed for the deposit of solid waste, placed at commercial premises for collection of commercial solid waste and charged at commercial rates. Commercial bins do not include construction and demolition bins or residential solid waste containers or roll-offs placed at residential premises.

(j)     “Commercial premises” shall mean all premises in the City, other than residential premises, where solid wastes are generated or accumulated. Commercial premises refers to location and not ownership. The term includes, without limitation, stores; offices; federal, state, county and local governmental institutions; schools; restaurants; hotels; motels; manufacturing, processing or assembling shops or plants; hospitals; clinics; nursing homes; convalescent centers; and dormitories.

(k)    “Commercial solid waste” shall mean all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, generated or accumulated at commercial premises. Commercial solid waste does not include residential solid waste or recyclable material, but includes solid waste generated by multi-family residential units receiving commercial collection services.

(l)     “Construction and demolition materials” shall mean used or discarded construction materials removed from any premises during the construction, renovation or razing of a structure.

(m)   “Container” shall mean any commercial bin, residential solid waste container, vessel, can or other receptacle used for the temporary accumulation, collection and removal of solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes and green waste.

(n)    “Contractor” shall mean any person or entity holding, or required to hold, a contractor’s license of any type under the laws of the State of California, or who performs any construction, demolition, remodeling or landscaping service relating to buildings or accessory structures in the City.

(o)    “Construction” shall mean all building, landscaping, remodeling, addition, removal or destruction involving the disposal of recyclable solid waste.

(p)    “Customers” shall mean persons, including responsible persons, who obtain collection services from the City or its franchisee.

(q)    “Demolition and construction debris” shall mean:

(1)    Discarded materials generally considered to be not water soluble and non-hazardous in nature, including, without limitation, steel, glass, brick, concrete, asphalt material, pipe, gypsum, wallboard and lumber from the construction or destruction of a structure as part of a construction or demolition project or from the renovation of a structure and/or landscaping, and including rocks, soils, tree remains, trees and other vegetative matter that normally results from land clearing, landscaping and development operations for a construction project;

(2)    Clean cardboard, paper, plastic, wood and metal scraps from any construction and/or landscape project;

(3)    Non-construction and demolition debris wood scraps;

(4)    De minimis amounts of other non-hazardous wastes that are generated at construction or demolition projects, provided such amounts are consistent with best management practices of the industry.

(r)    “Drop box” shall mean roll-off bins.

(s)    “Electronic waste” shall have the same meaning as 22 CCR Section 66273.9 for consumer electronic devices that exhibit the characteristic of toxicity.

(t)     “Franchise” or “solid waste franchise” shall mean the right and privilege granted by the City to:

(1)    Arrange for collecting solid waste;

(2)    Transport solid waste to landfills, transformation facilities or other licensed solid waste management facilities; and/or

(3)    Recycle solid waste collected within the City.

(u)    “Franchisee” shall mean a solid waste enterprise, as defined by California Public Resources Code Section 40193, holding a valid solid waste franchise issued pursuant to this chapter.

(v)    “Franchise fee” shall mean the fee or assessment imposed by the City on a franchisee which was granted a solid waste franchise in accordance with this chapter.

(w)   “Gardeners” shall mean persons who possess a City business license or permit for gardening and landscaping maintenance services for hire.

(x)    “Generator” shall mean any person who or entity which produces solid waste.

(y)    “Green waste,” also sometimes referred to as “yard waste,” shall mean a form of solid waste composed of leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic matter generated from landscapes and gardens, separated from other forms of solid waste. Green waste includes trees and bushes but does not include stumps or branches exceeding four (4″) inches in diameter or four (4′) feet in length, dirt, palm fronds, yucca or cactus.

(z)    “Green waste container” shall mean a container, trash can, barrel or cart provided by a customer or a franchisee used and intended for accumulation and collection of green waste.

(aa)  “Gross revenues” shall mean any and all revenue or compensation in any form derived directly or indirectly by a franchisee, its affiliates, subsidiaries, parents and any person or entity in which a franchisee has a financial interest, from the collection, transportation, processing, disposal and other services with respect to solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes and green waste, collected within the City, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, pursuant to a solid waste franchise, permit or license. Gross revenues include, without limitation, monthly customer fees for collection of solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes, special pickup fees, commercial bin and drop box rental and collection fees, fees for re-delivery of commercial bins and drop boxes and revenue from the sale of recyclable solid wastes, without subtracting franchise fees or any other cost of doing business.

(bb)  “Hazardous waste” shall mean any waste materials or mixture of wastes defined as a “hazardous substance” or “hazardous waste” pursuant to RCRA and CERCLA, or HSAA (as hereinafter defined), or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board. Hazardous waste may also include electronic waste when it enters the waste stream. Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two (2) or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term hazardous waste will be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition.

(cc)  “HSAA” shall mean the Carpenter-Presley-Tanner Hazardous Substance Account Act as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 25300, et seq., as amended.

(dd)  “Monthly basis” shall mean a billing period not exceeding thirty (30) days.

(ee)  “Multi-family residential” shall refer to multi-family residences, including apartments and condominiums (in which each unit has separate cooking and bathing facilities) of two (2) or more units at which commercial bins, not residential solid waste containers, are used for the temporary accumulation of solid waste.

(ff)   “Public right-of-way” shall mean any City street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path or any other “public way,” as defined by California Streets & Highways Code Section 18609, and any successor statute.

(gg)  “RCRA” shall mean the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act as set forth at 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901, et seq., as amended.

(hh)  “Recyclable material” shall mean any item which has commercial value and which is sold for compensation or donated to an entity other than a franchisee. Recyclable materials are not part of the waste stream. Recyclable materials lose their character as recyclable materials when placed into the waste stream, thereby becoming solid waste subject to this chapter.

(ii)    “Recyclable solid waste” shall mean a form of solid waste designated as a recyclable solid waste by the City or a franchisee and which is separated by a customer from non-recyclable solid waste. Recyclable solid waste is a part of the solid waste stream which can be reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture, consistent with the requirements of the Act. The term “recyclable solid waste” includes both mixed recyclables which are separated from other solid waste and source-separated single-category recyclable solid waste. Recyclable solid waste does not include those potentially recoverable items which are commingled with non-recyclable solid waste, for example, commingled solid waste and potentially recyclable articles or materials, or recyclable materials.

(jj)    “Recyclable solid waste container” shall mean a container, trash can, barrel or cart provided by a customer or a franchisee used and intended for accumulation and collection of recyclable solid waste.

(kk)  “Residential” or “residential premises” includes single-family residences. The terms do not include hotels, motels, rooming houses, hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent centers, dormitories or barracks or other group living places, or multi-family residential, using commercial bins for the temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste. Residential or residential premises refers to location and not ownership or an interest in property.

(ll)    “Residential solid waste container” shall mean a container (a trash can, barrel or cart) provided by a customer or a franchisee, used and intended for accumulating and collecting residential solid waste. The term does not include multi-family residential bins placed at multi-family units of two (2) or more units, nor those commercial bins used by commercial customers.

(mm)        “Responsible person” shall mean the person responsible for daily operations of every residential or commercial premises located within the City’s jurisdiction, including, without limitation, the property owner.

(nn)  “Self-hauler” shall mean persons disposing of solid waste which they, or occupants of premises for which they are responsible, generated who possess a self-hauler permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

(oo)  “Solid waste” shall mean all putrescible and non-putrescible solid, semi-solid and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes and other discarded solid and semi-solid wastes. “Solid waste” does not include hazardous waste, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40141, radioactive waste regulated pursuant to the Radiation Control Law (Chapter 8 [commencing with Section 114960] of Part 9 of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code) and medical waste regulated pursuant to the Medical Waste Management Act (Part 14 [commencing with Section 117600] of Division 104 of the Health and Safety Code). Medical waste that has been treated and deemed to be solid waste shall be regulated pursuant to Division 30 of the Public Resources Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004, as amended by § 1, Ord. 789, eff. March 28, 2006)

 

Sec. 5-1.03. Prohibited acts.
(a)    Unapproved containers. It is unlawful for any person to keep solid waste in containers or commercial bins other than those approved by the City or a franchisee.

(b)    Unlawful accumulation. It is unlawful for any person to accumulate solid waste for more than seven (7) consecutive days.

(c)    Unlawful storage. It is unlawful for any person to keep upon any premises in the City any solid waste which is offensive, obnoxious or unsanitary.

(d)    Unlawful use of containers. It is unlawful for any person, other than the responsible person or a franchisee authorized by the responsible person, to remove any container from the location where the container was placed for storage or collection, or remove any solid waste from any container, or move the container from the location in which it was placed for storage or collection, or apply any paint or markings (commonly known as “graffiti” or “tagging”) to any solid waste container without the container owner’s prior written approval.

(e)    Unlawful bulky goods disposal. It is unlawful for any person to place bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way without first having made arrangements with the City or a franchisee for the pickup of the bulky goods.

(f)    Unlawful disposal in civic litter container. It is unlawful for any person to place or deposit institutional, commercial, industrial, special or hazardous solid waste in any civic litter container.

(g)    Unlawful burning. It is unlawful for any person to burn solid waste within the City, except in an approved incinerator or transformation facility or other device for which a permit was issued and which complies with all applicable permit and other regulations of air pollution control authorities and provided any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other law, rules and regulations.

(h)    Unlawful disposal. It is unlawful for any person to place solid waste in, or otherwise use the solid waste or recyclable solid waste or green waste containers of another, without the permission of the other person.

(i)     Failure to clean is unlawful. It is unlawful for any person transporting solid waste, including recyclable solid waste or green waste within the City, to fail to immediately clean up, or arrange for the immediate clean up, of any solid waste released, spilled or dumped into the environment during removal or transport within the City by such person.

(j)     Unlawful dumping prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or dispose into the environment (including by abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever) any solid or liquid waste upon any premises within the City, or to cause, suffer or permit any solid or liquid waste to come to be located upon any premises in the City, except in an authorized or permitted solid waste container or at an authorized or permitted solid waste facility.

(k)    Solid waste facilities. It is unlawful for any person to construct or operate a solid waste management facility, including, without limitation, a materials recovery facility, solid waste transfer or processing station, composting facility, a buy-back or drop-off center, disposal facility or a recycling center without first satisfying all City requirements for land use, environmental and other approvals. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(l)     Scavenging. It is unlawful for anyone to scavenge or remove recyclable solid waste set out for collection by a business or resident or deposited in a recycling solid waste container in a public place. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.04. Categories.
        The City Council may establish waste management collection categories, including, without limitation, residential, multi-family residential, commercial, industrial, special, special event, household hazardous waste, recyclable solid waste, green waste and others, and may make or impose solid waste franchise, license, contract or permit requirements which vary for the categories.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.05. Collection required.
        Responsible persons must arrange with the City or a franchisee for solid waste collection services as set forth in this chapter except that responsible persons may instead self-haul solid waste generated or accumulated on premises of which they are in charge after first obtaining a self-haul permit from the City pursuant to this chapter. The City may provide or arrange with a franchisee for the provision of street sweeping services to prevent solid waste from accumulating in City streets. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 789, eff. March 28, 2006)

 

Sec. 5-1.06. Containers—Use.
(a)    Responsible persons must keep in a suitable place one (1) or more containers capable of holding, without spilling, leaking or emitting odors, all solid waste that would ordinarily accumulate on the premises between the time of two (2) successive collections.

(b)    Responsible persons must deposit or cause to be deposited in containers or commercial bins provided or approved by the City or a franchisee all solid waste generated or accumulated on those premises.

(c)    It is unlawful for any person to place ashes which are not cold and free from fire in any container.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.07. Limitations on placement and removal of solid waste.
(a)    It is unlawful for any person to place for collection any solid waste container or commercial bin not conforming with the solid waste container or commercial bin designated by the City or franchisee.

(b)    It is unlawful for any person to place a residential, recyclable or green solid waste container adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection if the container and its contents weigh more than fifty (50) pounds, unless automated collection is used.

(c)    It is unlawful for any person to place a solid waste container or any bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection service before 5:00 p.m. on the day preceding the regularly scheduled collection day. Bulky goods may not be set out for collection unless the responsible person made prior arrangements with the City or a franchisee for pickup of the bulky goods.

(d)    During the hours for collection, residential, recyclable or green solid waste containers must be placed at the location designated by the franchisee holding the residential solid waste franchise and be accessible for mechanized pickup, if mechanized pickup methods are utilized by the franchisee. Except during the time a container is placed for curbside collection, residential, recyclable or green solid waste containers must not be visible from the public right-of-way. Commercial bins must be accessible to the franchisee providing solid waste services at that location.

(e)    Solid waste containers must be removed from any location adjacent to a street or right-of-way not later than 8:00 p.m. on the day following the regularly scheduled collection day.

(f)    No solid waste container or bin may be stored in any front yard or side yard that is visible from a public street.

(g)    A franchisee which was notified by a commercial customer or the City that commercial solid waste service is to be discontinued at a particular premises must remove all of its commercial bins from the premises of the customer who is discontinuing commercial solid waste service within one (1) week after receiving notification that service is to be discontinued.

(h)    No franchisee may place a commercial bin at any location within the City unless the bin is clearly marked with the name, address and telephone number of the owner of the bin and the person responsible for collection from the bin and the type of material which may be placed inside the bin. The identification must be waterproof and legible.

(i)     Each franchisee must maintain its commercial bins within the City in a manner to protect public health and safety and prevent the spread of vectors. Each franchisee must maintain its commercial bins in the City free from any exterior paint or markings commonly referred to as “graffiti” or “tagging.” Graffiti must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of finding or being notified that graffiti exists, and all paint or labels must be replaced and/or repaired.

(j)     Each franchisee must post each of its commercial bins in the City with conspicuous notices on each side of the commercial bin that the commercial bin is not to be used for the disposal of hazardous waste.

(k)    It is unlawful to provide solid waste collection services within 100 feet of a school between 7:30 a.m. and 8:30 a.m. and fifteen (15) minutes before and after school is scheduled to be dismissed.

(l)     Violations of this section are punishable as infractions in accordance with this Code. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.08. Frequency of collection and removal.
(a)    Responsible persons must arrange to have all solid waste on the premises (other than construction and demolition debris) collected and removed at least once a week.

(b)    Each franchisee must collect the contents of each commercial bin (except construction and demolition bins) placed, located or maintained in the City by that franchisee not less frequently than once per week.

(c)    Subject to the requirements for minimum removals per week, responsible persons for commercial premises may specify the frequency of collection of solid waste from the premises and the size and number of commercial or multi-family residential bins required.

(d)    In order to protect residents’ quiet enjoyment of their residential premises, collection from residential premises, both single-family and multi-family, may not be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any day. Collection from commercial premises at locations more than 600 feet from any residential zone and/or use within the City may not be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Collection from commercial premises at locations less than 600 feet from any residential zone and/or use within the City may not be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Subject to the foregoing requirements, collections may be made by arrangement between the responsible person for commercial premises and the franchisee.

(e)    Franchisees must design their routes and times for collection in a manner which minimizes air pollution, traffic, noise and wear and tear on public and private streets and other problems with the potential to adversely affect public health, safety or the environment. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.09. Special collections.
        Customers may order special collections of such things as bulky waste and drop-off bins. The responsible person must make arrangements for the collection and disposal of bulky waste which has accumulated on the premises. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.10. Collection equipment.
(a)    Vehicles used for collecting or transporting solid waste within the City must be leakproof and equipped with a close-fitting cover which is affixed in a manner that will prevent spilling, dropping or blowing of any solid waste upon the public right-of-way during collection or transportation. Equipment used for street sweeping must meet SCAQMD Rule 1186; street sweeper operation must be in accordance with the equipment manufacturer’s operating manual to maximize debris cleanup; and sweeping practices must meet EPA Rule PM-10 for dust control.

(b)    It is unlawful for any person to park, or cause to be parked within the City any vehicle containing solid waste unless the vehicle is free from odor and in a sanitary condition. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004, as amended by § 3, Ord. 789, eff. March 28, 2006)

 

Sec. 5-1.11. Collection trucks—Noise.
        It is unlawful for the noise level of collection vehicles during the stationary compaction process to exceed seventy-five (75) dBA at a distance of twenty-five (25′) feet from the collection vehicle and at an elevation of five (5′) feet from the horizontal base of such vehicles. For penalty, Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.12. Self-haulers.
        A self-haul permit is required to be obtained for the following types of solid waste materials:

(a)    Green waste removed from a premises by a gardening, landscaping or tree trimming contractor as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than as a hauling service and tree trimmings, clippings and all similar materials generated within the City which are collected and transported to a disposal site or facility.

(b)    Construction/demolition debris removed from a premises by a licensed demolition or construction contractor using its own employees and equipment as an incidental part of a total service offered by that contractor rather than as a hauling service.

        Self-haulers and gardeners must deposit solid waste and green waste only at lawfully permitted solid waste facilities or a compostable materials handling facility or a composting facility (as defined in 14 CCR Section 17852, as amended) or other site permitted (or exempt from permitting) by the CIWMB. Each self-hauler and each gardener must report to the City, at a frequency and in a manner determined by the City Manager, the type, quantity, volume, weight and destination of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid wastes, collected in the City and transported from the City, and present gate tickets or receipts to substantiate its disposal reports. Failure to submit required reports to the City is a basis for revocation of a “self-haul” permit. Self-hauling in lieu of regularly-scheduled solid waste collection service is strictly prohibited. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.13. Self-haul permits.
        Before collecting or transporting solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes or green waste, each self-hauler must obtain a self-haul permit from the City. Fees for such permit shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The City Manager is authorized to promulgate administrative policies and procedures for issuing the permits. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.14. Ownership of recyclable solid waste placed for collection.
(a)    Pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 41950(c), recyclable solid waste and recyclable materials become the property of the authorized recycling agent upon being placed at a designated recycling collection location or in a recyclable solid waste container.

(b)    Recycling or disposal of any recyclable solid waste which has become part of the solid waste stream by having been discarded must be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.15. Cleanup responsibility.
(a)    Until solid waste is collected by the City or a franchisee, the responsible person is responsible for cleaning up of solid waste generated, deposited, released, spilled, leaked, pumped, poured, emitted, emptied, discharged, injected, dumped or disposed into the environment, or which is located outside an authorized container on, at or in the premises of which the person is in charge. This cleanup responsibility includes the cleanup of solid waste, including recyclable solid waste and green waste which is located outside an authorized container notwithstanding human or animal interference with commercial bins or containers, wind or other natural forces and whether during storage, collection, removal or transfer. For purposes of this section, the term “disposed into the environment” includes, without limitation, abandoning or discarding barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever.

(b)    Each franchisee must clean up any solid waste spilled or otherwise released or discharged into the environment during its collection, removal or transfer. In addition, each franchisee shall clean up litter in the immediate vicinity of any solid waste storage area (including the areas where collection bins and drop-off boxes are delivered for collection) whether or not such franchisee caused the litter.

        For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.16. Recyclable material.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided, nothing in this chapter limits the right of any person, organization or other entity to sell recyclable material owned by that person, organization or other entity or to donate recyclable material to a charity or any entity other than a franchisee.

(b)    Recyclable material which is mixed with solid waste is considered to have been discarded and to have become recyclable solid waste.

(c)    If the seller or donor of recyclable material pays the buyer or the donee any consideration for collecting, processing, recycling, transporting or disposing of the recyclable material, or providing consultation services which exceed the selling price of the recyclable material, the transaction is not to be regarded as a sale or donation of recyclable material, but as an arrangement for the disposal of solid waste and is subject to this chapter.

(d)    A person receiving a discount or reduction in the collection, disposal and/or recycling service rates for unsegregated or segregated solid waste is not to be deemed to be selling or donating recyclable material and does not fall within this “donate or sell” exception.

(e)    Recyclable solid waste must be placed in recyclable solid waste containers and may not be contaminated with other forms of solid waste or with hazardous waste. It is unlawful for any person to mix recyclable solid waste with other forms of solid waste nor may recyclable solid waste be contaminated with any other substance. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.17. Green waste.
        Green waste must be placed in containers designated for the collection of green waste or tied securely in bundles not exceeding fifty (50) pounds and may not be contaminated with other forms of solid waste or with hazardous waste. It is unlawful for any person to mix green waste with other forms of solid waste, nor may green waste be contaminated with any other substance. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.18. Fees.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided by federal, state or local laws, this chapter or other City Council authorized restrictions, all fees applicable to this chapter will be established by City Council resolution.

(b)    Upon a franchisee’s request, the City Council may, but is not required to, waive fees. Fees may be waived for franchisees collecting green waste.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.19. Service charges.
        The City may impose charges and fees, and set limits on the charges and fees imposed by franchisees, for collecting, inspecting, auditing, recycling, transferring and disposing solid waste and planning for and responding to hazardous materials releases and spills. Rates for charges and fees must be set by ordinance in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 5471. The City’s current monthly rate charges are set forth in Exhibit “A” to the ordinance codified in this chapter and are incorporated herein by reference as if set forth herein in full.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.20. Franchise and customer fees.
        Pursuant to California Public Resources Code Sections 41900, et seq., the City may levy fees upon franchisees and customers for planning and program development and administration regarding solid and household hazardous waste, recyclable solid wastes and/or green waste planning, and for access to collection service, for collection service, inspection, auditing, transfer and disposal and the planning for and response to releases and spills of solid wastes which have the characteristics of hazardous substances. The fees may include charges for the use of disposal facilities and may include costs of preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements, household hazardous waste elements and integrated waste management plans. The City may collect such charges by such means as determined by City Council resolution or ordinance.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.21. Fee waiver.
        By City Council resolution, the City may waive permit fees for collectors of green wastes which transport such green wastes to a compostable materials handling facility, a green material composting facility or other site permitted (or exempt from permitting) by the CIWMB and which report amounts delivered to the facilities to the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.22. Collecting fees and charges.
(a)    Customers must pay the fees and charges imposed by this chapter on a monthly basis.

(b)    Upon delinquency, the City or, if applicable, its franchisee may give written notice to the delinquent customer that the bill is now overdue and payable in full and attempt to collect payment through all legal means.

(c)    If billing is performed by the franchisee, the City is not responsible for collecting any sums due to the franchisee in providing collection services nor does the City guarantee or warrant payment to the franchisee for collection services except the City will assist the franchisee in placing an assessment against the property for the unpaid fees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.23. Liability for fees.
(a)    Every customer and responsible person, including, without limitation, corporate and government entities, is jointly and severally liable for fees and charges of solid waste collection services. All charges, fees, penalties and interest imposed pursuant to this chapter are civil debts owed to the City (or, if applicable, the franchisee) by the customer.

(b)    The responsible person must arrange for collection, recycling and disposal of solid wastes generated or accumulated on those premises in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The fees and charges (plus any interest or penalties) are due and payable on the date stated on the bill. The responsible person is liable for the payment of all charges (plus any interest or penalties) for solid waste services, including any recycling charges.

(c)    If solid waste and recycling service fees and charges (and any applicable interest or penalties) are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date payment was due, solid waste, including recycling, service may be discontinued and collection of the unpaid amount may be undertaken by any lawful means available to the City or to a franchisee providing solid waste services.

(d)    Upon receiving written notice from a responsible person to discontinue solid waste collection services because the premises are vacant, the franchisee providing solid waste service must refund any advance collection fees.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.24. Special assessment.
        The City may initiate proceedings to make delinquent collection service fees and charges a special assessment against properties owned by a customer indebted to the City in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 5470, et seq.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.25. Interest on unpaid assessments.
        All assessments remaining unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of confirmation of the assessment by the City Council bear interest at the rate of seven percent (7%) per year from and after that date.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.26. Penalties generally.
        Penalties may be imposed upon all delinquent and non-compliance charges as follows:

(a)    Basic penalty. A basic penalty of ten percent (10%) of total delinquent charges may be imposed as of the date of the delinquency.

(b)    Additional penalties. An additional penalty of ten (10%) percent may be imposed on the total delinquent charges on each billing date upon which the charges remain unpaid.

(c)    Non-compliance penalty. A penalty of twenty-five (25%) percent of the total charges may be imposed on each billing date for failure to comply with the City’s mandatory recycling requirement as provided in this chapter.

(d)    Limit of penalty. The total penalty imposed may not exceed one hundred (100%) percent of the total of any delinquent amount.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.27. Service termination.
        Should a customer fail or refuse to pay the fee assessed for the collection of solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials in accordance with this chapter, the franchisee must notify the City Manager of the refusal. Failure to pay may, except as otherwise stated, result in the non-collection of solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials, which condition the City Council may determine and may declare to be a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and which condition may be declared to be, if permitted to exist, a public nuisance. The franchisee will continue to collect solid waste, green waste and recyclable materials when directed to do so by the City Manager. In such cases, a franchisee may seek reimbursement from the City and the City will recoup its costs from the responsible person.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.28. Service restoration.
        Where collection service is discontinued, service will not be restored until all required payments (including, without limitation, arrearages, penalties and service charges) are paid in full. The City or franchisee may also require a customer to pay a deposit to guarantee payment for future collection service in an amount determined by the City Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.29. Liability for fines.
        All fines, fees, penalties and interest imposed pursuant to this chapter are civil debts owed to the City by the person fined. In the event that judicial action is necessary to compel payment of any debt owed to the City, the person or persons subject to the fine are also liable for the costs of suit and attorney’s fees incurred by the City to collect the fine.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.30. Franchise requirements.
        It is unlawful for any person, other than a franchisee or the City, to collect residential or commercial solid waste or place a commercial bin for the accumulation of solid waste in the City. For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.31. Collection in emergencies.
        In emergencies where, in the judgment of the City Manager, the particular situation justifies such action, the City Manager may issue limited or temporary franchises to private persons or corporations to perform any of the services covered by this chapter, subject to such reasonable fees, charges and conditions as the circumstances may warrant and as the parties involved may agree upon; provided, that such fees and charges received from, or paid to, any private persons or corporations under this section for any period exceeding fifteen (15) days’ duration shall be approved by the City Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.32. Grant of solid waste franchises.
        The City Council may award an exclusive or one (1) or more non-exclusive solid waste franchises to one (1) or more franchises for collecting, transferring, recycling, composting, and disposing of solid wastes, including recyclable solid wastes and/or green waste, from all or a portion of residential premises in the City, commercial premises, and/or City streets. Nothing in this chapter requires the City Council to award any solid waste franchise and the City may collect solid wastes itself.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004, as amended by § 4, Ord. 789, eff. March 28, 2006)

 

Sec. 5-1.33. Scope of solid waste franchises.
        A solid waste franchise may authorize collecting, transferring, recycling, composting, and disposing of solid wastes, including recyclable solid wastes and/or green waste, from all or a portion of residential premises in the City, commercial premises and/or City streets as specified by the franchise. A solid waste franchise does not authorize providing any other service. A franchisee that wishes to provide other services must apply for such authorizations as may be required and comply with all local laws pertaining to the provision of the services.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004, as amended by § 5, Ord. 789, eff. March 28, 2006)

 

Sec. 5-1.34. Solid waste franchise characteristics.
(a)    A solid waste franchise may be either exclusive or non-exclusive. An exclusive franchise does not explicitly or implicitly preclude the City from granting other solid waste franchises or affect the City’s right to provide its own solid waste collection services.

(b)    All privileges prescribed by a solid waste franchise are subordinate to any prior lawful use and occupancy of public rights-of-way.

(c)    A solid waste franchise is a privilege held in public trust and personal to the original franchisee. A solid waste franchise cannot be validly transferred without obtaining the City’s prior written consent pursuant to this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.35. Franchisee subject to applicable law, police power.
(a)    Except as specified in the solid waste franchise, the franchisee is subject to all applicable laws.

(b)    The City retains every right and power that it has under applicable laws.

(c)    Nothing in any solid waste franchise may be construed to waive any of the City’s governmental rights or police powers.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.36. Franchisee’s employees.
(a)    A franchisee must guarantee a top quality of service by industry standards, i.e., competent, qualified, sober, identifiable and uniformed personnel who serve the public in a courteous, helpful and impartial manner.

(b)    The City may, at its option, require fingerprinting of the franchisee’s employees whose service will cause them to enter onto or work in close proximity to private property.

(c)    Any employee driving the franchisee’s vehicles shall at all times have in his or her possession a valid and appropriate vehicle operator’s license issued by the State of California.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.37. Acts at franchisee’s expense.
        Any act permitted or required by a solid waste franchise or applicable law must be performed at the franchisee’s own expense, unless expressly provided otherwise in the solid waste franchise or applicable law.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.38. Form.
        Solid waste franchises must be in writing, be approved by the City Council and obligate the franchisee to the following:

(a)    To comply with this chapter and all other applicable laws;

(b)    To cooperate with the City in solid waste disposal characterization studies or other waste stream audits;

(c)    To submit information required by the City to meet the reporting requirements of the Act and implement measures consistent with the City’s source reduction and recycling element in order for the City to reach the diversion goals mandated by the Act, to the extent authorized by law; and

(d)    To comply with such additional terms and conditions as the City Council may require in its sole discretion to protect public health, safety and welfare.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.39. Franchise fee.
(a)    A franchisee must pay the City a franchise fee in an amount equal to a percentage of gross revenues as set forth in a solid waste franchise for the privilege of operating a solid waste collection service within the City.

(b)    Unless otherwise specified in a solid waste franchise, a franchisee must pay the franchise fee due to the City on a monthly basis. Payment for each month will be made to the City not later than fifteen (15) days after the end of each month.

(c)    The City’s acceptance of any franchise fee payment may not be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor will such acceptance of such franchise fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable.

(d)    The franchise fee is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment of general applicability.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.40. Indemnification.
        Solid waste franchises must include a hold harmless provision which will, in part, cause franchisees to indemnify the City, its officers, employees, and agents, from any liability arising from the franchisee’s activities. The provision must be in a form approved by the City Attorney’s office and include protections from liability under RCRA, CERCLA and HSAA.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.41. Liability insurance.
(a)    Franchisees must obtain liability insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of California and having a financial rating in Best’s Insurance Guide of not less than “A VII.” The insurance will provide “occurrence” coverage against liabilities for death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way connected with the franchisee’s activities. The insurance will be based upon the nature of the franchisee’s activities, the risks foreseeably involved and will be in the amount prescribed by City Council resolution or City policy. Insurance will name the City and the City’s elected and appointed officials, officers and employees as additional insureds under the coverage afforded. In addition, such insurance will be primary and non-contributing with respect to any other insurance available to the City and will include a severability of interest (cross-liability) clause.

(b)    A copy of the policy or a certificate of insurance along with all necessary endorsements, in a form approved by the City Attorney, must be filed with the City Manager before a solid waste franchise becomes effective.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.42. Business licenses.
(a)    Nothing in this chapter waives the requirement for franchisees to obtain a business license as mandated by this Code.

(b)    Every franchisee claiming a right to continue to provide solid waste services in the City pursuant to California Public Resources Code Sections 49520, et seq., or other law must pay any applicable business tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.43. Continued collection services.
(a)    Franchisees claiming a right to continue to provide solid waste services in the City pursuant to California Public Resources Code Sections 49520 et seq., or other law, must adhere to the same standards for service (including waste stream diversion goals), charge comparable rates for service and pay the same franchise fee as those standards, rates and franchise fees are specified in an exclusive solid waste franchise entered into by the City with another franchisee.

(b)    In accordance with California Public Resources Code Section 49521(b) “rates that are comparable to those established by the local agency” cannot vary more than five percent (5%) above or below those rates set in any exclusive solid waste franchise entered into by the City and made applicable to all continuation franchisees by this chapter.

(c)    If a franchisee claiming a right to continue to provide solid waste handling services in the City pursuant to California Public Resources Code Sections 49520, et seq., or other law, fails to adhere to the same material standards, charge comparable rates for service, pay business taxes and pay franchise fees required by the City of other franchisees with an exclusive solid waste franchise as provided in this chapter, the franchisee will forfeit whatever, if any, continuation rights it may have had. The following standards are deemed by the City to be material: all insurance, bonding and indemnification requirements, rates of service, franchise fee payment, business tax payment and all service standards set in an exclusive solid waste franchise granted by the City.

(d)    A business license issued pursuant to this Code is not a solid waste franchise and does not confer any continuation rights under California Public Resources Code Sections 49520, et seq., or other law.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.44. Application required.
        Persons seeking to begin providing, or continuing to provide, solid waste collection services, must file an application with the City for:

(a)    Grant of an initial solid waste franchise;

(b)    Renewal of a solid waste franchise; or

(c)    Transfer of a solid waste franchise.

        For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.45. Application form.
        Applications will be in a form prescribed by the City Manager and applicable law. A person or franchisee must file a signed application with the City Manager. All applications accepted for filing are available for public inspection unless otherwise provided by applicable law.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.46. Application content.
        Applications for an initial solid waste franchise or a renewal of a solid waste franchise must contain all of the following:

(a)    The names and addresses of the persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect to the application;

(b)    The name and address of the applicant and identification of the applicant’s ownership and control;

(c)    A demonstration of the applicant’s ability to provide solid waste collection services;

(d)    A demonstration of the applicant’s legal qualifications to provide solid waste collection services;

(e)    A description of the applicant’s previous experience in providing solid waste collection services;

(f)    Identification of California cities and counties where the applicant holds a solid waste franchise. If an applicant does not have a solid waste franchise in California, it will provide the information for its operations in other states;

(g)    Identification of whether the applicant seeks to provide residential, commercial or other solid waste services and what area of the City would be served by the applicant;

(h)    Any other information as may be reasonably necessary to demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this Code or applicable law;

(i)     An affidavit or declaration of the applicant or its authorized officer certifying the truth and accuracy of the information in the application, acknowledging the enforceability of application commitments and certifying that the application meets all requirements of applicable law.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.47. Application fees.
        Applicants seeking an initial solid waste franchise, renewal of a solid waste franchise or approval of the transfer of a solid waste franchise must pay to the City a sum of money equal to the sum of money sufficient to reimburse the City for all expenses incurred by it in connection with granting the franchise, renewing the franchise or approving a transfer of the franchise pursuant to the provisions of this Code including, without limitation, legal fees, administrative costs and staff time. A franchise may establish the timing and procedures for making the payments required by this section. Unless a franchise provides otherwise, such payment must be made within thirty (30) days after the City furnishes the applicant with a written statement of the expenses.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.48. Legal qualifications.
        In order to be legally qualified to obtain an initial solid waste franchise, renewal of a solid waste franchise or a transfer of a solid waste franchise:

(a)    The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this Code, applicable law and all requirements of a solid waste franchise.

(b)    The applicant must not have had any solid waste franchise validly revoked by any franchising authority within three (3) years preceding the submission of the application.

(c)    The City will not grant a solid waste franchise if an applicant, during the ten (10) years before submitting the application, was convicted of a crime impugning its truthfulness and/or ability to abide with its legal obligations.

(d)    The City will not grant a solid waste franchise if the applicant files materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds, information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.

(e)    An applicant that otherwise would not be qualified to hold a solid waste franchise under this Code may include additional information demonstrating to the City that the particular circumstances surrounding its act or omission; the steps taken by the applicant to cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence; the lack of involvement of the applicant’s principals; and/or the remoteness of the matter from providing solid waste collection services would make it inappropriate for the City to deny it a solid waste franchise.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.49. Review of application.
        When evaluating an application, the City may consider the following and such other matters as it is required or entitled to consider under this Code or applicable law:

(a)    Whether the applicant substantially complied with this chapter, applicable law and the material terms of any existing City solid waste franchise;

(b)    Whether the quality of the applicant’s service under any existing City solid waste franchise is reasonable in light of community needs and interests;

(c)    Whether the applicant has the financial, technical and legal qualifications to hold a solid waste franchise;

(d)    Whether issuing a solid waste franchise is in the public interest considering the immediate and future effect on public rights-of-way; and

(e)    Whether approving the application would eliminate or reduce competition of solid waste collection services.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.50. City’s approval or denial.
(a)    Before deciding whether to grant a solid waste franchise, the City may hold one (1) or more public hearings or implement other procedures for obtaining public input.

(b)    The City also may grant or deny a solid waste franchise based on its review of an application without further proceedings and may reject any application that is incomplete.

(c)    If the City finds that it is in the public interest to issue a solid waste franchise, an ordinance will be adopted granting a solid waste franchise to the applicant, and the applicant will be entitled to exercise all of the franchise rights provided for therein upon its acceptance of the terms and conditions of such ordinance in writing.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.51. City approval required for transfer.
(a)    Transfers may not occur without the City’s prior written approval. Transfers without the City’s prior written approval will be considered to impair the City’s assurance of due performance. The granting of approval for a transfer in one instance will not render unnecessary approval of any subsequent transfer.

(b)    Franchisees must promptly notify the City of any proposed transfer. If any transfer should take place without prior notice to the City, the franchisee will promptly notify the City that such a transfer occurred.

(c)    At least 120 calendar days before the contemplated effective date of a transfer, the franchisee must submit an application to the City to approve the transfer. The application must provide complete information on the proposed transaction, including details on the legal, financial, technical and other qualifications of the transferee.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.52. Transfers without consent.
        Any transfer without the City’s prior written approval is ineffective and will make a solid waste franchise subject to revocation and to any other remedies available under this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.53. Exceptions.
        The City’s prior consent is not necessary for:

(a)    Pledges in trust or mortgages to secure the operational needs of the franchisee to provide solid waste collection services.

(b)    A solid waste franchise may allow transfers to a franchisee’s affiliate where:

(1)    The transferor notifies the City of the transfer at least sixty (60) days before it occurs, describes the nature of the transfer and submits complete information describing who will have direct and indirect ownership and control of the solid waste franchise after the transfer;

(2)    The transferee warrants that it has read, accepts and agrees to be bound by each and every term of the solid waste franchise and related amendments, regulations, ordinances and resolutions then in effect;

(3)    The transferee agrees to assume all responsibility for all liabilities, acts and omissions known and unknown of its predecessor franchisees for all purposes, including renewal;

(4)    The transferee agrees that the transfer will not permit it to take any position or exercise any right which could not have been exercised by its predecessor franchisees;

(5)    Both the transferor and transferee warrant that the transfer will not in any way adversely affect the City or customers (including by increasing rates); and

(6)    The transferor notifies the City that the transfer is complete within thirty (30) business days after the date the transfer is complete.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.54. Approval does not constitute waiver.
        Approval by the City of a transfer of a solid waste franchise does not constitute a waiver or release of any of the rights of the City under a solid waste franchise, this Code or other applicable law, whether arising before or after the date of the transfer.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.55. Open books and records.
(a)    The City may inspect and copy at any time during normal business hours at a franchisee’s nearest office or at such location within the City as the City may designate, all books and records reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms of this Code, a solid waste franchise, the requirements of any applicable law or when reasonably necessary for the exercise of any right or duty of the City under the same.

(b)    Each franchisee is responsible for collecting the information and producing it. For purposes of this chapter, the term “books and records” will be read expansively to include information in whatever format stored, including, without limitation, information stored in electronic form. Financial books and records must be maintained in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.56. Proprietary information.
        Franchisees will not deny the City access to books and records on the basis that the books and records contain proprietary information; however, all proprietary information received by the City from a franchisee and clearly marked as such will be treated as follows:

(a)    The City will notify franchisee if any third party seeks release of any document marked confidential and the City determines that the document cannot be protected consistent with California law and will withhold release for the maximum period permitted by law so that the franchisee has the opportunity to seek court protection against the release of the requested documents.

(b)    The City will notify a franchisee if it determines that the document can be withheld pursuant to California law and that determination is appealed to a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, so that franchisee may intervene to defend the City’s determination.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.57. Voluminous materials.
        If any books and records requested pursuant to this chapter or a solid waste franchise are too voluminous, or for security reasons or because the requested records contain trade secrets, cannot be copied and moved, a franchisee may request that City inspection of such records take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the City and the franchisee, provided that:

(a)    The franchisee must make necessary arrangements for copying documents selected by the City after its review; and

(b)    The franchisee must pay all reasonable travel and additional copying expenses incurred by the City (above those that would have been incurred had the documents been produced in the City) in inspecting those documents or having those documents inspected by its designee.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.58. Revocation and suspension of solid waste franchises.
(a)    Any solid waste franchise issued under this chapter is subject to revocation or suspension for cause.

(b)    No franchisee which engages in any act or conduct which falls in any one (1) or more of the following categories may collect solid waste in the City:

(1)    The operations of the franchisee are contrary to the public health, safety, well-being, peace, welfare or morals, or found to constitute a public nuisance;

(2)    The franchisee violates any material federal or state law, regulation of the CIWMB, a local enforcement agency, this Code or any material condition of a solid waste franchise affecting public health and safety in the City;

(3)    The franchisee practices, or attempts to practice, any fraud or deceit upon the City, or makes or uses any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations, or practiced any fraud or deceit or made any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations in connection with the issuance or renewal of the solid waste franchise;

(4)    The franchisee becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts or a receiver or trustee is appointed to take over and conduct the business of the franchisee whether in a receivership, reorganization or bankruptcy proceeding;

(5)    The franchisee fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the workers’ compensation, liability and indemnification coverages or cash bond as required;

(6)    The franchisee violates any order or ruling of any regulatory body with respect to solid waste collected within the City, except that such order or ruling may be contested by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith, in which case no violation is deemed to have occurred until a final decision adverse to the franchisee is entered; or

(7)    A franchisee claiming a right to continue to provide solid waste services in the City pursuant to California Public Resources Code Sections 49520, et seq., or other law fails to adhere to the same material standards required by the City of other franchisees with an exclusive solid waste franchise.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.59. Termination of solid waste franchise.
(a)    If the City determines that a franchisee’s performance does not conform with reasonable industry standards in Southern California or as required by the Act, including, without limitation, requirements for implementing diversion, source reduction and recycling, or any other applicable federal, state or local law or regulation, including, without limitation, the laws governing transfer, storage or disposal of solid and hazardous waste, or this chapter, the City will advise the franchisee in writing of such suspected deficiencies. In any written notification of deficiencies, the City will set a reasonable time within which the franchisee is to correct the deficiencies and respond. Unless otherwise specified, a reasonable time for response and correction of deficiencies is thirty (30) days from the receipt of such written notice by the franchisee.

(b)    At the expiration of the time set for response from the franchisee, the City will review the record, including any written response from the franchisee to the notice of deficiencies and resolve the matter in favor of the franchisee, or order remedial action to cure any breach, and inform the franchisee in writing of the resolution. A decision or order of the City is final and conclusive unless the franchisee files a notice of appeal with the City Clerk (with copy to the City Manager and City Attorney) within twenty (20) days after receiving the City’s decision or order. A notice of appeal must state the legal basis and all legal and factual contentions of the franchisee and include all evidence, including affidavits, documents, photographs and videotapes. A notice of appeal will not be accepted by the City Clerk for filing unless accompanied by a notice of appeal filing fee in an amount to be set by City Council resolution.

(c)    Within thirty (30) business days after the City Clerk receives a notice of appeal, the City Manager must decide the matter in a manner most favorable to the franchisee, order remedial actions to cure any breach, terminate the solid waste franchise, order the franchisee to cease operations in the City or refer the matter to the City Council and inform the franchisee, in writing, of the resolution and the basis for the resolution. The decision or order of the City Manager is final and conclusive unless the franchisee files a notice of appeal to the City Council with the City Clerk (and serves a copy, by mail, on the City Manager and the City Attorney) within thirty (30) days after receiving the City Manager’s decision or order. A notice of appeal to the City Council must state the legal basis and all factual and legal contentions of the appellant and include all evidence, including affidavits, documents, photographs and videotapes. A notice of appeal to the City Council will not be accepted by the City Clerk for filing unless accompanied by a notice of appeal filing fee in an amount set by City Council resolution.

(d)    If a matter is referred by the City Manager to the City Council, or a notice of appeal to the City Council is timely filed, the City Council may set the matter for a public hearing and act on the matter or decline to hear the matter. If the City Council elects to hear the matter, the City Clerk will give written notice of the time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the City Council will consider the administrative record, including the notice of deficiency, the franchisee’s response, the statement of resolution by the City Manager and the franchisee’s notice of appeal to the City Council and give the franchisee, or its representatives and any other interested person, a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The proceedings before the City Council will be an informal administrative hearing and the rules of evidence, as generally applied in judicial proceedings, are not applicable.

(e)    Based on the administrative record, the City Council will determine by resolution whether the decision or order of the City Manager should be upheld. A tie vote of the City Council is regarded as upholding the action of the City Manager. If, based upon the record, the City Council determines that the performance of the franchisee is in breach of any material provision of any applicable federal, state or local statute or regulation, or other cause for termination of the solid waste franchise, or decides to order the franchisee to cease operations in the City, the City Council, in the exercise of its sole discretion, may order remedial actions to cure the breach, or terminate forthwith the solid waste franchise or order operations in the City to cease. The decision of the City Council is final and conclusive.

(f)    Nothing in this chapter precludes the City from exercising any other remedy, including criminal prosecution or seeking equitable relief.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.60. Deconstruction and salvage and recovery.
        Every structure planned for demolition must be prepared for deconstruction, salvage and recovery before demolition. It is the owner’s, general contractor’s, and each subcontractor’s responsibility to recover the maximum feasible amount of salvageable recyclable solid waste before demolition. Recovered and salvaged recyclable solid waste from the deconstruction phase must qualify to be counted in meeting the diversion requirements of this chapter. Recovered or salvaged materials may be given or sold on the premises or may be removed to reuse the warehouse facilities for storage or sale. Title to recyclable materials transfers to the transporter when materials leave the construction site.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.61. Deconstruction and salvage recovery diversion requirements.
(a)    It is required that at least the following specified percentages of the waste tonnage of demolition and construction debris generated from every demolition, remodeling and construction project shall be diverted from going to landfill by using recycling, reuse and diversion programs:

(1)    Demolition. Fifty percent (50%) of waste tonnage including concrete and asphalt and fifteen percent (15%) of waste tonnage excluding concrete and asphalt.

(2)    Construction and remodeling. Twenty-five percent (25%) of waste tonnage.

(b)    Separate calculations and reports are required for the demolition and for the construction portion of projects involving both demolition and construction.

        For penalty, see Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.62. Information required before issuance of building permit.
        Every applicant must submit a properly completed “recycling and waste reduction form” prescribed by the Community Development Department, to the City as a portion of the building or demolition permit process. The form must contain an accurate estimate of the tonnage or other specified units of construction and/or demolition debris to be generated from construction and demolition on the site. Approval of the form as complete and accurate is a condition precedent to issuance of any building or demolition permit.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.63. Deposit required.
        Before the City issues any building or demolition permit involving production of solid waste destined to be delivered to a landfill, the applicant must post a cash deposit in an amount set by City Council resolution, but not less than Five Thousand and no/100ths ($5,000.00) Dollars. The Director of Public Works may waive the deposit required for smaller residential projects. The deposit or cash bond will be returned, without interest, in total or in proportion, upon proof to the satisfaction of the building official, that not less than the required percentages or proven proportion of those percentages of the tons of debris generated by the demolition and/or construction project were diverted from landfills and were recycled or reused. If a lesser percentage of tons or cubic yards than required is diverted, a proportionate share of the deposit will be returned. The deposit is entirely forfeited to the extent that there is a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.64. Administrative fee.
        Before the City issues any building or demolition permit involving production of solid waste destined to be delivered to a landfill, the applicant must pay the City a fee in an amount specified by resolution sufficient to compensate the City for all expenses incurred in administering the permit.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.65. On-site practices.
        During the term of the demolition or construction project, the contractor must recycle or divert the required percentages of materials and keep records thereof in tonnage or in other measurements approved by the City that can be converted to tonnage. The City will evaluate and monitor each project to gauge the percentage of materials recycled, salvaged and disposed of from the project. The required diversion of a minimum of the required percentages of the demolition and construction debris will be measured separately with respect to the demolition segment and the construction segment of a project where both demolition and construction are involved. To the maximum extent feasible, on-site separation of scrap wood and clean green waste in a designated debris box or boxes must be arranged in order to allow chipping and mulching for soil enhancement or land cover purposes. In order to protect chipping and grinding machinery, metal and other materials which cannot be chipped or ground must not be placed in such boxes. On-site separation must be undertaken for wallboard to the extent feasible on new construction.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.66. Reporting.
        Within sixty (60) days after a construction or demolition project is complete, the contractor must, as a condition precedent to final inspection and for the City to issue a certificate of occupancy, submit documentation to the City which show compliance with this chapter. The documentation must include a final completed “recycling and waste reduction form” showing actual data of tonnage of materials recycled and diverted, supported by originals or certified photocopies of receipts and weight tags or other records of measurement from recycling companies, deconstruction contractors and/or landfill and disposal companies. Receipts and weight tags will be used to verify whether materials generated from the site have been or are to be recycled, reused, salvaged or otherwise disposed of. If a project involves both demolition and construction, the report and documentation for the demolition project must be submitted and approved by the City before it issues a building permit for the construction project. In the alternative, the permittee may submit a letter stating that no waste or recyclable materials were generated from the project, in which case this statement may be verified by the City. Any deposit posted pursuant to this chapter will be forfeited if the permittee does not meet the timely reporting requirements of this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.67. Administration.
        It shall be the duty of the Director of Public Works or his or her designee to administer the provisions of this chapter and issue such rules and regulations necessary for its implementation. All decisions of the Director of Public Works in this regard are subject to appeal to the City Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.68. Enforcement.
(a)    In addition to the remedies set forth in this chapter, violations of this chapter or a solid waste franchise may be enforced as follows:

(1)    Prosecution as infractions or misdemeanors at the City Attorney’s discretion or as specified by this chapter;

(2)    Abated as public nuisances;

(3)    Enjoined as unfair business practices that are presumed to nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the franchisee operates.

(b)    The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other criminal or civil remedies.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.69. City attorney enforcement authority.
        In addition to any other general functions, powers and duties given to the City Attorney by this Code or California law, the City Attorney is authorized to:

(a)    Prosecute on behalf of the people all criminal and civil cases for violations of this chapter, including, without limitation, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement and suits for injunctive relief;

(b)    Prosecute all actions for the recovery of fines, penalties, forfeitures and other money accruing to the City under this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

 

Sec. 5-1.70. Civil action by authorized recycling agent.
        Nothing in this chapter limits the right of any franchisee to bring a civil action against any person who violates California Public Resources Code Sections 41950—41951, nor will a conviction for a violation exempt any person from a civil action.

(§ 1, Ord. 775, eff. September 10, 2004)

Chapter 2 MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Sec. 5-2.01. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Mobile home” shall mean a structure transportable in one or more sections which, when erected on a site, has a minimum square footage of 800 square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed to be used as a dwelling, with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required utilities and shall include the plumbing and air-conditioning systems contained therein. For the purposes of this chapter, “mobile home” shall also include a trailer coach.

(b)    “Mobile home park” shall mean any area or tract of land where one or more mobile home lots are rented or held out for rent.

(c)    “Lot” shall mean any area or tract of land or portion of a mobile home park designated or used for the occupancy of one mobile home and shall include a site.

(d)    “Temporary trailer park” shall mean any area or tract of land where space is rented or held out for rent to one or more travel trailers or camp cars and which is established for one operation not to exceed eleven (11) days and is then removed.

(e)    “Lot line” shall mean a boundary line of a lot or site designated or used for the occupancy of mobile homes.

(f)    “Front line of lot” shall mean the line separating the lot from the road providing access to the lot for the transportation of a mobile home.

(g)    “Rear line of lot” shall mean a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line and, in the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, a line within the lot parallel to, and at a maximum distance from, the front lot line, having a length of ten (10’) feet or more.

(h)    “Side line of lot” shall mean any lot boundary line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

(i)     “Lot width” shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

(j)     “Lot depth” shall mean the distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured on the mean direction of the side lot lines.

(k)    “Property line” shall mean a boundary line of the area or tract of land on which a mobile home park is located.

(§ 1, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963, and § 16, Ord. 593, eff. September 10, 1981)

 

Sec. 5-2.02. Application of provisions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to mobile homes, other than as permitted in subsection (ii) of subsection (6) of subsection (a) of Section 10-2.1102 of Article 11 of Chapter 2 of Title 10 of this Code, and to mobile home parks; provided, however, they shall not apply to mobile home parks in which no mobile home is parked for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, which type of mobile home park shall be referred to in this chapter as transient mobile home parks. It shall be unlawful for the operator of any transient mobile home park to permit the occupancy of any lot therein by any mobile home for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to temporary trailer parks. The provisions of this chapter are intended to supplement the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the State applicable to mobile homes and mobile home parks and the rules and regulations of the State adopted pursuant thereto.

(§ 2, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963, § 1, Ord. 410, eff. January 22, 1970, and § 17, Ord. 593, eff. September 10, 1981)

 

Sec. 5-2.02.1. Procedure.
        A mobile home park may be allowed as a conditional use pursuant to the provisions governing conditional uses. The provisions of this chapter may be modified by specific provisions in the permit for the mobile home park conditional use if such modification is in the public interests and does not conflict with any of the standards established by State laws or regulations.

(§ 2, Ord. 410, eff. January 22, 1970)

 

Sec. 5-2.02.5. Limitations of occupancy.
        No person shall occupy a mobile home, except as permitted in subsection (6) of subsection (a) of Section 10-2.1102 of Article 11 of Chapter 2 of Title 10 of this Code, or motor vehicle as a living or sleeping accommodation for a period in excess of twenty-four (24) hours, except within a mobile home park.

(Ord. 367, eff. May 25, 1966, as amended by § 18, Ord. 593, eff. September 10, 1981)

 

Sec. 5-2.03. Minimum park size.
        The minimum total area of each mobile home park shall be twenty (20) acres.

(§ 3, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.04. Maximum park density.
        The maximum density of lots within a mobile home park shall be seven and 26/100ths (7.26) lots per acre.

(§ 4, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.05. Park setback requirements.
        Mobile homes shall not be parked within a mobile home park at distances from the park boundaries of less than the following:

(a)    The minimum distance from the park boundary, if the boundary abuts a public street, shall be forty (40′) feet.

(b)    The minimum distance from the front property boundary shall be forty (40′) feet.

(c)    The minimum distance from the side and rear boundaries not abutting a public street shall be fifteen (15′) feet.

(§ 5, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.06. Walls and landscaping.
        Each mobile home park shall be enclosed by a solid masonry wall not less than six (6′) feet in height. Where boundaries of the park do not abut a public street, such wall shall be immediately adjacent to the boundaries. Where the boundaries abut a public street, the wall shall be set back even with the minimum setback line of the adjoining property so that the setback line of the mobile home park wall will present a prolongation of the minimum setback line of the adjoining property. If adjoining properties have different minimum setback lines, the greater of the two (2) setback lines shall be applicable to the mobile home park minimum setback line for the wall required. Yards provided by setback requirements shall be landscaped and kept well maintained.

(§ 6, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.07. Lots.
        The minimum lot size shall be 4,000 square feet. The minimum lot width shall be forty (40′) feet, and the minimum lot depth shall be eighty (80′) feet.

(§ 7, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.08. Lot setbacks.
        Mobile homes shall not be parked within, and no structure shall be placed upon, a mobile home lot at distances from the lot boundaries of less than the following:

(a)    The minimum distance from the front line of the lot shall be twenty (20′) feet.

(b)    The minimum distance from the side or rear line shall be five (5′) feet; provided, however, where a side or rear yard abuts an access road, public parking area, or walk, the setback shall be a minimum of ten (10′) feet.

(§ 8, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.09. Mobile home spacing.
        The following minimum spacing requirements shall apply:

(a)    The minimum distance between the mobile home and the building shall be twenty (20′) feet.

(b)    The minimum distance between the mobile home and an awning or between awnings shall be ten (10′) feet.

        Awnings shall not project closer than five (5′) feet to a lot line.

(§ 9, Ord. 103, as amended by § 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.10. Patios.
        A concrete patio of not less than 400 square feet shall be installed on each lot.

(§ 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.11. Storage lockers.
        A maximum of 200 cubic feet of storage locker may be provided for each lot. Storage lockers may be located on the lot or in locker compounds off the lots.

(§ 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.12. Park and recreation space.
        Each mobile home park shall have a park and recreation area or areas with a total size of not less than 200 square feet multiplied by the number of lots in the mobile home park. The minimum size of each park and recreation area shall be 3,000 square feet.

(§ 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.13. Sanitary sewers.
        Each lot shall be provided with a connection to the City’s sanitary sewer system. Mobile homes which cannot be connected to the City’s sanitary sewer system shall not be used for human habitation. Bituminous fiber pipe and cement asbestos pipe shall not be used as sanitary sewer drainage pipe.

(§ 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.14. Electrical and telephone service.
        All electrical and telephone service lines within a mobile home park shall be placed underground.

(§ 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-2.15. Laundry drying yards.
        All outside clothes drying yards within a mobile home park shall be enclosed with a solid fence not less than six (6′) feet in height.

(§ 1, Ord. 316, eff. May 22, 1963)

Chapter 3 SEWER SYSTEM
Article 1. Waste Disposal
Sec. 5-3.101. Statement of purpose.
        The sewerage system of the City shall discharge effluent into the treatment plant of the Oak View Sanitary District. Under contractual arrangements between the City and the Oak View Sanitary District, the City shall regulate the flow of certain wastes into such treatment plant.

(§ 101, Ord. 224, as amended by § 1, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964)

 

Sec. 5-3.102. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:

(a)    “Public sewer” shall mean any sewer owned or maintained by the City, whether inside or outside the City. The term as here used shall not include storm drains or channels for the conveyance of natural surface waters.

(b)    “City Manager” shall mean the City Manager of the City or his authorized representative or deputy.

(c)    “Industrial waste water” shall mean the waste water arising from or associated with an industrial operation. Such operation shall include the production or refining of petroleum, the production, processing, packing, or canning of fruits, vegetables, meat, or beverages, the laundering of clothes in public laundries or public self-service laundries, the production of fertilizers, keeping of livestock, and operation of dairies, the production or dyeing of textiles, the production of soap or other detergents or chemicals, the cleaning of tanks, tank cars, or barrels, the plating of metals, the processing or reclamation of refuse, all kinds of manufacturing, and other similar operations. It shall also include the washing of equipment or spaces used in industrial operations. It shall not include waste waters from the operation of restaurants, hotels, schools, hospitals, vehicle service stations, wash racks, garages, establishments for the regeneration of water softening apparatus, or places of retail business. It shall not include waste waters from lunch rooms, toilets, or wash rooms in industrial establishments.

(d)    “Floatable oil and grease” shall mean the oil and grease floating to the surface of a sample of water when it is retained for one hour in a quiescent condition in a vessel with vertical walls, filled to the depth of thirty (30) centimeters.

(e)    “Floatable hydrocarbon oil” shall mean the amount of hydrocarbon oil floating to the surface of a sample of the water under the same conditions as prescribed in subsection (d) of this section.

(§§ 202 through 206, Ord. 224, as amended by § 2, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964)

 

Sec. 5-3.103. General restrictions.
        Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged into any public sewer or any opening leading to a public sewer of the City any of the following:

(a)    Any earth, sand, rocks, ashes, gravel, plaster, concrete, glass, metal filings, metal objects, or other materials which will not be carried by the sewage stream nor anything which may obstruct the flow of sewage in the sewer, nor any object which will cause clogging of a sewage pump or sewage sludge pump;

(b)    Any garbage which has not first been shredded so that no particle is more than one-fourth (¼″) inch in any dimension, nor any garbage containing broken glass;

(c)    Any solid or semisolid material, such as garbage, trimmings, cuttings, offal, or other wastes produced in the processing of meats, fruits, vegetables, food stuffs or similar material except garbage produced in the preparation of or arising in connection with the serving of meals at the premises;

(d)    Any compound which may produce a strong odor in the sewer or sewage treatment plant;

(e)    Any volatile liquid or substance which can produce a toxic or flammable atmosphere in the sewer;

(f)    Any overflow from any septic tank or cesspool, or any liquid or sludge pumped from a cesspool or septic tank, except at such place and in such manner as may be prescribed by the City Manager.

(g)    Any storm water or any run-off from any field, roof, yard, driveway, or street;

(h)    Any material which will cause damage to any part of the sewerage system or abnormal sulfide generation or abnormal maintenance or operation costs of any part of the sewerage system or which may cause any part of the sewerage system to become a nuisance or a menace to public health, or a hazard to workers, or which will cause objectionable conditions at the final point of disposal of the sewage, or which will cause the sewage to transgress the concentration limits set by Regional Water Pollution Control Board No. 4.

(§ 301, Ord. 224)

 

Sec. 5-3.104. Special restrictions: Vehicle servicing stations.
(a)    Sand-and-Oil Interceptor Required. Any station maintained for the servicing or repair of roadway vehicles shall install and maintain a sand-and-oil interceptor. Waste waters from toilets shall not be allowed to pass through this interceptor, but all waste waters arising from the servicing and repair of vehicles shall pass through this interceptor before discharge to a public sewer of the City. If the service station does not include facilities for the washing of more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have an operating fluid capacity not less than six (6) cubic feet and an accessible effective water surface not less than four (4) square feet. “Accessible effective water surface” is defined as a surface which is easily accessible for cleaning and which at the same time will retain oil floating on the surface of water passing through the trap under conditions of use. If the service station has facilities for washing more than one vehicle at a time, the interceptor shall have an operating fluid capacity of at least twelve (12) cubic feet and an accessible effective water surface of at least six (6) square feet, and shall be as much larger than this as is necessary so that a seven (7) day accumulation of sand and oil will not together fill more than twenty-five (25%) per cent of the fluid capacity. The interceptor shall be designed so as to retain any oil and grease which will float and any sand which will settle. It shall be water-tight and structurally sound and durable. It shall be easily accessible for cleaning and also for inspection of the City Manager.

(b)    Prior Installation of Interceptors Permitted. Any interceptor legally and properly installed at a vehicle service station on or before October 14, 1957 shall be acceptable as an alternative to the interceptor specified in subsection (a) of this section, provided such interceptor is effective in removing sand and oil and is so designed and installed that it can be inspected and properly maintained. If the City Manager finds either by engineering knowledge or by observation that an interceptor is incapable of retaining adequately the sand and oil in the waste water flow from a service station, he shall condemn such interceptor and declare that it does not meet the requirements of this article.

(c)    Design of Interceptor. The City Manager shall maintain a file, available for public use, of suitable designs of sand-and-oil interceptors. This shall be for informational purposes. Installation of an interceptor of a design shown in this file, or of any design meeting the size requirements set forth in this article shall not impute any liability to the City for the adequacy of the interceptor under actual conditions of use. It shall not relieve the owner or proprietor of responsibility for keeping sand and oil out of the sewer. If the interceptor is not adequate under the conditions of use, he shall construct one which is effective in accomplishing the intended purpose.

(d)    Approval of Interceptor. The Plumbing Official shall not approve the plumbing of a vehicle servicing or repairing station if it does not have a sand-and-oil interceptor meeting the requirements of this article.

(e)    Maintenance of Interceptor. The sand-and-oil interceptor of a vehicle servicing station shall be properly maintained. It shall be cleaned as often as is necessary to assure that sand and oil do not accumulate in sufficient amount to impair the efficiency of the interceptor, or in such amount that sand and oil will pass out with the effluent. When an interceptor is cleaned, the accumulated sediment and floating material shall be removed and legally disposed of otherwise than to a sewer. An interceptor is not considered to be properly maintained if for any reason it is not in good working condition. It is not considered to be properly maintained if sand and oil accumulations total more than twenty-five (25%) per cent of the operating fluid capacity. The owner of any service station, the lessee and sub-lessee if there be such, and the proprietor, operator, or superintendent of such station are individually and severally liable for any failure of proper maintenance of such interceptor.

(§§ 401, 402, 403, 404, and 405, Ord. 224)

 

Sec. 5-3.105. Special restrictions: Water treating wastes.
(a)    Water treating apparatus. It shall be unlawful for any person to install, replace, or enlarge any apparatus for treating all or any part of the water supply to a property discharging sewage into a public sewer of the City if such apparatus is of a kind that produces, in any phase of its use or servicing, any waste water with a mineral content higher than that of the water supply of the property, except that such apparatus may be installed if arrangements are made to dispose of the waste water by other means than discharge to the sewers of the City or to the ground in any place where it might pollute any usable water supply. Such apparatus shall include zeolite and resinous ion exchange softeners or demineralizers, stills, processes using electro-osmosis, and other like devices. The regeneration of ion exchange softeners in commercial soft water service establishments and the addition of ion exchange materials to water softeners shall be included in the operations limited by this section.

        It shall be unlawful for any person to use or to maintain in a condition of readiness for use any apparatus which it would be illegal to install under this section if such apparatus was installed on or after October 14, 1957.

(b)    Approval by City Manager. Any person desiring to install, enlarge, or replace any water-treating apparatus of the kind described in subsection (a) of this section, or to regenerate ion exchange water softeners in a commercial establishment, or to add ion exchange materials to any water softeners, shall submit to the City Manager a letter describing the intended installation or alteration and describing the arrangements which will serve to prevent improper discharge of the waste water. Within ten (10) days the City Manager shall reply, stating whether or not the disposal arrangements are adequate to insure against the addition of mineral salts to the sewage or the ground. No person shall install, replace, or enlarge a water-treating apparatus of the kind described in subsection (a) of this section, nor may he operate such a unit, if installed on or after October 14, 1957, nor may he regenerate an ion exchange water softener in a commercial establishment, nor may he add ion exchange materials to any water softeners unless he has a letter from the City Manager approving as satisfactory the proposed arrangements for the disposal of waste waters. Such apparatus may be operated only so long as the method of waste water disposal is as approved by the City Manager. Alterations in the method of disposal may be made only after communication to the City Manager and receipt of a letter of approval as in the first instance.

(c)    Inspection by City Manager. Any person installing or operating water-treating apparatus of the kind described in subsection (a) of this section shall make such apparatus accessible to the City Manager for inspection and shall make such reports as the City Manager may request as to the operations of the apparatus.

(d)    Exemptions. Any water-treating apparatus which has a rated capacity less than five (5) gallons in an eight (8) hour period shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. Multiple units installed to supply water to the same points of use shall be considered as a single apparatus for the purposes of this subsection.

(e)    Other requirements applicable. Nothing in this section shall be construed as lessening the applicability of other requirements of this article.

(§§ 501 through 505, Ord. 224, as amended by § 3, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964)

 

Sec. 5-3.106. Special restrictions: Industrial waste waters.
(a)    Approval for discharge by the City Manager. Any person desiring to discharge industrial waste water into a public sewer of the City in an amount exceeding 100 gallons in any one day shall submit a letter to the City Manager presenting information as to the kind and size of the industrial operation producing the waste water, the quantity and characteristics of the waste water, detailed plans for any pretreatment facilities planned to prevent the discharge of improper materials to the sewer, and any other information requested by the City Manager. If the City Manager shall find that the quality of the water and the facilities for discharge to the sewer conform to the requirements of this article and Code, that any required pretreatment facilities are adequate, and that sewer capacity is available, he shall reply approving the discharge of that waste water to the sewer. The letter of approval shall state the nature of the industry and the nature and amount of flow which the applicant may discharge to the sewer, and shall include any restrictions which the City Manager finds necessary in order that the sewerage system may serve its intended purpose. If he finds that the proposed discharge will not be lawful under this article or other applicable laws, he shall so notify the applicant.

(b)    Alterations of approved discharge methods. If the discharger wishes to make alterations of pre-treatment facilities or alterations of connections to the sewer, or if he wishes to discharge additional wastes or to discharge wastes in excess of the amounts which have been approved, or wastes of a different kind, he shall submit to the City Manager a letter requesting approval of such alteration. The City Manager shall treat this in the same manner as an original application under subsection (a) of this section.

(c)    Effective date. It shall be unlawful, on and after January 15, 1958, for any person to discharge to a public sewer of the City, directly or indirectly, any industrial waste water which is not approved as to kind and amount by a letter from the City Manager, and any such discharge shall be in accordance with any restrictions and conditions imposed in the City Manager’s letter of approval.

(d)    Requirements. Except as hereinafter set forth, no industrial waste shall be discharged to a public sewer unless it conforms to the requirements set forth hereinbefore for all discharges to public sewers, and no industrial waste water flow exceeding one hundred (100) gallons in any one day shall be discharged to a public sewer unless it conforms also to the following requirements:

(1)    The content of dissolved solids shall at no time exceed 1,250 milligrams per liter;

(2)    The content of chloride ion shall at no time exceed 175 milligrams per liter;

(3)    The content of boron shall at no time exceed 2.0 milligrams per liter of boron, except that this restriction shall not be applied unless and until it is found that the boron content of the total sewage outflow from the City averages more than 1.0 milligrams per liter, this average to be determined from analyses of four consecutive samples on different days in one week;

(4)    The content of total oil and grease shall at no time exceed 600 milligrams per liter;

(5)    The content of floatable oil and grease shall at no time exceed 25 milligrams per liter;

(6)    The content of floatable hydrocarbon oil shall at no time exceed 10 milligrams per liter;

(7)    The standard five-day biochemical oxygen demand shall at no time exceed 1,000 milligrams per liter;

(8)    The suspended solids content shall at no time exceed 1,000 milligrams per liter;

(9)    The dissolved sulfide content shall at no time exceed 0.1 milligram per liter; and

(10)  The pH shall at no time be below 6.

(e)    Manholes: Sampling Compartments. Every discharge of industrial waste to a public sewer of the City shall be routed through a manhole or sampling compartment approved by the City Manager, which manhole or sampling compartment shall be available and accessible at all times to authorized representatives of the City Manager. If reasonably practical, this structure shall be on public property but shall be built at the expense of the industry using it. The piping to and from the manhole or sampling compartment shall be arranged so that observations may be made of all of the industrial sewage flow without prior admixture of any waste water from toilets, washrooms, kitchens, or lunch rooms, and so that the industrial sewage flow can be plugged off without impeding the flow of sewage from such other sources.

(f)    Report of measurement of flow. The City Manager may require that any person discharging industrial waste water to the sewer shall install a measuring device and the measurements of the flow be taken and reported to the City. Where the discharge of waste of low pH (acid wastes) is a possibility, he may require the installation of pH recording equipment, with submission of records to the City. He may require that the industry provide for the inspection of the quality of the waste water or performance of the waste water pretreatment facilities by an impartial third party, with reports to the City. He may require that a permittee report to the City from time to time on the amount of materials processed by the industry or other information which he finds necessary to evaluate the effect of the wastes on the sewerage system.

(g)    Approval for discharge tentative. Every letter of approval for the discharge of industrial waste waters shall be considered tentative, and the approval shall be revoked by the City Manager when it is found that the discharge which the letter approves is in fact in violation of this article or Code, or that the information furnished by the applicant in applying for the approval was misleading, or that the discharge is causing harm, nuisance, or an unreasonable burden in the operation of the sewerage system.

(h)    Other requirements applicable. Nothing in this section shall be construed as lessening the applicability of other requirements of this article.

(§§ 601 through 608, Ord. 224, as amended by § 4, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964)

 

Sec. 5-3.107. Waivers.
        If a waste water contains or may contain constituents which will cause it to fail to conform to any of the requirements of Sections 5-3.103, 5-3.104, 5-3.105, or 5-3.106 of this article for sewage or industrial waste discharges, but if the City Manager finds that the discharge will not cause harm to the sewerage system nor an unreasonable or inequitable burden in the operation of the system, and that it will not cause deterioration of the quality of the sewage effluent of the City, he may grant approval for discharge to the sewer, with waivers or modifications of the requirement which would not be met. In his letter of approval he shall include a statement regarding the requirement waived, with reasons as to why the waiver is reasonable. A copy of such letter shall be filed with the City Clerk.

(§ 701, Ord. 224)

 

Sec. 5-3.108. Discharge to storm drains, pits, and land.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, or cause to be discharged, into any storm drain or storm water channel or natural watercourse, whether currently carrying water or not, or into any pipe or waterway leading to such drain, channel, or watercourse any solid or fluid material which will impair the useful functioning of such drain, channel, or watercourse, or which will cause expense to the City in maintaining the proper functioning of the same, a public nuisance, public hazard, or the detrimental pollution of natural surface or subsurface waters.

        It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or discharge, or cause to be deposited or discharged, into any sump which is not impermeable, or into any pit or well, or on the ground, or into any storm drain or watercourse any material which, by seeping underground, or by being leached, or by reacting with the soil, can cause such alterations of usable underground waters as to be detrimental and as to be beyond the range of the effects of ordinary nonindustrial land uses on underground waters into which such wastes may seep, or which may violate any requirement of Water Pollution Control Board No. 4.

(§§ 801 and 802, Ord. 224)

 

Sec. 5-3.109. Appeals.
        Any aggrieved person may appeal a decision of the City Manager, in respect to the provisions of this article, to the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code. The action of the City Council shall be final insofar as the authority of the City is concerned.

(§ 901, Ord. 224, as amended by § 4, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Article 2. Sewer Charges
Sec. 5-3.201. Sewer service fees.
        The rates and charges for the use and service of the sewerage system of the City shall be established by resolution of the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 126, as amended by § 1, Ord. 252, eff. June 17, 1959, § 5, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964, § 2, Ord. 381, eff. May 10, 1967, § 1, Ord. 430, eff. June 30, 1971, fees operative July 1, 1971, Part 1, Ord. 503, eff. April 10, 1975, and § 2, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 5-3.202. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this article, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows:

(a)    “Apartment house” shall mean any building containing three (3) or more dwelling units with separate plumbing facilities, but shall not include any building commonly known as a hotel, motel, or auto court.

(b)    “Rooming house” shall mean any building other than an apartment house, motel, hotel, or auto court where two (2) or more rooms are rented to others for lodging purposes but without separate cooking facilities.

(c)    Water closet as used in this article shall not include urinal.

(§ 2, Ord. 126, as amended by § 1, Ord. 252, eff. June 17, 1959)

 

Sec. 5-3.203. Collection of charges.
        The charges established in this article shall be payable annually for each fiscal year (July 1 to June 30) based upon the service furnished on the first Monday in March of the preceding fiscal year; provided, however, where new facilities are installed or changes in existing facilities or uses are made, either of which would increase the basis for charges established in this article, the new charges or the increase in charges resulting therefrom shall be immediately payable in advance for the remainder of the fiscal year to which such charges apply. Such charges for a partial fiscal year shall be collected by the Finance Director. As to all charges based upon the situation existing on the first Monday in March of each year, and as to all charges for a partial year uncollected on such date, the City hereby elects to have such charges collected on the tax roll for fiscal year 1959-1960 and for all subsequent fiscal years in the same manner, by the same persons, and at the same time as, together with and not separately from, its general taxes.

(§ 1, Ord. 252, eff. June 17, 1959, as amended by § 4, Ord. 747, eff. October 26, 2000)

 

Sec. 5-3.204. Sanitation Fund.
        All moneys collected pursuant to the charges imposed by the provisions of this article shall be placed in the Sanitation Fund created by Section 8-2.201 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 252, eff. June 17, 1959)

 

Article 3. Sewer Connections
Sec. 5-3.301. Permit required.
        No person shall connect any sewage disposal line or facility from property located within the City to the sewage disposal system of the City without first having secured a permit therefor from the City Manager or his designee. Such permit shall be issued for service to property within the City limits after payment by the applicant to the City of the applicable fees as specified in this article; provided, however, the City Manager or his designee shall not issue any such permit if in his opinion facilities of the City’s sewage disposal system are inadequate to accept and properly process the load anticipated from such connection.

(§ 1, Ord. 247, eff. February 16, 1959, as amended by § 6, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964)

 

Sec. 5-3.302. Sewer connection fees.
        Fees for connections to the City’s sewer system shall be established by resolution of the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 247, eff. February 16, 1959, as amended by § 3, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961, § 7, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964, § 2, Ord. 381, eff. May 10, 1967, Part 1, Ord. 502, eff. March 27, 1975, and § 1, Ord. 590, eff. June 25, 1981)

 

Sec. 5-3.303. Additional fee.
(§ 1, Ord. 247, eff. February 16, 1959, as amended by § 4, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961, and § 8, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964; repealed by § 1, Ord. 381, eff. May 10, 1967; reenacted by § 1, Ord. 398, eff. August 21, 1968; repealed by § 3, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 5-3.304. Reimbursement fees.
        Where the City has advanced funds for sewer extensions, appropriate reimbursement shall be made to the City in accordance with the provisions of Section 5-3.306 of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 247, eff. February 16, 1959)

 

Sec. 5-3.305. Costs of connections.
        Any person connecting any sewage disposal line or facility to the sewage disposal system of the City shall bear all costs of making the physical connection and procuring and installing the required facilities, subject to the following exceptions:

(a)    The City at its own cost and expense will make necessary engineering studies for the location, size, and establishment of the grade of sewer lines to be located upon City streets or property and to become the property of the City; and

(b)    The City may participate in the cost of certain facilities as provided in Section 5.3.306 of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 247, eff. February 16, 1959)

 

Sec. 5-3.306. Participation by the City in the cost of constructing sewer line extensions.
        The City, when it has funds available therefor, upon an order of the Council, may pay to a person installing a sewer line in a City street or on City property a portion of the funds required to finance such installation under the following circumstances:

(a)    When the facilities to be installed will benefit areas other than those owned or being subdivided or developed by the person who proposes to make and pay for the installation, the City may pay the portion of the costs which represents the amount of such benefit.

(b)    When the cost of the facilities to be procured and installed is increased because the City requires a design more expensive than that required to serve adequately the area owned or being subdivided or developed by the person who proposes to make and pay for the installation, the City may pay the portion of the costs directly resulting from such increased design.

(c)    Expenditures of funds by the City pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be made only where the Council finds that there is a reasonable probability that such expenditures will be recovered by the City from the subdivider, developer, or owner of land benefited by such expenditures. The owner, subdivider, or developer of such land benefited shall be required to reimburse the City for all costs so advanced for the benefit of such land before being allowed to use the facilities so constructed.

(§ 1, Ord. 247, eff. February 16, 1959)

 

Sec. 5-3.307. Reimbursement contracts where City does not participate.
        When any person installs, or agrees to install, lines connecting with the City sewerage system, which sewer lines can be or will be used in the disposal of sewage from property not owned by the person who installs such sewer lines, and the City does not participate in the cost thereof pursuant to the provisions of Section 5-3.306 of this article, the City may contract with such person to impose the charges provided in this section upon any persons connecting to such sewer lines within the ensuing fifteen (15) years and to reimburse such person in the amount of such charge so collected. For any connection to a sewer line of the City with respect to which the City has entered into a contract pursuant to the provisions of this section, there shall be charged and collected, in addition to all connection fees set forth in this article, a fee determined by the Council, after a recommendation by the City Manager, to bear the same ratio to the total cost of such line as the use anticipated to be made of such line by the applicant fifteen (15) years after completion bears to the total use thereof anticipated to be made fifteen (15) years after the completion thereof.

(§ 1, Ord. 247, eff. February 16, 1959, as amended by § 1, Ord. 424, eff. May 13, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-3.308. Use of connection fees.
        All moneys collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be placed in the Wastewater Capital Reserve Fund created by Section 8-2.601 of Article 6 of Chapter 2 of Title 8 of this Code and shall be used only for such purposes as are permitted by law.

(§ 1, Ord. 247, eff. February 16, 1959, as amended by § 4, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 5-3.309. Connections to sewer mains to be maintained by owners.
        All connections, including the wye or saddle at the sewer main, shall be maintained at the expense of the property owner.

(§ 1, Ord. 389, eff. October 25, 1967)

 

Article 4. Service to Properties Outside the City
Sec. 5-3.401. Special permits required.
        Properties located outside the City may connect with and discharge sewage into the City public sewers when, but only when, a special permit for the specific service is granted by the Council and remains unrevoked. Such permits may be issued upon the conditions specified therein. Applications for such permits shall be made on forms prescribed by the City Manager. The Council reserves the right to revoke any such permit in its discretion at any time for any reason deemed appropriate by it. No such permit, however, shall be deemed revoked until ninety (90) days after notice is delivered to the permittee of the action of the Council electing to revoke. Such notice shall be deemed delivered when mailed, postage prepaid, to the permittee at the address given by him on his application for a permit or a change of address for such purpose filed by him with the City Clerk.

(§ 9, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964)

 

Sec. 5-3.402. Restrictions.
        The provisions of Article 1 of this chapter, except the provisions of Section 5.3.108 of said article, shall be applicable, insofar as possible, to sewer service rendered to properties and persons outside the City. The violation of any restriction contained in said provisions shall be specific cause for the revocation of a permit for such service.

(§ 9, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964)

 

Sec. 5-3.403. Sewer connection fees outside the City.
        The sewer connection fee for any approved connection outside the City shall be the standard fee established pursuant to Section 5-3.302 of Article 3 of this chapter, plus an additional amount to be determined and established by resolution of the Council, said amount representing payments in lieu of sewer bond assessments.

        Any person connecting any sewage disposal line or facility from property outside the City to the City’s public sewer shall bear all the costs of making the physical connection and procuring the installation of the required facilities, plus all engineering and inspection fees related thereto. All such work shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the Public Works Construction Standards of the City and shall be approved by the Director of Public Works, or his designate, who may require “as-built” engineering drawings reflecting the facilities precisely as and where constructed and the posting of cash or suitable surety therefor in a sufficient amount to guarantee that such “as-built” drawings shall be for the City’s permanent files.

(§ 9, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964, as amended by § 1, Ord. 412, eff. July 8, 1970, § 1, Ord. 414, eff. November 11, 1970, § 1, Ord. 434, eff. September 16, 1971, Part 2, Ord. 502, eff. March 27, 1975, § 2, Ord. 590, eff. June 25, 1981, and § 5, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 5-3.404. Sewer service fees outside the City.
(§ 9, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964, as amended by § 2, Ord. 381, eff. May 10, 1967, § 2, Ord. 412, eff. July 8, 1970, § 2, Ord. 414, eff. November 11, 1970, and Part 2, Ord. 503, eff. April 10, 1975; repealed by § 6, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 5-3.405. Use of fees.
(§ 9, Ord. 334, eff. March 25, 1964; repealed by § 6, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

Chapter 4 ANIMALS
Article 1. Poundmaster
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 4, consisting of Sections 5-4.01 through 5-4.08, added by Ord. No. 97, and amended by Ord. Nos. 125, 198, 241, 290, 297, 305, 309, and 329; Sections 5-4.09 through 5-4.38 added by Ord. No. 290, amended by Ord. Nos. 297, 309 and 332; Section 5-4.15.1 added by Ord. No. 309, Section 5-4.39 added by Ord. No. 330, Section 5-4.40 added by Ord. No. 297 and Section 5-4.41 added by Ord. No. 393. Entire chapter repealed and replaced by Section 1, Ord. No. 422, effective April 23, 1971.

 

Sec. 5-4.101. Poundmaster.
        The office of Poundmaster is hereby created and established. It shall be the duty of the Poundmaster to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter and the resolutions of the Council adopted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The City may delegate the performance of such duties by entering into a contract with any proper person or organization, public or private, which will undertake to perform such duties. The Poundmaster and any deputies or other persons having the responsibility, either directly or through contract, for administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter shall also be referred to as the Animal Control Department.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.102. Peace officers.
For the purposes of enforcing and carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the Poundmaster and his or her deputies shall have the authority of peace officers.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Article 2. License Tags
Sec. 5-4.201. License tag requirements.
Every person who owns, harbors, or keeps any dog over the age of four (4) months for thirty (30) days or longer shall obtain a current license and license tag issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and stamped with the current license year and shall maintain such license in an active status for the remainder of the current license year. A license shall cease to be active on the date of expiration, as set forth in Section 5-4.202 of this article, of the rabies vaccination of the dog for which the license is obtained. The license tag obtained shall be attached to a substantial collar or harness which shall be worn by the dog at all times, except as provided in Section 5-4.903 of Article 9 of this chapter. Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any dog found without a current license tag may be taken up and impounded by the Poundmaster or any peace officer.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 477, eff. January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 5-4.202. License applications.
The license and license tag required by the provisions of this chapter may be obtained by displaying an acceptable rabies vaccination certificate, furnishing the information required by the provisions of this section, and paying the proper fee to the County Animal Control Department. Such information shall include the name, sex, breed, age, and color of the dog for which the application is made, the microchip number, whether the dog has been sterilized, and the address and, when available, the telephone number of the person owning, harboring, or keeping such dog. The official receiving such information shall record it on the receipt to be given for the payment of the license fee. If the dog is unaltered, written documentation in accordance with Section 5-4.702 must be provided by the owner. A rabies vaccination certificate, to be acceptable, shall show that the vaccination has at least one year to run before its expiration date. The expiration date of the rabies vaccination shall be recorded on the receipt.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 477, eff. January 1, 1974; § 2, Ord. 883, eff. March 15, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-4.203. License period.
        The license period for the license tag required by the provisions of this chapter shall be one year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.204. License fees.
        The fee for the annual license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be ten dollars ($10.00) for each dog, whether male or female. When a veterinarian’s certificate verifying that a dog is spayed, neutered, or rendered temporarily infertile by a birth control method acceptable to the Director of the Animal Control Department is submitted with the application, the fee shall be four dollars ($4.00). When a dog first requires the license after July 1 of any calendar year, the license fee for the remainder of the calendar year shall be one-half the fee charged for a full year.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 443, eff. December 9, 1971, fees operative January 1, 1972, and § 1, Ord. 477, eff. January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 5-4.205. Due dates and penalties.
        The information and fees required by the provisions of this chapter shall be due on or before the last day in February of each year, except that as to any dog acquired or brought into the City after the last day in February or which attains the age of four (4) months after the last day in February, the information and fee shall be due within thirty (30) days after its acquisition, or within thirty (30) days after it is brought into the City, or when such dog attains the age of four (4) months, whichever is later. Any person purchasing a license tag after the due date shall be charged a late penalty which shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) and which shall be paid in addition to the regular license fee.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 477, eff. January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 5-4.206. Issuance of license tags.
        Upon the receipt of the required information, accompanied by the payment of the proper fee and the display of an acceptable rabies vaccination certificate, the dog shall be licensed, a written receipt shall be issued to the applicant, and a metal license tag shall be mailed to the applicant’s address. Each tag shall be serially numbered and stamped with the words “Ventura County” and shall be stamped with the year for which it is issued. The Animal Control Department shall maintain a record of the licenses so issued, which record shall be kept on file in the office of the Animal Control Department, open to reasonable public inspection, until the expiration of the current year.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 477, eff. January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 5-4.207. Lost license tags.
        If a license tag issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter is lost, a duplicate tag may be obtained from the Animal Control Department upon paying a fee of one dollar ($1.00) and either surrendering the receipt obtained for the lost license tag or certifying under penalty of perjury that a tag was obtained and that the receipt cannot be found.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 477, eff. January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 5-4.208. Transfer of licenses.
        In the event there is a change in the ownership of a dog licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter during the license year, the new owner may have the current license transferred to his or her name upon the payment of a transfer fee of one dollar ($1.00) and the surrender of the license receipt.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 477, eff. January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 5-4.209. License inspectors.
        The Animal Control Department may appoint animal license inspectors for the purpose of inspecting animals required to be licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to ascertain if such animals are properly licensed, issuing the licenses required hereunder, and collecting the required license fees. Inspectors shall be compensated at the rate of fifty ($0.50) cents for each license issued. In the event a license fee collected by an inspector includes a penalty imposed pursuant thereto, the inspector shall receive, in addition, fifty (50%) percent of the penalty collected as compensation. However, no full-time City or County employee shall receive compensation for the collection of dog license fees or penalties. Each inspector shall promptly account to the Animal Control Department for all funds collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and shall pay over such funds within forty-eight (48) hours after their receipt. Such inspectors shall be paid for their services on or about the fifth (5th) day of each month following the rendition of such services.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.210. License violations.
        Every person who counterfeits a dog license tag, or who attaches a license tag issued under the provisions of this chapter to any dog other than the one for which such tag was issued, or who obtains a dog license tag or dog kennel license and, in doing so, states as true any material matter which he or she knows to be false shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Article 3. Animal Pound
Sec. 5-4.301. Definition of owner.
        “Owner,” as used in this chapter, shall include any person who has the legal right to custody of an animal.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.302. Disposing of impounded dogs.
        The Poundmaster shall feed and care for any dog impounded as provided in this chapter until it is disposed of as provided by law. If such dog is not a “diseased or injured dog,” as defined in Section 5-4.304 of this article, and is not suspected of having rabies, the person owning such impounded dog may redeem it at any time within five (5) days after it is taken up by describing it, proving ownership to the satisfaction of the Poundmaster, paying all applicable fees, and obtaining, when necessary, the dog license tag provided by this chapter. When the Poundmaster knows the address of the owner of an impounded dog, the five (5) days for redemption shall begin when written notice of such impounding is deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, directed to such address. However, an owner may waive the five (5) day redemption period in writing. If the impounded dog bears a license tag issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, such notice shall be mailed to the address shown on the copy of the receipt for such license tag on file in any City office. If any dog impounded as provided in this chapter is not so redeemed within such five (5) days, or if the owner of such dog is unknown to the Poundmaster or fails or refuses to comply with any of the requirements of redemption as provided in this chapter, or if the owner has waived the redemption period in writing, the Poundmaster shall dispose of such dog according to the provisions of this chapter. In disposing of an impounded dog, the Poundmaster may, in his or her discretion, destroy the dog in a humane manner, or he or she may sell such dog for a pet to any person who obtains a license tag as required by this chapter and signs a written agreement to feed the dog and provide it with a good home, or he or she may sell such dog to a State chartered humane society. When a dog is returned to the Pound within ten (10) days after such sale, the buyer or other person returning the dog shall not be given the discretion to determine what disposition shall be made of the dog. The price to be charged for any dog sold as a pet or to any State chartered humane society shall be as prescribed by the Poundmaster.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.303. Animals for medical research.
        In addition to the authorization contained in this chapter for the disposition of impounded dogs, the Poundmaster may, in his or her discretion, transfer title to any impounded animal to any institution engaged in the diagnosis or treatment of human or animal diseases, or in research for the advancement of veterinary, dental, medical, or biologic sciences, or in the testing or diagnosis, improvement, or standardization of laboratory specimens, biologic products, pharmaceuticals, or drugs provided that:

(a)    Such institution has the approval of the United States Department of Agriculture pursuant to the Federal Animal Welfare Act and, when applicable, the Board of Public Health of the State;

(b)    Such institution and its facilities have been inspected and approved in writing by the County Health Officer at least once within twelve (12) months before delivery of the animal to it;

(c)    A dog has been impounded in an animal pound for at least ten (10) consecutive days after the time for redemption has commenced; and

(d)    The Poundmaster or his or her delegate shall keep a record containing a general description, the date of impoundment, the date of transfer, and the name of the transferee of each dog transferred pursuant to the provisions of this section.

        In lieu of all other fees and charges set forth in this chapter, the Poundmaster shall charge for each dog and cat or other small animal so transferred the price set by the schedule of fees adopted by the Council.

        As used in this section, “institution” shall include, but not be limited to, laboratory, firm, association, corporation, copartnership, and educational institution. Neither the City nor its officers, agents, or employees shall be liable for the good faith transfer of any animal pursuant to the provisions of this section.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.304. Diseased or injured animals.
        The Poundmaster shall, after impounding any animal, determine whether it is a “diseased or injured animal” as defined in this section. A “diseased or injured animal” shall mean any animal not suspected of rabies which is apparently either diseased, sick, injured, disabled, infirm, or crippled. When a diseased or injured animal is impounded, the Poundmaster is authorized to procure any necessary emergency medical treatment for such animal and shall, without undue delay, exercise reasonable diligence in locating and notifying the owner of the location and condition of the animal. When reasonable effort fails to locate the owner, or when an owner, after having been located, refuses to accept responsibility for further medical treatment of a diseased or injured animal, the Poundmaster may destroy such animal in a humane manner. When a licensed veterinarian advises that a diseased or injured animal is in severe pain and not likely to survive though provided medical treatment, it may be destroyed in a humane manner by the Poundmaster, but the Poundmaster shall first exercise reasonable diligence to notify the owner that the animal was injured and should be destroyed. If a diseased or injured animal is not destroyed pursuant to the provisions of this section, the Poundmaster shall dispose of such animal as otherwise provided in this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.305. Temporary animal pound.
        The Poundmaster is authorized, whenever he or she deems it necessary, to temporarily impound animals within an enclosure other than the animal shelter, and such an enclosure shall constitute a temporary animal pound. Notice that an enclosure is an animal pound shall be given by placing a sign to that effect on the gate or other entrance thereto.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.306. Livestock running at large.
        It is unlawful for any person owning, harboring, or controlling any livestock to permit such livestock to run at large upon the private property of another, without the permission of the person owning or occupying such private property, or upon the streets or public places of the City. The Poundmaster is authorized, whenever he or she deems it necessary, to deputize individuals who are properly equipped to capture and transport livestock which is running at large in violation of the provisions of this chapter. Each animal captured or transported pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be impounded at the risk of the owner, and the owner or keeper of such animal shall be liable for all fees for reclaiming such animals provided for in this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.307. Keeping stallions.
        Upon the approval of the County veterinarian, a stallion may be kept, when authorized by land use regulations, in a substantial corral of wood or other construction six (6′) feet in height and under conditions to prevent escape and to protect people or other animals. A minimum substantial corral is defined as being constructed of four (4″) inch by four (4″) inch posts, eight (8′) feet on center, anchored twenty-four (24″) inches in Portland cement with two (2″) inch by six (6″) inch rails set two (2′) feet apart.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.308. Disposal of impounded livestock.
        Upon the impounding of any livestock, the Poundmaster shall notify the owner thereof, if the name of such owner is known to him or her, of such impounding. If the name of the owner is not known, the Poundmaster shall publish a notice once in one or more newspapers published in the City describing the animal, stating that it has been impounded, and, if not reclaimed, that it will be sold to the highest bidder at the time and place therein fixed, not less than ten (10) nor more than fifteen (15) days after the publication of such notice. At such sale the Poundmaster may bid, on behalf of the City, the amount required to reclaim, and, if such bid shall be the highest bid, the Poundmaster shall direct the manner of disposal. All livestock impounded may be reclaimed by the owner thereof at any time prior to its disposal by the Poundmaster upon:

(a)    Furnishing proof of ownership satisfactory to the Poundmaster; and

(b)    Paying the fees required by the provisions of Section 5-4.309 of this article.

The City and its officers, agents, and employees shall not be liable to any person for the delivery of any animal to any person claiming to be the owner thereof, or to be acting on his or her behalf, and the sale of any animal by the Poundmaster in conformity with the provisions of this chapter shall vest title thereof in the purchaser.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.309. Fees for reclaiming livestock.
If any impounded livestock is reclaimed, the Poundmaster shall collect all applicable fees before delivering the animal to its owner.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.310. Liability.
All animals specified in this chapter which may be impounded shall be kept at the risk of the owner, and neither the City nor its officers, agents, or employees shall be liable to the owner for the delivery in good faith of any such animal to a person claiming to be, but not in fact being, entitled to reclaim the same. Neither the City nor its officers, agents, or employees shall be liable for injury or disease to any animal incurred while such animal is being captured, transported, or impounded.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.311. Interfering with duties of Poundmaster.
Every person who breaks open a dog pound, animal shelter, temporary pound, or pound vehicle or who wilfully resists, delays, or obstructs the Poundmaster in the discharge of, or attempt to discharge, any duty of his or her office shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.312. Kennel licenses required.
        It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, or operate a dog kennel, as defined in Section 5-4.313 of this article, without having a current and valid license therefor issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 5-4.313. Dog kennel defined.
        As used in this chapter, “dog kennel” shall mean any place or premises where five (5) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months are kept for commercial purposes. For the purposes of this section, “commercial purposes” shall include boarding, grooming, breeding, training, selling, and related purposes.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.314. Kennel license fee period.
The dog kennel license required by this chapter may be obtained by a written application to the Poundmaster or Tax Collector. Such application shall be in duplicate and shall state the name and address or location of the kennel, the names of the persons owning, managing, or operating such kennel, the number and approximate ages of the dogs currently kept therein, and the purposes for which they are kept. Such application shall be accompanied by a certificate from the County Health Officer stating that such kennel was inspected and found to be in a sanitary and healthful condition. If applicable, the application shall also include documentary evidence in accordance with Section 5-4.702 showing that any breeding dog(s) being kept at the kennel are in compliance with Section 5-4.702 and have received all recommended vaccinations and have had proper veterinary care. Such application shall also be accompanied by an annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). If such application, certificate, and fee are proper, a copy of the application shall be signed and dated by the Poundmaster or Tax Collector and issued to the applicant as his or her current kennel license. The license period for the kennel license required by this chapter shall be one year, beginning January 1 and ending December 31. Any kennel license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire and cease to be current at the expiration of the license year for which it was issued. Renewal shall be made only upon an application, certification, and payment of the fee in the manner provided for the issuance of an original kennel license.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 3, Ord. 883, eff. March 15, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-4.315. Revocation of kennel licenses.
Any kennel license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the County Health Officer whenever, in his or her opinion, the dog kennel for which such license was issued is not being maintained in a sanitary or healthful condition or is not provided with adequate care and supervision for the dogs confined therein. The revocation shall become effective thirty (30) days after a notice of such defective condition is deposited in the mail, postage prepaid, directed to the persons owning or operating such kennel at the address shown in the application, unless, within such thirty (30) days, the noticed condition is corrected to the satisfaction of the County Health Officer. After such revocation becomes effective, the revoked license shall be invalid for any purpose whatsoever.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.316. Zoning.
The requirements of this chapter shall be deemed to be in addition to, and not in limitation of, the requirement of any applicable zoning laws or ordinances. A kennel license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall cease to be valid if the operation of a dog kennel should become a prohibited use for the zone in which it is then located.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Article 4. Rabies Control
Sec. 5-4.401. Rabies vaccinations required.
Every person owning, harboring, or keeping any dog shall, within thirty (30) days after such dog attains the age of four (4) months, cause it to be vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian with a vaccine of a type known as “canine chick embryo origin modified live-virus rabies vaccine” or of a type known as “canine nerve tissue killed-virus rabies vaccine.”

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.402. Rabies vaccinations.
The Poundmaster shall provide facilities for rabies vaccinations of dogs or shall arrange for such vaccinations at clinics operated by private veterinary groups or associations. he or she shall provide blank forms for the vaccination certificates required by this chapter. Failure to display a valid vaccination certificate

upon reasonable demand by the Poundmaster shall be prima facie evidence of non-vaccination. No charge in excess of the actual cost therefor shall be made for vaccinations at such facilities or clinics.

        The vaccinations required by the provisions of this chapter may be obtained either at such facilities or clinics or from a licensed veterinarian of the owner’s choice.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

 

Sec. 5-4.403. Isolation of suspected dogs.
        The Poundmaster shall take up and place in isolation any dog, licensed or not, which, in the opinion of a licensed veterinarian or the County Health Officer, displays symptoms suggestive of rabies. Such isolation shall be at an animal pound unless the owner of such dog, with the approval of the County Health Officer, arranges with a licensed veterinarian for such isolation in a private animal hospital or clinic. Any dog placed in such isolation shall be kept strictly confined and under such observation as may be required by the County Health Officer. Such isolation shall continue for at least fourteen (14) days from the date the symptoms suggestive of rabies were first observed. Such isolation may be continued for a period longer than fourteen (14) days if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the County Health Officer, such longer period is necessary. At the expiration of such fourteen (14) days, or longer period, any dog confined at an animal pound shall be released upon the payment of the fees required by Section 5-4.408 of this article if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the County Health Officer, such dog does not have rabies.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.404. Responsibilities of veterinarians.
        It shall be the duty of every licensed veterinarian to report immediately to the Poundmaster any animal observed by him or her which is diagnosed by him or her as having rabies or is suspected of having rabies.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.405. Reporting bite cases.
        It shall be the duty of every physician, or other person, to report to the County Health Officer the name and address of any person treated for a bite inflicted by any animal, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies control.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.406. Biting animals.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Poundmaster shall take up, impound, and isolate for fourteen (14) days following the date of the alleged bite any animal of a type subject to rabies that is reported to have bitten any person, whether or not such animal has been vaccinated with rabies vaccine and whether or not such animal displays any symptoms suggestive of rabies. The animal shall be impounded and isolated in the manner provided in Section 5-4.403 of this article for the isolation of dogs suspected of having rabies.

        Any person who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older may, however, make a written request to the Poundmaster for the isolation of such biting animal, either in facilities provided by a licensed veterinarian, or in a licensed boarding kennel, or upon the private premises of the person making such request. If such request is approved by the Poundmaster, such biting animal shall not be taken up and impounded but shall instead be kept strictly confined and isolated in such veterinarian’s facilities or on such private premises for the isolation period. The Poundmaster shall post such private premises, in a conspicuous place thereon, with a notice that an animal is being confined thereon to be observed for rabies. Upon the termination of the isolation period, animals isolated in an animal pound shall be released upon the payment of the fees required by the provisions of Section 5-4.408 of this article if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the County Health Officer, the animal does not have rabies, and animals isolated upon private property shall be released from such isolation if, in the opinion of any licensed veterinarian or the County Health Officer, the animal does not have rabies.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.407. Violations of isolation requirements.
        It shall be unlawful for any person who has obtained approval for the keeping of a biting animal confined and isolated upon his or her private premises, as provided in Section 5-4.406 of this article, to fail for any reason to keep such animal continuously confined and isolated upon his or her premises, either indoors or inside some enclosure, for a period of fourteen (14) days after the day such written request is presented to the Poundmaster. Any such animal, whether licensed or unlicensed, not continuously confined and isolated as required by this article shall be taken up forthwith by the Poundmaster and isolated as provided in Section 5-4.403 of this article.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 5-4.408. Redemption of isolated animals.
        Any dog isolated at the animal pound, as provided in Sections 5-4.403, 5-4.406, and 5-4.407 of this article, and found not to have rabies may be redeemed by the owner by paying to the Poundmaster all applicable fees and by obtaining any necessary license tag. Any cat or smaller animal may be redeemed in a similar manner. Any animal which is not so redeemed within seventy-two (72) hours after the expiration of the isolation period shall be deemed to have been abandoned and shall be disposed of as provided in Section 5-4.302 of Article 3 of this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Article 5. Animal Control
Sec. 5-4.501. Leash law.
        It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog owned, harbored, or controlled by him or her to be on any public street, alley, lane, park, or place of whatever nature open to and used by the public in the City unless such dog is securely leashed and the leash is held continuously in the hands of a responsible person capable of controlling such dog, or unless the dog is securely confined in a vehicle.

        It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit any dog owned, harbored, or controlled by him or her to be on any private property in the City without the permission of the person owning or occupying such private property.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.502. Animals at large.
        It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the possession of any animal to permit it to be at large without reasonable control or to be pastured or kept upon any street or other public place or upon any private property against the wishes of the owner or occupant thereof or in any manner or place to the injury of the owner or occupant of any other property.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.503. Impounding animals at large.
        Any animal found by the Animal Control Department not under control as prescribed in this chapter shall be taken by the Animal Control Department and impounded; provided, however, no such animal staked or tied for the purpose of grazing upon private property, and no fowl at large upon private property, shall be impounded except upon the complaint of the owner or occupant of such property or any other person in charge of such property who claims to be injured thereby.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.504. Notices of impoundment.
        The Animal Control Department shall immediately notify the owner or person entitled to possession of such animal or fowl of the impounding thereof personally, if known, or, if unknown, by posting a notice of impounding, with a description of the animal and the time and place of apprehension for five (5) days at the Animal Control Center. After the expiration of such period, any animal or fowl mentioned in such notice may be disposed of, unless redeemed as provided in this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.505. Privileged entry.
        For the purposes of discharging the duties imposed by this chapter or other applicable laws and to enforce the same, the Poundmaster or any peace officer may enter upon private property, except dwellings located thereon, as follows:

(a)    During daylight:

(1)    When in pursuit of any animal which he or she has reasonable or probable cause to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws;

(2)    To impound or place in isolation any animal thereon which he or she has any cause whatsoever to believe or suspect has rabies or is a biting animal;

(3)    To inspect or examine animals isolated thereon pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws;

(4)    To impound an animal pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 5-4.509 of this article; or

(5)    To seize an animal pursuant to subsection (j) of Section 5-4.509 of this article; and

(b)    At night:

(1)    When in pursuit of any animal which he or she has reasonable or probable cause to believe is subject to impoundment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws;

(2)    To impound or place in isolation any animal thereon which he or she has any cause whatsoever to believe or suspect has rabies or is a biting animal; and

(3)    To impound an animal pursuant to subsection (c) of Section 5-4.509 of this article.

        As a condition of the authority set forth in this section, except where time does not permit in an emergency or when in fresh pursuit, before entering upon private property a reasonable effort shall be made to locate the owner or possessor thereof to request permission to enter upon such property and to explain the purposes for such entry.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 633, eff. September 12, 1985)

 

Sec. 5-4.506. Enforcement provisions.
        In addition to other authority provided by law for making arrests, the Poundmaster and his or her deputies are hereby designated as public officers and employees and are authorized to make arrests according to Section 836.5 of the Penal Code of the State for the purpose of enforcing and carrying out the provisions of this chapter. The Poundmaster and any deputies he may designate are further authorized to carry and use weapons while actually engaged in the performance of their duties.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.507. Animal Control Department employees: Powers and duties: Age requirements.
        In addition to his or her duties as otherwise provided, each employee of the Animal Control Department is hereby given the power and duty of collecting dog license fees. Persons under the age of twenty-one (21) years may be appointed to a position within the Animal Control Department for the purpose of performing clerical, stenographic, or kennel duties. All other positions shall be filled by persons over the age of twenty-one (21) years.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.508. Animal nuisances.
        Any animal, except an animal kept or controlled by a governmental agency, which has committed any one or more of the following acts is a public nuisance:

(a)    An unprovoked infliction of physical injury upon any person where such person is conducting himself or herself lawfully;

(b)    Unprovoked threatening behavior toward any person, where such person is conducting himself or herself lawfully, which occurs in such circumstances as to cause such person reasonably to fear for his or her physical safety;

(c)    The utterance of barks or cries which are so loud, so frequent, and continued over so long a period of time as to deprive persons residing in three (3) or more residences in the neighborhood of the comfortable enjoyment of their homes;

(d)    An unprovoked infliction of physical injury upon any other animal which occurs off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal inflicting the injury;

(e)    The damaging of the real or personal property of some person, other than the owner or keeper of the animal, which occurs off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal;

(f)    The dumping of trash cans or the spreading of trash which occurs off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal; or

(g)    The chasing of pedestrians, bicycles, vehicles, or ridden horses which occurs off the property of the owner or keeper of the chasing animal.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by § 2, Ord. 633, eff. September 12, 1985)

 

Sec. 5-4.509. Abatement procedures.
        A public nuisance, as defined in Section 5-4.508 of this article, may be abated in accordance with the following procedures. Such procedures are in addition to any other remedies which may be available under the law:

(a)    Complaints. Any person aggrieved by such public nuisance may file a complaint with the Poundmaster. Such complaint shall be in writing, shall be signed by and bear the address of the complainant, shall state the place or places where such nuisance exists, shall describe the animal and the conduct which renders it a nuisance, and shall give the name and address of the animal’s owner or keeper if known to the complainant.

(b)    Notices. Upon the receipt of a complaint which alleges a public nuisance or as soon thereafter as the Poundmaster may learn the name and address of the owner or keeper of the animal, the Poundmaster shall serve notice of a hearing upon the owner or keeper and upon the complainant. The notice shall be in writing and may be served either by personal delivery of a copy or by depositing a copy in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be served. The notice shall do the following:

(1)    Include a copy of the complaint;

(2)    State that a hearing will be held to determine whether the animal described in the complaint is a nuisance within the meaning of Section 5-4.508 of this article and, if so, that the nuisance may be abated as provided in this section;

(3)    State the time, which shall be not less than fifteen (15) calendar days after the date of the notice, and the place of the hearing; and

(4)    Include a copy of Sections 5-4.508 and 5-4.509 of this article.

(c)    Impoundment pending hearings. If it appears to the Poundmaster from the complaint or other information available to him or her that the animal is being kept or maintained in a manner which poses an imminent threat to the safety of persons or property, the Poundmaster may impound the animal immediately and may hold the animal until findings are issued pursuant to subsection (i) of this section at which time the animal shall be disposed of as provided in Article 3 of this chapter; provided, however, if the findings are that the animal is not a nuisance, the owner or keeper may redeem the animal without payment of the impound fees; and provided, further, if the order is that the animal be destroyed, the Poundmaster shall hold the animal for an additional seventy-two (72) hours and then shall destroy it in a humane manner.

(d)    Hearings. The hearing shall be public and shall be held before the Poundmaster at the time and place noticed or at such other time or place as may be mutually agreed to by the Poundmaster, the complainant, and the owner or keeper of the animal. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, the Poundmaster may continue the hearing to such time and place as may be reasonably necessary for the convenience of witnesses or other parties. Failure of the owner or keeper of the animal to appear at the hearing or any continuance thereof shall constitute a default.

(e)    Oaths. The Poundmaster shall have the power to administer oaths or affirmations when necessary in conjunction with the hearing.

(f)    Evidence. Oral evidence need not be taken under oath or affirmation, unless either the owner or keeper of the animal or the complainant so requests and it appears that the witness has a motive for being untruthful. Testimony may be given in an informal narrative style. The complainant, the owner or keeper of the animal, and the Poundmaster shall have the right to call and examine witnesses, to introduce exhibits, to cross-examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though such matter was not covered on direct examination, and to impeach any witness, regardless of which party first called the witness to testify. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence or objection in a civil action. Hearsay evidence shall be admissible for any purpose but shall not be sufficient itself to support a finding unless such evidence would be admissible over objection in a civil action.

(g)    Subpoena powers. Before the hearing has commenced, the Poundmaster, at the request of the complainant or the owner or keeper of the animal, shall issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum for attendance or production of documents at the hearing. Compliance with the provisions of Section 1985 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the State shall be a condition precedent to the issuance of a subpoena duces tecum. After the hearing has commenced, the Poundmaster may issue such subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum as he or she deems proper. Any person duly subpoenaed to appear and testify or to produce any books and papers before the Poundmaster who wrongfully neglects or refuses to appear or to testify or to produce such books and papers shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

(h)    Records. The Poundmaster shall record the hearing on a recording device and shall make such recording available to the complainant and to the owner or keeper of the animal upon request. The Poundmaster shall provide a copy of the recording or a transcript prepared therefrom to any party who requests it and pays the cost of making such copy or preparing such transcript.

(i)     Findings and orders. At the conclusion of the hearing, or within a reasonable time thereafter, the Poundmaster shall make a written finding that the animal either is or is not a public nuisance as defined in Section 5-4.508 of this article. Such finding shall be supported by the weight of the evidence presented at the hearing. If no evidence is presented, the finding shall be that the animal is not a public nuisance, unless the owner or keeper of the animal has defaulted by failing to appear, in which case the finding shall be that the animal is a public nuisance.

        If the finding is that the animal is a public nuisance, the Poundmaster shall determine what actions, up to and including humane destruction of the animal, are reasonably necessary in order to abate the nuisance and shall make and enter an order that the owner or keeper of the animal take all such actions within such time limits as the order may prescribe. The finding and order shall be final when issued and shall be served promptly on the owner or keeper of the animal either by personal delivery of a copy or by depositing a copy in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner or keeper.

(j)     Failure to comply with orders. The failure of the owner or keeper of the animal to take any action required of him or her by the order of the Poundmaster within the applicable time limit specified in the order shall be a misdemeanor/infraction; provided, however, humane destruction of the animal within such time limit shall be deemed compliance with the order, regardless of the abatement action specified in the order. Each day or portion thereof that such noncompliance continues after such time limit shall be a separate offense. The Poundmaster may seize and summarily destroy any animal being kept or maintained in violation of such order of the Poundmaster.

(§ 4, Ord. 633, eff. September 12, 1985)

 

Sec. 5-4.510. Destruction of wild dogs.
        Any dog which is running at large and which is, by reason of its vicious disposition, dangerous to persons or property may be shot by any peace officer or taken up and destroyed in a humane manner by the Poundmaster.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as renumbered by § 4, Ord. 633, eff. September 12, 1985)

 

Sec. 5-4.511. Inspections.
        It shall be unlawful for any person who has an animal in his or her possession, custody, or control to fail or refuse to exhibit such animal or any license therefor for inspection upon demand by the Poundmaster or any peace officer.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975, as renumbered by § 4, Ord. 633, eff. September 12, 1985)

 

*       Editor’s note—Former Section 5-4.111, Noisy Animals, added by Ord. No. 422, effective April 23, 1971, as amended by Ord. No. 508, effective July 24, 1975, repealed by Ord. No. 633, effective September 12, 1985.

 

Article 6. Wild Animal Control
Sec. 5-4.601. Prohibitions.
        No person shall have, keep, or maintain any wild animal or reptile unless adequate provisions are made for its confinement and control to insure the maintenance of the public peace, health, and safety.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.602. Wild animal defined.
        As used in this chapter, “wild animal” shall mean an animal or reptile which is wild by nature and not customarily domesticated in the City. This definition shall not include birds, small rodents, or small nonpoisonous reptiles commonly used for educational or experimental purposes or for pets.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.603. Confinement regulations.
        The Animal Control Department may make rules regulating the size and type of a cage or other means of confinement, the distance from the place of confinement to adjoining property, and any other regulations deemed reasonably necessary by the Animal Control Department or the County Health Officer to carry out the purposes of this chapter and to insure the maintenance of humane, sanitary conditions and the safety of persons and property. A copy of the rules and regulations shall be furnished by the Animal Control Department upon request. In applying the regulations to a given situation, the Animal Control Department shall take into consideration the type, nature, disposition, and training of the animal involved.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.604. Notices of escape.
        Any person keeping or maintaining a wild animal that escapes from its confinement shall immediately notify the Animal Control Department of such escape.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.605. Disposition.
        Wild animals found running loose may be impounded in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. However, neither the City or County, nor their officers, agents, or employees, shall be liable for any injury or disease to any animal incurred while such animal is being captured, transported, or impounded. Wild animals, when found to be at large and injuring or damaging, or threatening to injure or damage, any person or property, shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be summarily destroyed without liability resulting to the City or County, or their officers, agents, or employees.

        Reclamation by an owner or keeper of any impounded wild animal shall be permitted upon the payment to the Animal Control Department of the actual cost to the Department of the capture, impounding, and care of such animal.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.606. Release of wild animals.
        No person, organization, society, association, or corporation shall import or release into the City any wild animal, whether indigenous to the County or not, without a permit from the Animal Control Department. The animal released shall be identified by an indelible number tattooed on the animal, and the person, organization, society, association, or corporation shall be responsible for any damage inflicted by such animal.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Article 7. Mandatory Sterilization of Dogs and Cats
Sec. 5-4.701. Intent.
The intent of this article is to create a culture and common practice of sterilization of dogs and cats. Education and voluntary compliance is the preferred method of achieving sterilization, with enforcement measures as a last resort. Nothing in this article shall make veterinarians mandatory reporters of animals that have not been sterilized.

(§ 4, Ord. 883, eff. March 15, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-4.702. Unaltered dogs and cats prohibited—Exceptions.
For purposes of this chapter, sterilization shall mean any medical procedure performed by a veterinarian on a dog or cat that prevents reproduction of that dog or cat. No person domiciled within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City shall own a dog or cat over the age of six (6) months that has not been sterilized, unless valid written documentation is provided to the City to show proof that the animal is exempt from the requirement to be sterilized by reason of one of the following:

(a)    If a dog is a breed approved by and registered with the American Kennel Club (“AKC”) or United Kennel Club (“UKC”), and the dog is actively used to exhibit or compete and has competed in at least one legitimate exhibition or sporting competition hosted or approved by the AKC and/or UKC within the last two (2) years, or is being trained to exhibit or compete and is too young to have yet competed.

(b)    The dog has earned, or if under three (3) years old, is actively being trained and is in the process of earning, an agility, carting, herding, protection, rally, hunting, working, or other title from the AKC or UKC.

(c)    The owner of the dog is an American Kennel Club “Breeder of Merit.”

(d)    The dog is being, or has been, appropriately trained and is actively being used in a manner that meets the definition of a guide, signal, or service dog as set forth in California Penal Code Section 365.5, subdivisions (d), (e), and (f), or the dog is enrolled in a guide dog program administered by a person licensed under California Business and Professions Code Section 7200 et seq.

(e)    The dog is being, or has been, appropriately trained and is actively used by law enforcement agencies, the military, or search and rescue organizations, for law enforcement, military, or search and rescue activities.

(f)    If a cat is a breed recognized by the Cat Fancier’s Association and meets one of the following:

(1)    The cat has competed in at least one cat show or sporting competition sanctioned by the Cat Fancier’s Association within the last three hundred sixty-five (365) days; or

(2)    The cat has earned a conformation, obedience, agility, rally, sporting, working or other title from the Cat Fancier’s Association.

(g)    The owner of the dog or cat provides a letter from a licensed veterinarian certifying that the animal’s health would be best served by sterilization after a specified date; or, that due to age, poor health, or illness of the animal, it is detrimental to the health of the animal to have it sterilized; or, that arrangements have been made to sterilize the animal within sixty (60) days. This letter shall include the veterinarian’s license number and, if applicable, the date by which the animal may safely be sterilized.

(§ 4, Ord. 883, eff. March 15, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-4.703. Animal identification device.
All dogs and cats over the age of four (4) months shall be implanted with an animal identification device (or microchip), at the owner’s expense, identifying the owner of the animal. The owner shall notify the City and the national registry applicable to the implanted chip, of a change of owner, address or telephone number.

(§ 4, Ord. 883, eff. March 15, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-4.704. Notice of violation and penalties.
Every act prohibited or declared unlawful by this chapter, and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter, shall be punishable as a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of the City Attorney or the District Attorney, in accord with Ojai Municipal Code Section 1-2.03. In addition, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a public nuisance subject to abatement as provided in this Code or under California law.

(§ 4, Ord. 883, eff. March 15, 2018)

 

Article 8. (Not Used)
Article 9. General
Sec. 5-4.901. Records.
        It shall be the duty of the Tax Collector or Poundmaster to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of:

(a)    All dogs or livestock licensed, impounded, or sold;

(b)    All animal bite cases reported and the results of the investigations thereof; and

(c)    All moneys received.

        Such records shall be open to inspection by the public at all reasonable times.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.902. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

(a)    “Animal pound” shall mean any dog pound, animal shelter, temporary animal pound, or pound vehicle owned or operated by the Poundmaster.

(b)    “Poundmaster” shall include deputies poundmaster and any person or organization authorized to perform the duties and functions of Poundmaster or the agents or employees of any such person or organization.

(c)    “Tax Collector” shall mean the County Tax Collector and officers, employees, and agents thereof.

(d)    “County Health Officer” shall mean the County Health Officer and officers, employees, and agents thereof.

(e)    A dog “runs at large” when it is upon private property without the permission of the person owning or occupying the property or when it is upon public property and is not upon a leash.

(f)    A person “harbors” a dog when he feeds or shelters a dog for a period of thirty (30) days or longer.

(g)    “Livestock” shall include horses, ponies, mules, burros, jacks, jennies, cows, bulls, calves, heifers, sheep, goats, swine, hogs, pigs, and all other domestic or domesticated animals other than household pets.

(h)    Livestock “runs at large” when upon private property without the permission of the person owning or occupying the property or when upon public property and not under the immediate control of a responsible person capable of controlling such animal.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.903. Exemptions from wearing licenses.
        Licenses need not be worn by dogs when dogs are contained within an enclosure, or confined to the premises of an animal hospital or licensed dog kennel or chartered benevolent organization of the State for the care of animals, or participating in or training for sporting events, field trials, obedience classes, or dog shows, or herding livestock provided such dogs are not allowed to run at large.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.904. Exemptions from license fees.
        A dog license shall be issued free of charge in the following instances:

(a)    When the license is for a dog which will be used as a guide dog for a blind person. An affidavit attesting to the fact that the dog will be used as a guide dog shall be given to the official issuing the license; and

(b)    When the license is for a dog which has been honorably discharged from the armed services of the United States. Such discharge shall be established by showing to the official issuing the license the discharge papers issued for such dog.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.905. Defenses in prosecutions.
        In any prosecution for a violation of any provision of this chapter the burden of producing evidence to establish any of the exemptions provided in this chapter shall, in the first instance, be upon the defendant.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.906. Citations to appear.
(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971; repealed by Part 4, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 5-4.907. Failure to appear.
(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971; repealed by Part 4, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 5-4.908. Violations.
        It is unlawful for any person to fail to comply with any provision of this chapter or any rule or regulation of the Animal Control Department or the County Health Officer. Before a person is charged with violating any such rule or regulation, he or she shall have received at least ten (10) days’ notice thereof.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 5-4.909. Severability.
        If any portion of this chapter is found to be unconstitutional or invalid, the Council hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of this chapter regardless of the absence of any such invalid part.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

 

Sec. 5-4.910. Rates and charges.
        The Council may, by resolution, establish rates and charges for services rendered by the Poundmaster not designated in this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 422, eff. April 23, 1971)

Chapter 5 NORDHOFF CEMETERY
Sec. 5-5.01. Application of chapter provisions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the Nordhoff Cemetery, owned by the people of the City and transferred to the City on July 1, 1963, for purposes of operation and maintenance.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.02. Requirements for interment.
        Before any human body or cremated remains thereof may be interred in Nordhoff Cemetery, the following conditions shall exist or have occurred:

(a)    The body shall be embalmed and enclosed in a casket.

(b)    The casket shall be enclosed in a container.

(c)    The cremated remains shall be enclosed in a solid metal container.

(d)    A burial permit shall have been obtained from the City Clerk.

(e)    All applicable statutes, laws, and regulations of governmental authority shall have been complied with.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.03. Burial permits.
        The City Clerk shall issue burial permits, without charge, for the burial of human bodies or cremated remains in Nordhoff Cemetery where the following conditions exist:

(a)    The burial lot is owned or has been paid for by the decedent or applicant.

(b)    The applicant has obtained from the Council consent to such burial pending purchase of the lot.

(c)    The right of the applicant to cause the burial to be made is established to the satisfaction of the City Clerk.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

 

Sec. 5-5.04. Memorials and markers.
        No memorial or marker may be placed on any lot except with the express permission of the Council or a person authorized by the Council to grant such permission pursuant to standards established by the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.05. Flower receptacles.
        No flower receptacle shall be placed upon any lot unless such receptacle is made of metal.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.06. Other lot improvements.
        All improvements to lots shall be made in accordance with standards established by the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.07. Use of lots.
        No more than one body shall be interred in one grave except with the express consent of the Council. In the event of such interment with such consent, the identification of such multiple interment shall be made upon a single memorial or marker.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.08. Reservations.
        The City retains the right, notwithstanding the sale of any cemetery lot or interment herein, to enlarge, reduce, replot, and/or change any boundary or any section of the cemetery, to change or modify the location of roads, driveways, and walks, and to install, maintain, and operate pipelines and gutters for sprinkling or drainage purposes.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.09. Prices for lots.
        The prices of cemetery lots shall be as established by resolution of the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963, as amended by Part 1, Ord. 512, eff. January 8, 1976)

 

Sec. 5-5.10. Additional rules and regulations.
        The Council may establish by ordinance reasonable additional rules and regulations applicable to the Nordhoff Cemetery.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.11. Incorporation in deeds.
        Deeds to cemetery lots and burial permits issued by the City Clerk shall be deemed to incorporate all the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

 

Sec. 5-5.12. Horseback riding prohibited.
        It shall be unlawful for any person having the custody and control of a horse to permit such horse to enter the Nordhoff Cemetery.

(§ 1, Ord. 328, eff. December 12, 1963)

Chapter 6 ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES
Sec. 5-6.01. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to provide a procedure for the abatement of nuisances and to make the cost of abatement of a nuisance upon a parcel of land a special assessment against that parcel.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

 

Sec. 5-6.02. Findings and determinations.
        There exist from time to time within the City conditions which constitute nuisances as defined in Section 3479 of the Civil Code of the State. Included are conditions such as sewage which is allowed to escape because of clogged or disconnected lines and accumulations of trash, manure, and other offensive material. Legal actions to abate such nuisances are expensive and time consuming. The costs involved in the legal action in most cases far exceed the costs of abating the nuisance itself and are not fully recoverable from the person responsible for the nuisance. It is desirable, therefore, to seek an inexpensive and summary method of abating nuisances at the expense of the persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining each nuisance.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

 

Sec. 5-6.03. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Abate” shall mean to repair, replace, remove, destroy, or otherwise remedy the condition causing a nuisance by such means and in such manner and to such an extent as the enforcement officer in his or her judgment shall determine is necessary in the interests of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community.

(b)    “Enforcement officer” shall mean the City Manager or such other person as he may designate to be the person responsible for carrying out the provisions of this chapter.

(c)    “Premises” shall mean any building, lot, parcel, real estate, or land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.

(d)    “Responsible person” shall mean any agent, lessee, or other person occupying or having charge or control of any premises, except the owner.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

 

Sec. 5-6.04. Conditions constituting nuisances.
        Each of the following conditions constitutes a nuisance which shall be subject to abatement as provided in this chapter:

(a)    The violation of any of the provisions of this Code, violation of which is declared to be a nuisance;

(b)    The violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 5 of this Code;

(c)    The violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 3 of Title 5 of this Code;

(d)    The improper disposal or accumulation of sewage and waste matter by reason of blocked drains, improper or no connection to an adequate disposal system, or any other reason;

(e)    Substantial accumulations of trash or debris;

(f)    Accumulations of garbage, refuse, or manure; and

(g)    Any condition which has been declared to be a threat to the public health by the Health Officer of the City.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

 

Sec. 5-6.05. Notices to abate.
        When it appears to the enforcement officer that a nuisance exists as declared in this chapter, he shall direct the owner or responsible person in control of the premises where the conditions giving rise to the nuisance exist or originate to abate the conditions within a given period of time depending upon the circumstances, or, if he does not, to appear before the enforcement officer at a stated time and place and show cause why such condition should not be abated by the City at the expense of the owner or responsible person.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

 

Sec. 5-6.06. Notices to abate: Service.
        Each notice to abate shall be sent by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the owner of the premises as shown on the last equalized County assessment roll and to any responsible person at the address as shown on the last equalized County assessment roll or to any address known to the enforcement officer where such person can be reached.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

 

Sec. 5-6.07. Hearings.
        At the time fixed in the notice of abatement, the enforcement officer shall hear testimony offered on behalf of the owner or responsible person involved which tends to show why the conditions causing the nuisance should not be abated and the expense thereof charged to the owner or responsible person as a civil debt and made a lien upon the premises. The enforcement officer may hear testimony from other City officials or any other interested person having relevant knowledge of the nuisance. At the conclusion of the hearing, the enforcement officer may find that the conditions constitute a nuisance and order such nuisance abated by the owner or responsible person. He shall fix a reasonable time, depending upon the circumstances, within which the nuisance shall be abated. In addition, in the event the City elects, at the initiation of the hearing, to seek recovery of its attorneys’ fees, the enforcement officer shall order that the prevailing party in the hearing be awarded its attorneys’ fees. In no event shall the award of attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in the proceeding.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968, as amended by § 3, Ord. 796, eff. July 26, 2007)

 

Sec. 5-6.08. Abatement by City.
        Where the owner or responsible person has failed or refused to abate any nuisance within the time allowed by the enforcement officer, unless a notice of appeal has been filed, the City may forthwith abate the nuisance and collect the expenses of abatement from the owner or responsible person directed to carry out the abatement. Any such expenses may be assessed against the premises where the conditions giving rise to the nuisance existed or originated unless the enforcement officer determines that the owner of such premises was in no way responsible for the existence or maintenance of the nuisance. Such assessment shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

 

Sec. 5-6.09. Appeals to the Council.
        Each owner or responsible person shall be notified at the time a decision is rendered by the enforcement officer under this chapter that he may appeal to the Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within twenty-four (24) hours after his or her decision. The enforcement officer shall place the matter on the agenda of the Council for its next regular meeting. Notices of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal shall be given to all persons who received a notice of abatement and all other interested persons who request such notice. The appeal shall be heard by the Council which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order of the enforcement officer or take any other action deemed appropriate. A proper notice of appeal shall stay the authority of the enforcement officer to abate the nuisance, as provided in this chapter, unless he determines that immediate abatement is necessary for the public health, safety, and welfare and makes a written finding containing facts justifying immediate abatement. The subject of an appeal where immediate abatement has taken place shall be whether the costs thereof shall be assessed against the owner or responsible person or be borne by the City.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

 

Sec. 5-6.10. Procedure not exclusive.
        The procedures provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and in addition to any other procedures provided by the laws of the City or the State for the abatement of any of the conditions described in this chapter, and abatement pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not prejudice or affect any other action, civil or criminal, for the maintenance of any such condition.

(Part I, Ord. 401, eff. September 11, 1968)

Chapter 7 GROUNDWATER CONSERVATION
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 7, Regulation of Wells, consisting of Sections 5-7.01 through 5-7.15, added by Ord. No. 416, effective December 30, 1970, as amended by Ord. Nos. 420, effective April 8, 1971, and 508, effective July 24, 1975, repealed by Ord. No. 583, effective June 12, 1980. Section 5-7.01, codified from Ord. No. 583, effective June 12, 1980, repealed by Ord. No. 676, effective November 30, 1990.

Chapter 8 REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Sec. 5-8.01. Declaration of need.
        The Council hereby declares that there is a need for a Redevelopment Agency to function in the community.

(§ I, Ord. 449, eff. April 6, 1972, as renumbered by Part I, Ord. 454, eff. June 22, 1972)

 

Sec. 5-8.02. Name of the Agency.
        The name of the agency shall be the Redevelopment Agency of the City of Ojai and will sometimes be referred to as the Redevelopment Agency or the Agency.

(§ I, Ord. 449, eff. April 6, 1972, as renumbered by Part I, Ord. 454, eff. June 22, 1972)

 

Sec. 5-8.03. Functions of the Agency.
        The Agency shall exercise all the powers and functions provided by the Community Redevelopment Law of the State and all other applicable laws.

(§ I, Ord. 449, eff. April 6, 1972, as renumbered by Part I, Ord. 454, eff. June 22, 1972)

 

Sec. 5-8.04. Declaration that Council is the Agency.
        The Council hereby declares itself to be the Agency.

(§ I, Ord. 449, eff. April 6, 1972, as renumbered by Part I, Ord. 454, eff. June 22, 1972)

 

Sec. 5-8.05. Community Redevelopment Commission.
(§ I, Ord. 449, eff. April 6, 1972, as renumbered by Part I, Ord. 454, eff. June 22, 1972; repealed by § 6, Ord. 785, eff. November 25, 2005)

Chapter 9 PUBLIC HEALTH PERMITS AND ENFORCEMENT
Sec. 5-9.01. Purposes and authority of provisions.
        The purposes of this chapter are to establish a permit system for activities subject to State statutes, orders, quarantines, rules, or regulations and City laws relating to environmental health; and to provide for the collection of the fees necessary to pay the reasonable expenses resulting from the enforcement thereof as authorized by Sections 480, 481, 482, and 1155.6(d) of the Health and Safety Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.02. Appointment of Health Officer.
        Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 476, 477, and 1155.6 of the Health and Safety Code of the State, the Director of Environmental Health of the County is directed to enforce and observe in the City all orders, quarantine regulations, and rules prescribed by the Department of Public Health of the State, all other rules and regulations issued under the provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the State, the provisions of this chapter, and all statutes now or hereafter enacted relating to environmental health and sanitation services.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.03. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Perishable food” shall mean any food or beverage capable of supporting the rapid and progressive growth of microorganisms which can cause food infections or food intoxications.

(b)    “Bakery,” “organized camp,” “retail food production and marketing establishment,” “public water system,” “itinerant restaurant,” “restaurant,” “vending machine location,” “ice plant,” “sell contained ice plant,” “ice distributor,” and “ice distribution vehicle” shall have the meanings assigned for each in the Health and Safety Code of the State.

(c)    “Mobile food preparation unit,” “food establishment open to the outside air,” “retail dairy,” “retail sales area of grower-seller premises,” and “roadside stand” shall have the meanings assigned for each in Title 17 of the California Administrative Code.

(d)    “Vending machine,” “septic tank pumper,” “food demonstrator,” and “medical research institution” shall have the meanings assigned for each in Division 4 of Chapter 6 of the Ventura County Ordinance Code.

(e)    “Food vehicle” shall mean any vehicle from which packaged and perishable foods are sold or otherwise offered to the public.

(f)    “Frozen food vehicle” shall mean any vehicle upon which predominantly frozen foods are sold or otherwise offered to the public.

(g)    “Retail delivery vehicle” shall mean any vehicle from which exclusively nonperishable foods are carried, sold, or otherwise offered to the public.

(h)    “Commissary” shall mean any food processing establishment as defined in Section 28280.1 of the Health and Safety Code of the State which establishment purveys food exclusively for sales or distribution from vehicles required to have a permit under the provisions of this chapter.

(i)     “Food vendor” shall mean any person who sells or distributes food to the public by means other than those defined in subsections (e), (f), (g), and (h) of this section.

(j)     “Public swimming pool” shall mean and include “swimming pools,” “pools,” “wading pools,” “special use pools,” and “temporary training pools” as defined in Section 7774 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code. This definition shall not include private pools which are maintained by an individual exclusively for the use of his or her family and friends.

(k)    “Director” shall mean the Director of Environmental Health of the County and his or her duly authorized agents.

(l)     “Person” shall mean an individual, partnership, joint venture, association, trust, corporation, or municipal corporation.

(m)   “Tax Collector” shall mean the County Treasurer-Tax Collector, Public Administrator.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.04. Permits to construct required.
        No person shall engage in the construction or remodeling of a restaurant, bakery, commissary, food establishment open to the outside air, retail dairy, roadside stand, retail food production and marketing establishment, public swimming pool, or public water system without having first obtained a permit to construct. A retail sales area of a grower-seller premises may be constructed without a permit to construct if no permit for the structure is required by the Building Department.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.05. Plans required for permits to construct.
        Two (2) sets of plans shall be submitted to the Director for the new construction or remodeling of restaurants, bakeries, commissaries, retail sales areas of grower-seller premises, retail dairies, roadside stands, food establishments open to the outside air, retail food production and marketing establishments, and public swimming pools. Upon the approval of the plans, a permit to construct will be issued and will be valid for twelve (12) months or until the completion of the construction or remodeling, whichever comes first. Upon a written request therefor, the Director, for good cause, may extend the twelve (12) month period for an additional period not to exceed twelve (12) months. A permit to construct may be denied unless it appears, upon the review of the plans, that applicable State, County, and City environmental health requirements will be met. Otherwise the permit shall be granted.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.06. Health permits required.
        No person shall conduct any business, occupation, or activity set forth in subsections (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), and (j) of Section 5-9.03 of this chapter within the City, whether or not at a fixed location, without having first obtained a health permit. The health permit shall be in addition to the permit to construct and to any other license or permit required by the City or any other public jurisdiction. A health permit may be denied if it appears, upon an inspection of the premises or otherwise, that applicable State, County, and City environmental health requirements will not be met. Otherwise the permit shall be granted. Such permits shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months after the date of issuance and shall be renewable from year to year upon the payment, on or before the delinquency date of each such year, of the fee required or upon the payment of such fee plus penalties. The paid period of a health permit shall not be affected by any period of suspension imposed by the Director pursuant to the provisions of Sections. 5-9.22, 5-9.23, or 5-9.24 of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.07. Vehicle permits and exemptions.
        Either the lessor or the lessee of all vehicles defined in subsections (b), (c), (d), (e), (f), and (g) of Section 5-9.03 of this chapter shall obtain a health permit to operate. If the lessor obtains a permit and there is a change in the lessee, the lessor shall notify the Director and obtain a new health permit. The Director may exempt from the permit requirement vehicles operated by owners of restaurants and retail food production and marketing establishments if such vehicles are used exclusively for deliveries of packaged foods. No such exemptions may be granted for food vehicles which hold or transport perishable foods for periods longer than one hour.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.08. Separate activities.
        If a permittee shall engage in, conduct, manage, or carry on at the same time more than one of the activities for which a permit is required by this chapter, he shall be deemed to be engaging in, conducting, managing, or carrying on each such activity separately and apart from each other activity, whether located on the same premises or not.

        A restaurant, retail food production and marketing establishment, or other establishment having a valid health permit shall not be required to obtain an ice distributor’s permit for ice distribution activities conducted on the premises.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.09. Applications for permits.
        Applications for any permit required by this chapter shall be made on such forms as are prescribed by the Director.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.10. Applications for permits: Action.
        Upon the receipt of the application and following the approval of the Director, the Director shall forward one copy to the County Tax Collector for the collection of the permit to construct or health permit fee and one copy to the City License Tax Collector for information to assist in the collection of the business license tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.11. Fictitious names.
        A permit may be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to a corporation duly authorized to transact business in the State or to a person operating under a fictitious name who has complied with all of the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 17900) of Part 3 of Division 7 of the Business and Professions Code of the State. Otherwise all such permits shall be issued in the true name of the applicant. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no permittee may operate under any false or fictitious name. A permit issued to a corporation shall designate such corporation by the exact name which appears in the articles of incorporation of such corporation.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.12. Temporary activities.
        If the applicant for a permit under this chapter shows to the satisfaction of the Director that because a business or occupation or other activity is of a seasonal nature, or because of statutory or ordinance regulations, or because of the termination or loss of a lease, or because of the acquisition by the public of the premises on which the occupation or business or other activity is situated, or because of similar reasons such business, occupation, or activity can only be carried on for a limited period of time, not more than three-fourths (¾) of a year, the permit fee shall be the following fractions of the annual fee:

(a)    For one-fourth (¼) of a year or less, one-fourth (¼);

(b)    For more than one-fourth (¼) but not more than one-half (½) of a year, one-half (½);

(c)    For more than one-half (½) but not more than three-fourths (¾) of a year, three-fourths (¾).

        License fees of Twenty-Five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars or less shall not be prorated.

        A public swimming pool which operates more than three (3) months of the year shall not be considered a seasonal activity.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.13. Exemptions from permit fees: Blind applicants.
        The Director shall issue without a fee a permit to any individual applicant who otherwise would be entitled to such permit if such person files with the Tax Collector a certificate by a licensed physician and surgeon or by the Bureau of Vocational Rehabilitation of the Department of Education of the State that he has not more than ten (10%) percent visual acuity in his or her better eye, with correction.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.14. Exemptions from permit fees: Charitable organizations.
        Except for operators of organized camps, as defined in Section 18897 of the Health and Safety Code of the State, any person exempt from taxation under subsection (c) of Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code or subsections (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (1) of Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, who conducts exclusively for charitable purposes an activity for which there is to be derived no personal benefit through the distribution of profits or the payment of excessive charges or compensation, shall not be charged a fee for the permits required by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.15. Exemptions from permit fees: Charitable organizations: Filing.
        Persons exempt from permit fees under the provisions of Section 5-9.14 of this chapter shall file acceptable evidence showing entitlement to such exemption with the Tax Collector within twenty (20) days following an application for a permit; otherwise, no permit fee exemption shall be granted. Acceptable evidence of an exempt status shall mean a copy of an appropriate tax exemption letter prepared by the Internal Revenue Service or Franchise Tax Board of the State.

        In lieu of an appropriate tax exemption letter from the Internal Revenue Service or Franchise Tax Board of the State, a declaration on a form prescribed by the Tax Collector attesting to the nonprofit or charitable status of the permittee will be accepted if the permittee is exempt under subsection (c) of Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code or subsections (a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (l) of Section 23701 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.16. Exemptions from permit fees: Tax supported institutions.
        Any permit applicant wholly supported by tax revenues shall not be charged a fee for any permit required by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.17. Collection of permit fees.
        The Tax Collector shall collect the permit fees and penalties as directed by this chapter when he receives the approved application for a permit from the Director and shall perform such other duties as are by this chapter prescribed.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.18. Lost permits.
        Where the Director finds that a permit (whether in the form of a tag, plate, paper or card, sticker, or otherwise) has been lost, he shall issue a duplicate permit to the owner thereof upon the payment of a fee in the amount provided for by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.19. Transfer of permits.
        The permits required by the provisions of this chapter shall not be transferable from one person to another nor by the same person from one business location to another; provided, however, a permit issued to a partnership may be transferred upon a reorganization of the partnership by the addition or departure of a partner if the partnership, as reorganized, applies for such transfer in the same manner as for a new permit and pays the transfer fee as provided for in this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.20. Posting or carrying permits.
        Every person having a permit under the provisions of this chapter and engaging in a permitted business or activity at a fixed place of business shall keep such permit posted and exhibited in public view while in force. Such person engaging in a business or occupation and not having a fixed place of business shall carry such permit with him or her at all times while engaging in the business or activity for which the permit was granted.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.21. Tags or stickers.
        The Director shall issue an appropriate tag or sticker for each vehicle or vending machine under permit at the time the permit is issued. The permittee shall keep such tag or sticker affixed to each vehicle or machine in a conspicuous place at all times. Where the applicant for such permit owns more than one vending machine, the Director shall issue but one permit form which shall set forth, in addition to the information required, the number of machines under permit for which the permit fee has been paid and the tags or stickers have been issued.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.22. Permits: Suspension and revocation.
        If the Director determines that any of the provisions of this chapter or of applicable statutes, quarantine orders, rules, or regulations are not being complied with in the City, he may issue and serve upon the permittee a notice of intended suspension or revocation setting forth in clear and concise language the acts and omissions with which the permittee is charged and specifying the provisions violated. Such notice shall specify a date and time, not more than fifteen (15) days following its service upon the permittee, and place of hearing before the Director or his or her agent designated in the notice, and shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. The permittee shall attend such hearing and may show cause, if any, why the permit should not be suspended or revoked. The Director, on his or her own motion or upon good cause shown by the permittee, may continue any such hearing by giving notice to the permittee of the time and place of the continued hearing. At the close of the hearing or at any time within ten (10) days thereafter, the Director shall order such disposition of the permit, within the terms of the original or any amended notice of intended suspension or revocation, as he deems proper, and such order in writing shall be served upon the permittee. The order of suspension or revocation shall be effective from the time of such service. If the permittee should fail to appear at any such noticed hearing or continued hearing, the Director may make all such orders as he might make if the permittee were present.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.23. Permits: Emergency suspensions.
        In the event the Director determines that the immediate suspension of a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter is necessary in the interests of public health or safety, he shall suspend the permit by serving upon the permittee a notice of suspension, effective forthwith, setting forth in clear and concise language the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged and stating the permittee’s rights to an appeal hearing.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.24. Permits: Suspension and revocation: Appeals: Hearings.
(a)    At any time within the fifteen (15) day period after a permit has been suspended or revoked pursuant to the provisions of Section 5-9.23 of this chapter, the permittee or other aggrieved person, on a form provided by the Director, may request in writing an appeal hearing before the Director. Failure to request an appeal hearing within fifteen (15) days after the permittee has received a notice of suspension or revocation shall be deemed a waiver of the permittee or other aggrieved person’s right to such hearing. Upon the receipt of a request for an appeal hearing filed in accordance with the provisions of this section, the Director shall schedule such hearing within fifteen (15) days and notify the appellant in writing of the date, time, and location of the appeal hearing at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. The appellant shall attend such hearing and may show cause, if any, why the permit should be reinstated. The Director, on his or her own motion or upon good cause shown by the appellant, may continue any such hearing by giving notice to the appellant of the time and place of the continued hearing. At the close of the hearing or at any time within ten (10) days thereafter, the Director shall order such final disposition of the permit as he deems proper, and such order in writing shall be served on the permittee and appellant. The order of reinstatement, suspension, or revocation shall be effective from the time of such service. If the appellant should fail to appear at any such noticed hearing or continued hearing, the Director may make all such orders as he might make as if the appellant were present.

(b)    Any aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the Director in respect to the provisions of this chapter, to the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978, as amended by § 5, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995

 

Sec. 5-9.25. Operations with suspended or revoked permits.
        No person shall conduct any business, occupation, or activity requiring a permit to construct or health permit after such permit has been suspended or revoked by the Director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.26. Penalties.
        Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of City authorities as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.03 of this Code, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided therein. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable as provided in this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978, as amended by § 6, Ord. 697, eff. June 25, 1993)

 

Sec. 5-9.27. Itinerant restaurant permit fees.
        The fees for itinerant restaurants shall be the same as the fees for restaurants.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.28. Food vendor permit fees.
        The fees for food vendors shall be the same as the fees for food demonstrators.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.29. Roadside business permit fees.
        The fees for retail sales areas of grower-seller premises, food establishments open to the outside air, roadside stands, and retail dairies shall be the same as the fees applicable to retail food production and marketing establishments.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.30. Public water system permit fees.
        The fees for public water systems shall be the same as the fees applicable to water purveyors.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

 

Sec. 5-9.31. Fees set by resolution.
        All the fees and fee penalties provided for in this chapter shall be identical to those fixed by resolution of the County Board of Supervisors for establishments operating in the unincorporated areas of the County.

(§ 1, Ord. 555, eff. April 13, 1978)

Chapter 10 SMOKING REGULATED OR PROHIBITED
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 10, Smoking Regulated or Prohibited, added by Ord. No. 650, repealed and replaced in its entirety by Ord. No. 703, effective February 12, 1994.

 

Sec. 5-10.01. Purpose and findings.
(a)    The City Council finds that smoking of tobacco or any other weed or plant is a positive danger to health and a cause of material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort and a health hazard to those who are present in areas exposed to secondhand smoke.

(b)    The declared purpose of this chapter is to:

(1)    Protect the public health, safety and welfare by prohibiting smoking in public places and places of employment; and

(2)    Guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air has priority over the desire to smoke.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994)

 

Sec. 5-10.02. Definitions.
        The following words, phrases and terms, as used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:

“Bar” means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term “bar” shall not include the restaurant dining area. A “bar” for the purpose of this definition does not include any bar where smoke can filter into a restaurant through a passageway, ventilation system, or any other means.

“Business” means any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold, as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

“City” means the City of Ojai, California.

“Common area” means every enclosed area or unenclosed area of a multi-unit residence that residents of more than one unit are entitled to enter or use, including, for example, halls, pathways, lobbies, courtyards, elevators, stairs, community rooms, playgrounds, gym facilities, swimming pools, parking garages, parking lots, grassy or landscaped areas, restrooms, laundry rooms, cooking areas, and eating areas.

“Designated smoking area” means an outdoor common area of a multi-unit residence designated as such by the owner, manager, or operator of the multi-unit residence, and located at least twenty-five (25′) feet from all units and areas primarily used by children.

“Employee” means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity.

“Employer” means any person, partnership, corporation, including a public entity, or non-profit entity, who employs the services of one or more individual persons.

“Enclosed area” means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides of solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passageways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by portions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, such as “office landscaping” or similar structures.

“Home occupation” means any use within a dwelling which has been issued a home occupation permit by the City.

“Incidental food sales/service” means the sale or service of food products in a bar if such sale/service constitutes twenty-five (25%) percent of the annual gross income of the bar.

“Landlord” means any person or agent of a person who owns, manages, or is otherwise legally responsible for a unit in a multi-unit residence that is leased to a residential tenant, except that landlord does not include a tenant who sublets a unit.

“Multi-unit residence” means property containing two or more units, including, but not limited to, apartment buildings, condominium complexes, senior and assisted living facilities, group homes, long-term health care facilities, mobile home parks, and campgrounds. Multi-unit residences do not include the following:

(1)    A single-family home, except if used as a child care, group home, or health care facility subject to licensing requirements; and

(2)    A single-family home with a detached or attached accessory dwelling unit, except if used as a child care or health care facility subject to licensing requirements.

“Non-profit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character-building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the entity and not to private gain. A public entity is not a ‘non-profit entity’ within the meaning of this section.

“Person” means any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

“Place of employment” means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges and rest rooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. A private residence is not a “place of employment” unless it is used as a child care or health care facility.

“Public entity” means any county, municipality, school or special district or political subdivision of the State, to the extent such public entity is subject to the jurisdiction of the City.

“Public place” means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health facilities, shopping malls, laundromats, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, hotels and motels, theaters and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a “public place.”

“Restaurant” means any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school cafeterias, including any associated outdoor eating area, and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities, except that the term “restaurant” shall not include a “bar.”

“Retail tobacco store” means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental.

“Separate ventilation system” means a system which is approved by the building official, exhausted to the outside, and negatively pressurized.

“Service line” means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money.

“Smoking” means vaping, inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted, activated, or openly burning cigar, cigarette, electronic cigarette, weed, plant, combustible substance, or other mechanical or electronic device used for consuming tobacco, tobacco products, or any other weed or plant in any manner or in any form.

“Sports arena” means enclosed sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events.

“Tobacco product” means any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion.

“Tobacco vending machine” means any electronic or mechanical device or appliance the operation of which depends upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper accuracy, or other things representative of value, which dispenses or releases a tobacco product.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 1, Ord. 704, eff. April 7, 1994, § 1, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.03. Prohibition of smoking in public places.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided, smoking shall be prohibited in all public places within the City, including, but not limited to, the following areas:

(1)    All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all public, business and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, offices (such as attorneys, doctors, and other professionals), banks, retail stores and shopping malls;

(2)    Buses, trolleys, taxicabs and other means of public transit provided by or under the authority of the City, and in ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots;

(3)    Elevators;

(4)    Public restrooms;

(5)    Service lines;

(6)    Libraries, museums and galleries;

(7)    All reception and waiting areas;

(8)    Waiting rooms, dining rooms, recreation rooms, lounges, hallways, wards and semiprivate rooms of private and public health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, senior care facilities, drug and alcohol treatment facilities, and doctors’ and dentists’ offices;

(9)    Child day care facilities as defined in the California Health and Safety Code and private residences while used as a family day care home or group home;

(10)  Within any facility which is primarily used for, or designed for the primary purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except to the extent smoking is part of a stage production;

(11)  Video arcades, bingo parlors, game rooms, pool halls, and other amusement and entertainment centers;

(12)  Sports arenas, health and fitness clubs, auditoriums, and other facilities used for sports, recreation and fitness purposes;

(13)  Bowling centers, including, but not limited to, bowling lanes, bowlers’ settees, visitors’ settees and concourses;

(14)  Rooms, chambers, halls, or other places used for public meetings or public assembly, during such time as a public meeting is in progress;

(15)  Restaurants, including outdoor seating areas;

(16)  Retail food marketing establishments, including, but not limited to, grocery stores and supermarkets;

(17)  Beauty and personal care salons and barber shops;

(18)  Laundromats;

(19)  Common areas;

(20)  Hotel and motel facilities, except as provided in Section 5-10.07;

(21)  Educational facilities;

(22)  Polling places;

(b)    Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who control any establishment or facility may declare that entire establishment or facility as a non-smoking establishment, whether enclosed or not.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 2, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.04. Prohibition of smoking in multi-unit residences.
(a)    Smoking is prohibited in all of the following, except as permitted under Section 5-10.07:

(1)    Units in a multi-unit residence;

(2)    Exclusive-use enclosed areas associated with a multi-unit residence, such as a private balcony, porch, deck, or patio;

(3)    Common areas in a multi-unit residence complex, except in a designated smoking area.

( § 4, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.05. Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
(a)    Smoking is prohibited in all enclosed places of employment. Each employer associated with each such place of employment shall make reasonable efforts, as necessary, to ensure that all enclosed areas in the place of employment controlled by such employer are free from tobacco smoke or other smoke emanating from smoking products.

(b)    All employers shall comply with these non-smoking provisions and shall be responsible for their implementation in their places of employment.

(c)    Employers shall post “No Smoking” signs in accordance with Section 5-10.11 of this chapter.

(d)    Places of employment exempt from the prohibition on smoking in other sections in this chapter shall be exempt from this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 3, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.06. Restriction of smoking in other areas.
        Smoking shall be restricted in Libbey Bowl and other outdoor City recreational and entertainment facilities, including, but not limited to, ball fields, sports arenas, children’s play areas, swimming pools, and outdoor theaters where the general public assembles to either engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports or entertainment events; provided, however, that smoking may be permitted in unenclosed areas of these facilities designated for smoking by the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 5, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.07. Smoking optional areas.
        Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter:

(a)    Single-family homes, except when used as a child care or health care facility or group home;

(b)    Bars;

(c)    Retail tobacco stores;

(d)    Dwellings used for home occupations;

(e)    Hotel and motel rooms with separate ventilation systems rented to guests provided each hotel and motel designates not less than fifty (50%) percent of its guest rooms as non-smoking rooms;

(f)    Conference or meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions provided these rooms are equipped with separate ventilation systems, while these places are being used for private functions. However, fifty (50%) percent of these areas will be designated non-smoking;

(g)    An enclosed place of employment which employs only the owner and no other employee provided that the place of employment is not a public place and does not share a ventilation system with any other enclosed place of employment or public places;

(h)    Bar areas within restaurants provided that such areas meet the separation standards enumerated in subdivisions (1) through (3) of this subsection and provided that the restaurant/bar intends to comply with these standards. The intent to comply shall be demonstrated by the restaurant/bar owner in the following manner:

(1)    The bar must have a separate ventilation system from the restaurant;

(2)    There must be a wall or walls with no penetration between the two (2) uses. A doorway may penetrate the wall if the doorway contains a door;

(3)    If a bar and restaurant are both attached through a kitchen or other space, that space must be equipped with a separate ventilation system or vented through the restaurant ventilation system;

(i)     Designated smoking areas in multi-unit residences;

(j)     Units within multi-unit residences with separate ventilation systems.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 6, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.08. Prohibition of tobacco vending machines.
        No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale, or distributed by or from a tobacco vending machine or other device designed or used for vending purposes, except from vending machines located on premises which have either a type 61, type 42 or type 48 license from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Each tobacco vending machine must be located at least twenty-five (25′) feet from any entry into the premises. The provisions of this section shall become effective one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994 , as amended by § 7, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.09. Regulation of tobacco products.
(a)    Any person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing or marketing cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products for commercial purposes shall post plainly visible signs at the point of purchase of tobacco products which state “THE SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW. PHOTO I.D. IS REQUIRED.” The letters of said signs should be at least one-quarter inch (¼″) high.

(b)    No person in the business of selling or otherwise distributing or marketing cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products for commercial purposes shall in the course of such business distribute any cigarette or other tobacco product, or coupon, certificate, or other written material which may be redeemed for tobacco products without charge, to any person on a public street or sidewalk or in a public park or on other public grounds.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 8, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.10. Out of package sales.
        No person shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other tobacco or smoking products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 9, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.11. Education.
        The City Manager or designee, in conjunction with the Ventura County Department of Health, shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this chapter to citizens affected by it, and to guide landlords, owners, operators, employers and managers in their compliance with it. Such program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 10, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.12. Posting of signs.
(a)    “No Smoking” signs or the international “No Smoking” symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is regulated by this chapter, by the landlord, owner, operator, manager, employer or other person having control of such building or other place.

(b)    Every restaurant shall have posted within every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited.

(c)    Every hotel and motel shall have signs posted conspicuously in the registration and lobby areas which state that non-smoking rooms are maintained and may be available; rooms designated as being non-smoking shall have signs designating such restriction conspicuously placed within the room.

(d)    The posting of signs pursuant to this section shall be exempt from the provisions of Chapter 6 of Title 9 of this Code.

(e)    The City Manager may adopt such regulations as are reasonably necessary to carry out the purpose and intent of this section.

(f)    The absence of signs shall not be a defense to a violation of any provision of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 11, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.13. Landlord’s responsibilities.
(a)    On the effective date of the ordinance adding this section, the following regulations apply:

(1)    The landlord will not permit the presence of ash trays, ash cans, or other receptacles designed for, or primarily used for, the disposal of smoking waste within any common area, except in a designated outdoor smoking area.

(2)    The landlord shall provide written notice to all tenants whose units are governed by an existing lease restating Section 5-10.04 and describing their rights to submit written complaints to the landlord under Section 5-10.13(a)(4) or to the City Manager under Section 5-10.14(c). If the landlord has created a designated smoking area, the landlord must include a floor plan of the building in the notice identifying the location of the designated smoking area. The landlord does not need to comply with this provision if smoking is already prohibited in all common areas and units in the multi-unit residence.

(3)    Every new lease shall include a provision substantially consistent with the following: “Ojai Municipal Code Chapter 5-10 prohibits smoking in all units, exclusive use enclosed areas, and common areas in a multi-unit residence, except as permitted under Section 5-10.07. It is a material breach of this lease for the tenant, or any other person subject to the control of the tenant or resident by invitation or permission of the tenant, to engage in vaping, inhaling, exhaling, or burning any electronic cigarette, lighted cigar, cigarette, weed, plant, combustible substance, or mechanical or electronic device in any manner or in any form on the property, or to violate any law regulating smoking while anywhere on the property. Violations are punishable under Ojai Municipal Code Section 5-10.15.”

(4)    Upon receiving a signed written complaint regarding prohibited smoking, the landlord must provide a warning to the offending tenant, stating that the tenant may be evicted if three (3) or more complaints are received. Upon receiving a third signed, written complaint against the offending tenant, the landlord may evict the tenant or pursue other legal remedies available. The landlord must maintain copies of the written complaints and make them available to the City upon request.

(b)    If the landlord has fully complied with Chapter 5-10, the landlord shall not be criminally or civilly liable to any person for a person’s breach of any smoking provision while in the multi-unit residence.

(c)    A landlord’s failure to enforce any smoking regulation of a lease agreement on one or more occasions does not constitute a waiver of the lease or agreement provisions required by this section, and does not prevent future enforcement of the lease or agreement provisions required by this section.

(§ 12, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.14. Enforcement.
(a)    Notice of the provisions set forth within this chapter shall be given to all applicants for a business license.

(b)    Enforcement of this chapter shall be implemented by the City Manager or designee.

(c)    Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the City Manager or designee.

(d)    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 13, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.15. Violations and penalties.
(a)    It shall be unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with any of its provisions.

(b)    It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter.

(c)    Any person, employer, business, tobacco retailer, landlord, owner, manager or operator of any establishment subject to this chapter who violates any provision of this chapter, shall be deemed guilty of an infraction at the discretion of City authorities and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the following schedule of penalties: a maximum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense; a maximum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense; a maximum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for every offense thereafter. Such person, employer, business, tobacco retailer, landlord, or owner, manager or operator shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted and shall be punishable as provided in this section. The provisions of this section are in addition to and independent of any other sanctions which are or may be imposed under this chapter or any other provision of law.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 14, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.16. Non-retaliation.
        No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any right to a smoke-free environment afforded by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 15, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 5-10.17. Other applicable laws.
        This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable law.

(§ 1, Ord. 703, eff. February 12, 1994, as amended by § 16, Ord. 899, eff. July 25, 2019)

Chapter 11 NOISE STANDARDS AND REGULATIONS
Sec. 5-11.01. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to maintain a quiet and comfortable living environment and to protect residents from unreasonably disturbing sound.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-11.02. Definitions.
“Ambient noise” is the normal or existing level of environmental noise at a given location. It is the composite of all noise from sources near and far, excluding the alleged intrusive noise source.

“A-weighted sound level” means the sound level as measured on a sound level meter using the “A” weighting network. The level so read is designated in units of db(A).

“Decibel (db)” is a unit for measuring the amplitude of a sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base of ten (10) of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals.

“Impulsive noise” means a noise characterized by brief excursions of sound pressures whose peak levels are very much greater than the ambient noise level (such as might be produced by the impact of a pile driver) typically with one second or less duration.

“Leaf blower” is any mechanical device used, designed or operated to produce a current of air by fuel, electricity or other means to push, propel, or blow cuttings, refuse or debris.

“Noise level limit” means the maximum noise level acceptable under this chapter for the stated period of time.

“Plainly audible” means any sound that can be clearly heard by a person with normal hearing using ordinary auditory senses without artificial enhancement.

“Sound amplifying equipment” means any machine or device used for amplification of the human voice, music or other sound regardless of location, including such things as radios, stereos and compact disc players.

“Sound level meter” means an instrument used to measure sound levels which meets the standards of the American National Standards Institute.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018)

 

 

 

 

Sec. 5-11.03. General noise regulations.
(a)    It is unlawful for any person to make or permit to be made any noise which unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood. Except as otherwise provided herein, no permit may be issued for any activity that may violate this section.

(b)    The factors which may be considered in determining whether a violation exists include, but are not limited to, the following:

(1)    The sound level of the objectionable noise;

(2)    The sound level of the ambient noise;

(3)    The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

(4)    The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

(5)    The number of persons affected by the noise sources;

(6)    The time of day or night the noise occurs;

(7)    The duration of the noise and its tonal, informational or musical content;

(8)    Whether the noise is continuous, recurrent or intermittent;

(9)    Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial activity;

(10)  Whether the noise is plainly audible by an enforcement officer at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the source of the noise.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-11.04. Noise standards and limits.
(a)    Exterior noise standards.

(1)    The following exterior noise standards apply to residential and commercial/industrial zones within the City:

 

 

Time Period

Noise Level

Residential Zone (includes Village Mixed Use)

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

55 db

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

45 db

Commercial/Industrial Zone

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

65 db

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

55 db

 

(2)    It is unlawful for any person at any location within the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise, on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured on any other residential or commercial/industrial property, to exceed the following noise levels measured in decibels on a cumulative basis per hour:

 

 

Noise Standard

15 Minutes Duration/Hour

Five Minutes Duration/Hour

One Minute Duration/Hour

Zones

Day

Night

Day

Night

Day

Night

Day

Night

Residential (includes Village Mixed Use)

55 db

45 db

60 db

50 db

65 db

55 db

70 db

60 db

Commercial/Industrial

65 db

55 db

70 db

60 db

75 db

65 db

80 db

70 db

 

(b)    Interior noise standards.

(1)    The following interior noise standards apply to all residentially zoned parcels and dwelling units within the City:

 

Zone

Time Period

Interior Noise Standard

Residential

All hours

45 db

 

(2)    It is unlawful for any person at any location within the City to create any noise, or to allow the creation of any noise, on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person when the foregoing causes the noise level, when measured within any other dwelling unit on any residential property, to exceed:

(i)     The interior standard for a cumulative period of more than five (5) minutes in any hour;

(ii)    The interior noise standard plus five (5) decibels for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour;

(iii)   The interior noise standard plus ten (10) decibels for any period of time.

(c)    Ambient noise level exception. In the event the existing ambient noise level exceeds any of the noise level limits in subsections (a) and (b) of this section, the noise level limit shall be increased in five (5) decibel increments as appropriate to encompass or reflect the ambient noise level.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-11.05. Special noise sources.
        Special regulations and/or prohibitions are established on the following specific noise sources; provided, however, that unless otherwise excepted, the following noise sources must nevertheless comply with the noise level limits set forth in Section 5-11.04 of this chapter.

(a)    Animals. It is unlawful to keep, maintain or permit to be kept or maintained upon any premises, animals which make utterances, barks or cries which are so loud, so frequent and continued over so long a period of time that they deprive persons residing in two (2) or more separate residences in the neighborhood of the comfortable enjoyment of their home.

(b)    Car alarms, burglar alarms, horns and signaling devices. Unnecessary use or operation of car alarms, burglar alarms, horns and signaling devices, on automobiles, motorcycles or any other vehicles is prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to cause, allow or permit any motor vehicle alarm registered in the name of, or driven by, such person to emit any audible sound within the City for a period of more than ten (10) minutes. It shall also be unlawful for any property owner or lessee/tenant of a real property to allow a burglar alarm to sound for more than ten (10) minutes. The time shall be calculated based upon the emission of the first audible sound, and ten (10) minutes thereafter, notwithstanding any variation or delay in the emissions of audible sound. Any violation of this section is declared a public nuisance. In addition to other remedies, if a motor vehicle alarm continues to be activated, any police officer may have the vehicle removed from any zone in the City to abate such nuisance at the owner’s and/or responsible party’s expense. In the case of burglar alarms, the owner or lessee/tenant of the property shall be subject to a citation if the alarm sounds for more than ten (10) minutes.

(c)    Construction. Any person who operates powered construction equipment, erects, constructs, demolishes, excavates for, alters or repairs any building or structure within the City in such a manner as to cause noise to be received by any person beyond the boundaries of the property on which the construction work is occurring shall comply with the following:

(1)    Construction hours shall be limited to between 7:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on weekdays. Construction activities authorized by a valid City permit may, as warranted by the project, exceed the noise level limits of Section 5-11.04 on a temporary and short-term basis during the authorized construction hours, as determined appropriate and necessary by the Community Development Director.

(2)    No construction work shall be performed on weekends or City holidays.

(3)    All construction equipment shall be operated with the standard factory silencer and/or muffler equipment attached and maintained in good working order.

Exception: A person may perform construction work on the person’s own property that results in noise being received by persons beyond the boundaries of the property between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekends providing such construction activity is for the purpose of improving the property where the work is being performed, is not carried on for profit or livelihood, and otherwise meets the noise level standards of Section 5-11.04 of this chapter.

(d)    Gardening and domestic power tools. No person shall operate any lawnmower, lawn edger, riding tractor or any other machinery, equipment or other mechanical or electrical device, or any hand tool which creates a loud, raucous or impulsive sound, within any residential zone or within any commercial zone which can be heard within any residential zone between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. Use of such tools is prohibited on City holidays.

(e)    Leaf blowers.

(1)    Only electric powered leaf blowers may be used in the City. Leaf blowers powered by internal combustion engines are prohibited in the City. The operation of electric powered leaf blowers is permitted in residential zones providing the following conditions are met:

(i)     Hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. weekdays and Saturdays. Operation is prohibited on Sundays and holidays.

(ii)    No cutting, refuse or debris is blown onto neighboring properties or into a street or gutter.

(iii)   The standard factory silencer shall be attached at all times and in good working order.

The operation of electric powered leaf blowers shall be permitted on parcels in non-residential zones under the following conditions:

(iv)   Hours of operation are limited to 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Operation is prohibited on City holidays.

(v)    No cuttings, refuse or debris are blown onto neighboring properties or into a street or gutter.

(vi)   The standard factory silencer shall be attached at all times and maintained in good working order.

(2)    No business license shall be issued to any gardener and/or landscaper without proof of purchase of an electric leaf blower and a signed declaration that the company will not use prohibited leaf blowers or other prohibited equipment in the City.

(3)    The full blower nozzle extension shall be used for maximum efficiency and to minimize the spread of fugitive dust.

(4)    After leaf blower use, debris and waste materials shall be disposed of in trash receptacles or other equivalent container.

(5)    Leaf blowers shall be maintained in proper working order and all manufacturers’ noise and dust control equipment on the leaf blower shall remain on the blower and be in operating condition.

(f)    Libbey Bowl events.

(1)    All performances using sound amplification equipment in Libbey Bowl shall be in conformance with the adopted sound control plan for the Bowl. The sound control plan shall include such provisions as determined by resolution of the City Council.

(2)    Use of sound amplification equipment in Libbey Bowl shall be limited to the hours between 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

(g)    Loading and unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials or similar objects between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in a manner that causes a noise disturbance across the boundary lines of an adjacent property shall be prohibited. At all other times such loading and handling activities are subject to the noise level limits of Section 5-11.04 of this chapter.

(h)    Motor vehicle operation. The racing of the engine of a motor vehicle, allowing the engine to idle for longer than ten (10) minutes, or bringing a motor vehicle to a sudden start or stop are prohibited, except as required by an emergency. Operating a vehicle on public or private property in a manner that generates noise that is so loud, raucous or jarring that it disturbs or is a nuisance to any adjacent neighborhood or person residing in the neighborhood is prohibited.

(i)     Outdoor dining. Outdoor dining in commercial zones is prohibited between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. Such hours of operation may be further restricted by the conditions of any permit that must be granted to approve outdoor dining.

(j)     Pool equipment. All pool motor pumps and filters shall be designed and constructed with sound attenuation devices that meet the requirements of the City Building Department.

(k)    Refuse collection. No person shall collect refuse or operate a street sweeping vehicle on a street or parking lot within or adjacent to a City residential area between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(l)     Sound amplifying equipment (includes radios). The use or operation of sound amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following restrictions and prohibitions:

(1)    The type of amplified sound shall be limited to either music or human speech, or both.

(2)    The use or operation of sound amplifying equipment shall comply with the noise level limits set forth in Section 5-11.4.

(3)    The volume of sound shall be so controlled that it will not be unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons or domestic animals within the area of audibility.

(4)    It is unlawful for any person to operate a radio, stereo, compact disc player or other sound amplifying equipment on the public right-of-way or public land in a manner that exceeds the noise level limits established for adjacent properties or is plainly audible to the human ear at a distance of thirty-five (35) feet from the source, unless the operation of such equipment is part of a special event sponsored by the City or is otherwise permitted pursuant to the provisions of subsection (f) of this section.

(5)    The operation of any radio, compact disc or tape player on a public transit bus or trolley so as to emit noise that is plainly audible to any other person in the vehicle shall be prohibited.

(m)   Street sweeping vehicles. No person shall collect refuse or operate a street sweeping vehicle on a street or parking lot within or adjacent to a City residential area between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.

(n)    Yelling, shouting, etc. Disturbing or raucous yelling, shouting, hooting or whistling on the public streets and sidewalks is prohibited.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 1, Ord. 736, eff. April 22, 1999, § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018, § 2, Ord. 906, eff. April 29, 2020)

 

Sec. 5-11.06. Loud parties and assemblages—Enforcement costs and response fees.
(a)    When any loud or unruly assemblages occur and the City’s law enforcement agency is required to respond to the scene in response to citizen complaints, the peace officer at the scene shall determine whether there is a violation of this chapter. If the peace officer determines there is a violation, he or she shall notify the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property and/or the person responsible for the assemblage that such person or persons shall be held personally liable for the cost of providing additional law enforcement personnel over and above the normal police services provided during the initial response to the assemblage. If the person in charge or responsible for the party is a minor, the parents or guardians of such minor shall be notified regarding this liability.

(b)    In the event that subsequent police personnel and resources are needed within twenty-four (24) hours after the initial warning given in accordance with subsection (a) of this section in order to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare caused by such unruly assemblage, such resources shall be deemed to be on a special security assignment over and above normal police services. The owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property where such assemblage occurs and/or the person responsible for such assemblage shall be personally responsible for the cost of subsequent call backs or security assignments in an amount determined upon a cost accounting basis by the City, per administrative guidelines adopted by the City and approved by resolution of the City Council. The cost of such special police security shall include damage to City property and/or injuries to City personnel. In addition, to the foregoing, the City reserves its right to elect any other legal remedies.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-11.07. Exemptions.
        The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(a)    Emergency exemption. The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to the existence of an emergency or the emission of sound in the performance of emergency work, including emergency road work or utility repair;

(b)    Warning devices. The operation and/or testing of warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety, including police, fire and ambulance sirens and train horns;

(c)    Outdoor school activities. Activities conducted on public playgrounds and public or private school grounds, including, but not limited to, athletic and school entertainment events;

(d)    Special events. Community events, concerts and parades open to the general public without charge which are approved and/or permitted by the City in advance shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter;

(e)    Post Office Tower bell. Sound emanating from the bell in the historic Post Office Tower on Ojai Avenue is exempt from the provisions of this chapter;

(f)    Public facility maintenance and construction in the public right-of-way. Maintenance and repair of public facilities by City personnel and City-authorized contractors on weekends and holidays are exempt. Construction on public facilities or in the public right-of-way by City-authorized contractors and personnel is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. City personnel performing maintenance and construction activities shall make every effort to conform with the provisions of this chapter when feasible.

(g)    After hours construction.

(1)    The Community Development Director or designee may issue an after-hours construction permit authorizing work and/or entrance to a work site otherwise prohibited by this chapter if the Director determines that the public interest will be served by such a permit. Situations in which the public interest may be served include, but are not limited to, construction on or near school grounds and construction that may interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic in heavily traveled areas.

(2)    Applications for an after-hours construction permit shall be in writing and shall set forth how the public interest will be served by issuing the permit. An after-hours construction permit may be revoked or suspended by the Planning Director or designee if it is determined that the proposed activity will detrimentally affect the public safety, health and welfare. Emergency construction activities to protect the public safety, health and welfare are exempted under subdivision (1) of this subsection.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-11.08. Sound level measurement.
        Any sound levels measured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be “A” weighted sound levels, measured with a sound level meter using the “A” weighting and slow response, except for impulsive noise, for which the fast response shall be used. The sound level meter shall meet the standards for such devices established by the American National Standards Institute. Outdoor measurements shall be taken with the microphone located along the property line of the complainant’s property or the noise source. Whenever possible, the meter shall be located three (3) to five (5) feet above ground level. If the noise complaint is related to interior noise levels, interior noise levels shall be measured within the complainant’s dwelling or commercial structure. If possible, the ambient noise level shall be measured at the same locations as the offending noise source is measured.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018)

 

Sec. 5-11.09. Enforcement.
(a)    The Director of Community Development shall enforce the provisions of this section.

(b)    Any noise exceeding the noise level limits specified in Section 5-11.04 of this chapter, or any noise constituting an occurrence of any prohibited act specified in this chapter, shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this chapter.

(c)    Except where a person is acting in good faith to comply with an abatement order issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section, violation of any provision of this chapter shall be cause for a notice of violation to be issued by the Director of Community Development or other responsible official according to procedures which the Director may prescribe. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction.

(d)    In lieu of issuing a notice of violation, the Director or other responsible enforcement official may issue a warning or an order requiring abatement, within a reasonable time period, of a sound source alleged to be in violation of this chapter. No complaint or further action shall be taken in the event that the cause of the violation has been removed, the condition abated or fully corrected within the time period specified in the warning order of abatement.

(e)    In addition to the enforcement powers granted by this section to the Director of Community Development and the enforcement powers provided by all other applicable sections of this Code, the Chief of Police is authorized to enforce this chapter by issuance of citations for violations of this chapter.

(f)    For purposes of this chapter, enforcement officer and enforcement official mean the Director of Community Development, the Chief of Police, the Code Enforcement Officer, and their designees and deputies.

(§ 1, Ord. 731, eff. August 27, 1998, as amended by § 2, Ord. 887, eff. August 9, 2018)

Chapter 12 STORM WATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Sec. 5-12.101. Purpose and intent.
        This chapter implements the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (the “Clean Water Act” or “CWA”), 33 U.S.C. Sections 1251-1387, and the California Water Code by prohibiting the discharge of any pollutant to navigable waters of the United States from a point source unless the discharge is authorized by a permit issued pursuant to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) required by CWA Section 402, 33 U.S.C. Section 1342, and prohibits nonstorm water discharges into the storm drain system.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.102. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by the regulations implementing the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, Clean Water Act Section 402, and Division 7 of the California Water Code, as they may be amended from time to time, if defined therein, and, if not, to the definitions in an applicable permit issued by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board—Los Angeles (“RWQCB—ILA”) as such permits may be amended from time to time.

(a)    “Best Management Practices” (“BMPs”) shall mean schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices to prevent or reduce Pollutants in discharges. BMPs include, but are not limited to, public education and outreach, proper planning of development projects, proper clean-out of catch basins and proper waste handling and disposal.

(b)    “Chapter” shall mean Chapter 12 of Title 5 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(c)    “City” shall mean the City of Ojai, California.

(d)    “Development” shall mean any construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction for which either discretionary land use approval or a permit is required, for any public or private residential (whether single-family, multi-unit or planned unit development); industrial; commercial; retail; institutional; and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or mass grading for future construction.

(e)    “Director” shall mean the Director of Public Works of the City of Ojai and persons designated by and under the Director’s instruction and supervision.

(f)    “Discharge,” when used without qualification, shall mean the discharge of a pollutant.

(g)    “Discharge of a pollutant” shall mean any addition of any pollutant to waters of the United States, to the City’s storm drain system or any addition of any pollutant to waters of the contiguous zone from any point source other than a vessel or other floating craft which is being used as a means of transportation.

(h)    “EPA” or “US EPA” shall mean the Environmental Protection Agency of the United States of America.

(i)     “Hazardous substances” shall mean those substances designated as hazardous substances under Section 311(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, which are listed in the table at 40 C.F.R. Section 116.4, and other applicable law.

(j)     “Hearing officer” shall mean the City Manager or the City Manager’s designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue final decisions on matters raised therein.

(k)    “Illicit connection” shall mean any device or artifice, excluding roof drains and other similar connections, into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System, without a permit, through or by which an Illicit Discharge may be discharged.

(l)     “Illicit discharge” shall mean any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of storm water except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit and discharges which are exempt or conditionally exempt in accordance with any applicable order of the RWQCB—LA. The term “illicit discharge” shall not include the following types of nonstorm water discharges, unless the RWQCB—LA determines that these discharges cause specific receiving water limit violations:

(1)    Water line flushing;

(2)    Landscape irrigation;

(3)    Diverted stream flows;

(4)    Rising ground waters;

(5)    Uncontaminated ground water infiltration (as defined at 40 C.F.R. 35.2005(20)) to separate storm sewers;

(6)    Uncontaminated pumped ground water;

(7)    Discharges from potable water sources;

(8)    Foundation drains;

(9)    Air conditioning condensation;

(10)  Irrigation water;

(11)  Springs;

(12)  Water from crawl space pumps;

(13)  Footing drains;

(14)  Lawn watering;

(15)  Individual residential or non-commercial car washing;

(16)  Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

(17)  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges;

(18)  Street wash water;

(19)  Discharges or flows from fire fighting activities; and

(20)  Other types of discharge approved by the Executive Officer of the Regional Board.

(m)   “Invoice for costs” shall mean an invoice for the actual costs and expenses of the City, including, but not limited to, administrative overhead, salaries, attorney’s fees and other expenses recoverable under applicable law, incurred during any inspection, investigation or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter, where a notice of violation or other enforcement option under Section 5-12.112 is used to obtain compliance with this chapter.

(n)    “Permit” or “national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit” shall mean an authorization, license or equivalent control document issued by the US EPA, the State Water Resources Control Board or a Regional Water Quality Control Board, and includes an NPDES general permit and the permit issued by the RWQCB—LA, and entitled Water Discharge Requirements for Storm Water Management/Urban Runoff Discharges for VCFCD, County of Ventura, and the cities of Ventura County, Order No. 94-082 (NPDES No. CAS063339).

(o)    “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation, consortium, local, state or federal government agency, political subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

(p)    “Pollutant” shall mean a “pollutant” as defined in Section 502(6) of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1362(6) or Water Code Section 13373, or other applicable law, which is discharged into water. “Pollutant” shall not mean uncontaminated storm water, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility, or any substance, the discharge of which into the storm drain system, through BMPs, has been reduced to the maximum extent practicable, and shall not include those nonstorm water discharges set forth in the definition of “illicit discharge” contained in subsection (l)(1) of this section, unless the RWQCB—LA determines that these discharges cause specific receiving water limit violations.

(q)    “Property” shall mean any real property, irrespective of ownership.

(r)    “Responsible party” shall mean the person(s) identified in and responsible for compliance with the provisions of a storm water pollution prevention plan or storm water pollution control plan, and includes the owner and operator of the property to which the plan relates.

(s)    “State general permit” shall mean either the State general industrial storm water permit or the State general construction permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the EPA revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the State Water Resources Control Board, the term “State general permit” shall also refer to any EPA-administered storm water control program for industrial and construction activities.

(t)     “Storm drain system” shall mean a conveyance or system of conveyances, including municipal streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourses, or other facilities owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the City and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of Storm Water into waters of the United States (as defined at 40 C.F.R. Section 122.2).

(u)    “Storm water” shall mean runoff from rain or storm activity, snow melt runoff and surface runoff and drainage.

(v)    “Storm water pollution control plan” shall mean the plan as required by the City.

(w)   “Storm water pollution prevention plan” shall mean the plan as required by State general permit.

(x)    “Storm water quality management plan” shall mean the Ventura Countywide Storm Water Quality Management Plan, as the same may be amended from time to time.

(y)    “Watercourse” shall mean any natural or artificial channel for passage of water including the VCFCD jurisdictional channels, or “red line channels” (as described in the List of Channels within the Comprehensive Plan of the VCFCD as of October 4, 1994 and its amendments).

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.103. Prohibition of illicit connections and illicit discharges.
(a)    The discharge of pollutants into the storm drain system is prohibited. All discharges of material other than storm water must be in compliance with NPDES Permit No. CAS063339 or any other NPDES permit issued by the State of California.

(b)    No person shall:

(1)    Construct, use, maintain, operate and/or continue to utilize an illicit connection.

(2)    Cause, allow or facilitate an illicit discharge.

(3)    Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee or independent contractor to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or cause, allow or facilitate an illicit discharge.

(4)    Use storm drain system or watercourses for the discharge/disposal of wastes (including, but not limited to, yard trimmings, cut grass or paint clean-up).

(5)    Throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep or permit to be thrown, deposited, kept or maintained in or upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk or other component of the storm drain system, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. Wastes deposited in streets immediately prior to and for the purposes of collection are exempt from this prohibition.

(c)    This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, all illicit connections regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.104. Reduction of pollutants in storm water.
(a)    Discharges of storm water containing pollutants which have not been reduced to the maximum extent practicable are prohibited.

(b)    Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the storm drain system or watercourses shall undertake all practicable measures to reduce such pollutants.

(c)    With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the City may exempt in writing other nonstorm water discharges which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system or watercourses.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.105. Development.
(a)    On and after January 1, 1999, all development within the City shall be undertaken in accordance with:

(1)    Any conditions and requirements established by an applicable NPDES permit which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in storm water from the project site.

(2)    A storm water pollution prevention plan, which shall be prepared in accordance with State general permit.

(3)    A storm water pollution control plan, which shall be prepared in accordance with City requirements.

(4)    Any condition and/or requirements established by the City to protect specific watersheds or drainage basins.

(b)    Prior to the issuance by the City of any discretionary land use approval or permit for any development, the property owner shall submit to and obtain the approval of the Director for a storm water pollution control plan.

(c)    Proof of compliance with any general NPDES permit shall be required in a form acceptable to the City.

(d)    Notwithstanding the subsections (a) and (b) of this section, a storm water pollution control plan shall not be required for a development of four (4) or fewer lots which are zoned to permit only single-family units unless the Director determines that such development construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into the storm drain system.

(e)    Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a storm water pollution control plan shall not exempt any person from the requirement to comply independently with each provision of this chapter.

(f)    Each application for a storm water pollution control plan shall name a responsible party for the project.

(g)    The owners of lots included in a development project, their successors and assigns and each named responsible party (collectively “owners”) shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of the approved storm water pollution control plan. Each failure or violation by the owners to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of an approved storm water pollution control plan shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. The Director may require that the storm water pollution control plan be recorded with the County Recorder’s office by the property owner.

(h)    The costs and expenses of the City incurred in the review, approval or revision of any storm water pollution control plan or other related requirements (or in the approval or revision of any such) shall be assessed to the owners and shall be due and payable to the City. The City may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit and the balance, if any, refunded to the depositor.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.106. Best management practices and requirements.
(a)    The Director may adopt requirements establishing appropriate BMPs for any activity, operation or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of the storm drain system. If relevant BMPs have been promulgated by the City or any federal, State of California and/or regional agency for an activity, operation or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or watercourses, every person undertaking such activity or operation or owning or operating such facility shall implement such BMPs.

(b)    Any person engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants entering the storm drain system, or watercourses, as determined by the Director, shall implement applicable BMPs to the extent they are technologically and economically achievable to prevent and/or reduce such pollutants.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.107. Compliance with general permits.
        Each industrial discharger associated with any construction activity, or any other discharger described in any NPDES or NPDES general permit as may be adopted by the EPA, the State Water Resources Control Board or the RWQCB—LA, shall comply with and undertake all other activities required by any applicable NPDES general permit with regard to such discharge.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.108. Elimination of illicit discharges.
(a)    The Director shall require a person responsible for an illicit discharge to discontinue the illicit discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and to require such person to take any necessary measures to eliminate the source of the illicit discharge.

(b)    The Director shall require a person responsible for illicit connection to the storm drain system to eliminate or secure approval for the illicit connection by a specified date.

(c)    Regardless of whether the illicit connection or illicit discharge was established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter, it shall be subject to abatement pursuant to this chapter.

(d)    Whenever the City finds that an illicit discharge is taking place or has occurred which may result in or has resulted in pollution of the storm drain system, the City shall require the responsible person to cease the illicit discharge and the pollution within a specified time.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.109. Watercourse protection.
        Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or the person in charge of day-to-day operations of such property, shall keep and maintain the property reasonably free of trash, debris, vegetation and other obstacles which would pollute, contaminate or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, all existing structures within or adjacent to the watercourse shall be maintained so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for said maintenance, nor remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.110. Prohibited acts.
        No person shall commit or cause to be committed any of the following acts, unless a permit has first been obtained:

(a)    A discharge of a pollutant into any pipe or channel to a watercourse/storm drain system;

(b)    Modify the natural flow of water in storm drain system;

(c)    Deposit in, plant in or remove any material from any storm drain system including its banks, except as required for maintenance;

(d)    Construct, alter, enlarge, connect to, change or remove any structure in a storm drain system; or

(e)    Place any loose or unconsolidated material along the side of or within a storm drain system, or so close to the side as to cause a diversion of the flow, or to cause a probability of such material being transported by storm waters passing through a storm drain system.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.111. Scope of inspections.
(a)    The Director shall be authorized to enter public or private property to investigate the source or potential source of a suspected illicit discharge to a storm drain system or watercourses located within the City at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to storm water compliance.

(b)    The Director may inspect public or private property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to (1) identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property; (2) identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants; (3) investigating the natural slope at the location, the runoff coefficient, drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems (including roads with drainage systems, catch basin, curbs, gutters, man-made channels and storm drains); (4) establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system; (5) locating any illicit connection or the source of any illicit discharge; (6) evaluating compliance with any storm water pollution control plan; and (7) evaluating compliance with any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

(c)    The Director may examine and copy such records as are necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(d)    The Director may inspect, sample and test any area of runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system. The Director may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including, but not limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The Director may take photographs or videotape, make measurements or drawings and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the property.

(e)    The Director may undertake monitoring and analysis including both the construction and maintenance of devices at the owners’ expense, or require the owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations of the property to undertake construction and maintenance of devices, at the owners’ expense, for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm drain system.

(f)    The owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations of property subject to inspection shall provide copies of test results to the City. On submission of a written request to the Director, such person shall be entitled to receive copies of test results conducted by the Director.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.112. Remedies for violation.
(a)    The Director shall review each report of illicit connection or illicit discharge, and, if appropriate, may serve a notice of violation to the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations of any public or private property, as to which an illicit connection or illicit discharge exists. The notice of violation will:

(1)    Identify the provision(s) of this chapter, the applicable storm water pollution prevention plan, storm water pollution control plan or permit alleged to have been violated; and

(2)    State that continued noncompliance may result in civil, criminal or administrative enforcement actions against the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations; and

(3)    State a compliance date that must be met by the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations; and

(4)    Describe the manner of abatement required; and

(5)    Order remediation work.

(b)    The notice of violation may include, where deemed applicable by the Director, the following terms and requirements:

(1)    Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent threatened or future unauthorized illicit discharges, including, but not limited to, the threat of an illicit discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area; and

(2)    Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent; and

(3)    Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection; and

(4)    Specific requirements for containment, cleanup, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact storm water runoff; and

(5)    Any other terms or requirements calculated to prevent continued or threatened violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to, requirements for compliance with BMPs guidance documents promulgated by any federal agency, the State of California or the City; and

(6)    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the storm water quality management plan, a storm water pollution prevention plan, storm water pollution control plan or permit issued pursuant hereto, or this chapter.

(c)    The Director:

(1)    Shall review and, if appropriate, may issue a cease and desist order where the public health, safety and/or welfare requires the same, directing the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations of any public or private property and/or any other person responsible for a violation of this chapter to:

(A)   Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or illicit discharge to the storm drain system;

(B)   Immediately contain or divert any flow of nonstorm water off the property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter;

(C)   Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter; and

(D)   Clean up the area affected by the violation.

(2)    May direct by cease and desist order that the owner or other person in charge of day-to-day operations or any permittee under any applicable permit, immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable plan, permit or this chapter.

(d)    The Director shall serve an invoice for costs upon the owner and/or person in charge of day-to-day operations of any public or private property or any other responsible person who is subject to a notice of violation or a cease and desist order. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the City. If any owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations, permittee or responsible party, or any other person fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance with this chapter, the City may institute collection proceedings.

(e)    Any notice of violation, cease and desist order or invoice for costs (collectively “order”) shall be served pursuant to the requirements of this chapter and shall be subject to the following:

(1)    Each order shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in this chapter.

(2)    The order shall include the address of the affected property and be addressed to the owner as shown on the most recently issued equalized assessment roll or as may otherwise appear in the current records of the City.

(3)    If the owner or person in charge of day-to-day operations of affected property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the Director, the order shall be deemed served ten (10) business days after posting on the property.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.113. Appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by the issuance of an order may appeal from the issuance of such order in accordance with the following:

(a)    Any such appeal shall be filed in writing within fifteen (15) days of the date of service of the order by the Director upon the appealing party.

(b)    No such appeal shall be valid for any purpose unless it is timely filed with the City Clerk and unless a filing and processing fee is paid contemporaneously with the filing thereof in an amount as set by City Council resolution.

(c)    That upon the timely filing of such an appeal, the Hearing Officer shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal as expeditiously as is possible.

(d)    At the time of such hearing, the Hearing Officer shall permit any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing on the matters involved in the issuance of the order which is the subject of the appeal. The Hearing Officer need not follow the strict provisions of the rules of evidence as utilized in a judicial proceeding, but shall follow the substance of such rule to the end that the decision rendered is based upon reliable relevant evidentiary material. The Hearing Officer’s decision shall be final and conclusive and subject only to judicial review.

        The provisions of Sections 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this chapter. Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall file such action within ninety (90) days of the occurrence of the event for which review is sought.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

 

Sec. 5-12.114. Violation—Penalties.
(a)    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare and is hereby declared and deemed to be a nuisance. Any person who violates any provision of or fails to comply with any requirement of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with Chapter 2 of Article 1 of this Code.

(b)    Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with a separate provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter punishable by fines or sentences issued in accordance herewith.

(c)    Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the Director or the City to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter.

(d)    Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in violation of the CWA or the state Porter-Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions of these acts including civil and criminal penalties. Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter and the enforcement processes hereinbefore provided may result in the filing of a citizen suit by the City pursuant to CWA Section 505(a), seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance and other appropriate relief. The City may also notify the EPA, the RWQCB—LA, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter.

(e)    The City may file, in a court of competent jurisdiction, a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing non-compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the City of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the City, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law.

(f)    The City may file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of (1) all costs incurred in enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, attorney’s fees, all other expenses as authorized by law and consequential damages, (2) all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health and (3) damages for irreparable harm to the environment.

(g)    The City may file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the storm drain system from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the storm drain system.

(§ 2, Ord. 735, eff. March 12, 1999)

Chapter 13 SINGLE-USE CARRYOUT BAGS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 817, effective May 10, 2012, has an operative date of July 1, 2012.

 

Sec. 5-13.101. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this chapter:

(a)    “Carryout bag” means any bag that is provided by a retail establishment at the point of sale to a customer for use to transport or carry away purchases, such as merchandise, goods or food, from the retail establishment. Carryout bags do not include product bags as defined in this chapter.

(b)    “Restaurant” means any establishment in the City of Ojai that provides prepared food for public consumption on or off its premises and includes, without limitation, any store, shop, sales outlet, grocery store, or delicatessen.

(c)    “Grocery store” means any retail establishment that sells groceries, fresh, packaged, canned, dry, prepared or frozen food or beverage products and similar items, and includes, without limitation, supermarkets, convenience stores, liquor stores and gasoline stations.

(d)    “Paper bag pass-through” means the cost which must be collected by retailers from their customers when providing a recyclable paper bag.

(e)    “Product bag” means any bag provided to a customer for use within a retail establishment to assist in the collection or transport of products to the point of sale within the retail establishment, such as those distributed in the produce or meat section.

(f)    “Recyclable paper bag” means a paper carryout bag provided by a retail establishment to a customer at the point of sale that meets the following requirement:

(1)    The paper carryout bag is accepted for recycling in curbside programs in a majority of households that have access to curbside recycling programs in the City.

(g)    “Retail establishment” means any person, including any corporation, partnership, business, facility, vendor, organization or individual that sells or provides merchandise, goods or materials, including, without limitation, clothing, food or personal items of any kind directly to a customer. Retail establishment includes, without limitation, grocery store, department store, hardware store, pharmacy, convenience and liquor stores and any other retail store or vendor.

(h)    “Reusable bag” means a bag with handles that is specifically designed and manufactured for multiple reuse and is either (1) made of cloth or other washable material capable of being cleaned and disinfected, and/or (2) made of durable plastic that is at least two and one-quarter (2.25) mils thick and is suitable for reuse.

(i)     “Single-use plastic carryout bag” means any bag that is less than two and one-quarter (2.25) mils thick and is made predominately of plastic derived from petroleum or from bio-based sources, such as corn or other plant sources.

(Ord. No. 817, § 2, eff. May 10, 2012)

 

Sec. 5-13.102. Prohibitions.
(a)    No retail establishment in the City shall provide a single-use plastic bag to a customer unless otherwise permitted pursuant to Section 5-13.104

(b)    No grocery store in the City shall provide any type of carryout bag to a customer at the point of sale except a reusable bag or a recyclable paper bag unless otherwise permitted pursuant to Section 5-13.104

(c)    No person shall distribute a single-use plastic carryout bag at any City facility, City-managed concession, City-sponsored event or City-permitted event unless otherwise permitted pursuant to Section 5-13.104

(Ord. No. 817, § 2, eff. May 10, 2012)

 

Sec. 5-13.103. Recyclable paper bags cost pass-through.
(a)    Subject to subsection (b) of this Section, a grocery store may only provide a recyclable paper bag to a customer if it collects a paper bag cost pass-through from the customer for each recyclable paper bag provided.

(b)    The paper bag cost pass-through shall be ten (10) cents.

(c)    No grocery store collecting a paper bag pass-through pursuant to this Section shall rebate or otherwise reimburse a customer for any portion of this pass-through.

(d)    All grocery stores shall indicate on the customer transaction receipts the number of recyclable paper bags provided and the total amount of the paper bag pass-through.

(e)    On an annual basis or as otherwise may be required by the Community Development Director, or designee, each grocery store required to collect a paper bag pass-through shall report to the City, on a form approved by City Council. All moneys collected by the grocery store will be retained by the grocery store.

(Ord. No. 817, § 2, eff. May 10, 2012)

 

Sec. 5-13.104. Exemptions.
(a)    Notwithstanding the prohibitions contained in Section 5-13.102

(1)    Single-use paper or plastic carryout bags may be distributed without charge by restaurants for the transportation of food or beverages that are provided to customers for consumption on the premises, for take-out or by delivery.

(2)    Retail establishments may distribute product bags and may make reusable bags available to customers whether through sale or otherwise.

(b)    Notwithstanding the requirements contained in Section 5-13.103, a store may provide a reusable bag or a recyclable paper bag at no cost at the point of sale to a customer participating in the California Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children pursuant to Article 2 (commencing with Section 123275) of Chapter 1 of Part 2 of Division 106 of the California Health and Safety Code and/or a customer participating in the Supplemental Food Program pursuant to Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 15500) of Part 3 of Division 9 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code.

(c)    The City Manager, or designee, including the Community Development Director, may exempt a retail establishment from the requirements of this chapter for up to a one (1)-year period upon a showing by the retail establishment that the conditions of this chapter would cause undue hardship. An “undue hardship” shall only be found in:

(1)    Circumstances or situations unique to the retail establishment such that there are no reasonable alternatives to single-use plastic carryout bags or a paper bag pass-through cannot be collected; or

(2)    Circumstances or situations unique to the retail establishment such that compliance with the requirements of this chapter would deprive a person of a legally protected right.

(d)    If a retail establishment requires an exemption beyond the initial exemption period, the retail establishment must re-apply prior to the end of the exemption period and must demonstrate continued undue hardship if it wishes to have the exemption extended. Extensions may only be granted for intervals not to exceed one (1) year.

(e)    An exemption application shall include all information necessary for the City to make its decision, including, but not limited to, documentation showing the factual support for the claimed exemption. The City Manager, or designee, may require the applicant to provide additional information to permit the City to determine facts regarding the exemption application.

(f)    The City Manager, or designee, may approve the exemption application, in whole or in part, with such conditions necessary to ensure furtherance of the purposes of this ordinance.

(g)    Exemption decisions are effective immediately, are final and are not appealable.

(h)    The City Council may by resolution establish a fee for exemption applications. The fee shall be sufficient to cover the costs of processing the exemption application.

(Ord. No. 817, § 2, eff. May 10, 2012)

 

Sec. 5-13.105. Remedies.
(a)    The City Council is authorized to establish regulations and to take any and all actions reasonable and necessary to obtain compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, inspecting any retail establishment’s premises to verify compliance.

(b)    Any person violating this Section shall be guilty of an infraction which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding Two Hundred Fifty and no/100ths ($250.00) Dollars or a misdemeanor which shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(c)    The City Attorney may seek legal, injunctive or other equitable relief to enforce this chapter.

(d)    Administrative enforcement of this chapter shall proceed pursuant to the City’s Municipal Code Chapter 6 of Title 1 with the fines to be graduated for repeated violations in amounts set forth by City Council resolution.

(e)    The remedies and penalties provided in this Section are cumulative and not exclusive and nothing in this chapter shall preclude any person from pursuing any other remedies provided by law.

(f)    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, this chapter may be enforced through any remedy as provided for in this Section.

(Ord. No. 817, § 2, eff. May 10, 2012)

Chapter 14 ENVIRONMENTALLY ACCEPTABLE PACKAGING MATERIALS
Note
*       Editor’s note—The regulations set forth in this chapter shall take effect on July 1, 2014, in order to allow vendors to use up any remaining stock of prohibited product and to acquire necessary conforming product.

 

Sec. 5-14.101. Definitions.
        Unless otherwise expressly stated, whenever used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below:

(a)    “Affordable” means that a biodegradable, compostable or recyclable product may cost up to fifteen percent (15%) more than the purchase cost of the non-biodegradable, non-compostable or non-recyclable alternative(s).

(b)    “ASTM standard” means meeting the standards of the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) international standards D6400 or D6868 for biodegradable and compostable plastics, as those standards may be amended.

(c)    “Biodegradable” means the ability of organic matter to break down from a complex to a more simple form through the action of bacteria or to undergo a biodegradation process.

(d)    “City of Ojai contractor” means any person or entity that has a contract with the City of Ojai for work or improvement to be performed, for a franchise, concession, for grant monies, goods and services, or supplies to be purchased at the expense of the City, or to be paid out of monies deposited in the treasury or out of trust monies under the control of or collected by the City of Ojai.

(e)    “City of Ojai facility” means any building, structure or vehicle owned and operated by the City of Ojai, its agents, agencies, and departments.

(f)    “Compostable” means all materials in the product or package will break down, or otherwise become part of, usable compost (e.g., soil-conditioning material, mulch) in a safe and timely manner. Compostable disposable food service ware must meet ASTM standards for compostability and any bio-plastics or plastic-like products that are clearly labeled, preferably with a color symbol, to allow proper identification such that the collector and processor can easily distinguish the ASTM standard compostable plastic from non-ASTM standard compostable plastic.

(g)    “Disposable food service ware” is interchangeable with “to go” packaging and “food packaging material” and includes all containers, clamshells, bowls, plates, trays, cartons, cups, beverage containers, lids, straws, stirrers, forks, spoons, knives, napkins and other items designed for one-time use for prepared foods, including, without limitation, service ware for take-out foods and/or leftovers from partially consumed meals prepared by food providers.

(h)    “Event promoter” means an applicant for any special events permit issued by the City or any City employee(s) responsible for any organized special event.

(i)     “Food establishment” means all sales outlets, stores, shops, vehicles, or other places of business located within the City, which operate primarily to sell or convey foods or beverages, which foods or beverages are predominantly contained, wrapped or held in or on packaging. “Food establishment” shall include, but not be limited to, any place where food is prepared, mixed, cooked, baked, smoked, preserved, bottled, packaged, handled, stored, manufactured and sold or offered for sale, including, but not limited to, any fixed or mobile restaurant, drive-in, coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order cafe, delicatessen, luncheonette, grill, sandwich shop, soda fountain, hotel, motel, movie house, theater, bed and breakfast inn, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, nightclub, roadside stand, take-out prepared food place, industrial feeding establishment, catering kitchen, mobile food preparation unit, commissary, grocery store, public food market, produce stand, food stand, or similar place in which food or drink is prepared for sale, or for service, on the premises or elsewhere, and any other establishment or operation where food is processed, prepared, stored, served or provided for the public; and any organization, group or individual which provides food as part of its service.

(j)     “Food provider” means any individual, business, vendor, organization, entity, or group, including food establishments, as defined herein, located in the City of Ojai that offers food or beverage to the public.

(k)    “Person” means an individual, business, event promoter, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, non-profit, including a government corporation, partnership, or association.

(l)     “Polystyrene/plastic foam” means blown expanded and extruded polystyrene (sometimes called StyrofoamTM) or other plastic foams which are processed by any number of techniques including, but not limited to, fusion of monomer spheres (expanded bead plastic), injection molding, foam molding, and extrusion-blown molding (extruded foam plastic). Polystyrene and other plastic foam is generally used to make cups, beverage containers, bowls, plates, trays, clamshell containers, meat trays, egg cartons, coolers, ice chests, shipping boxes, packing peanuts, and beach or pool toys.

(m)   “Prepared food” means food or beverages, which are served, packaged, cooked, chopped, sliced, mixed, brewed, frozen, squeezed or otherwise prepared on the food provider’s premises or within the City of Ojai. Prepared food does not include raw, butchered meats, fish and/or poultry sold from a butcher case or similar establishment.

(n)    “Polystyrene/plastic for a products” means any item such as coolers, ice chests, cups, bowls, plates, clamshells, shipping boxes, containers, cutlery, or and other merchandise containing polystyrene/plastic foam that is not wholly encapsulated or encased by a more durable material.

(o)    “Recyclable” means any material that is accepted by the recycling program operated by the City of Ojai or its solid waste hauling contractor, including, but not limited to, paper, glass, aluminum, cardboard and plastic bottles, jars and tubs.

(p)    “Vendor” means any store or other business that sells goods or merchandise located or operating within the City of Ojai.

(§ 2, Ord. 837, eff. February 28, 2014)

 

Sec. 5-14.102. Polystyrene/plastic foam disposable food service ware prohibited.
        (a)    Food providers within the City of Ojai may not provide food in any disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene/plastic foam.

        (b)    Disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene/plastic foam is prohibited from use in all City of Ojai facilities.

        (c)    City of Ojai Contractors in the performance of City contracts and events promoters may not provide disposable food service ware that contains polystyrene/plastic foam.

(§ 2, Ord. 837, eff. February 28, 2014)

 

Sec. 5-14.103. Required use of biodegradable, compostable, reusable or recyclable food service ware.
        (a)    All food providers in the City of Ojai utilizing disposable food service ware shall use biodegradable, compostable, reusable or recyclable products, unless there is no affordable alternative available as determined by the City Manager or his/her designee (see definition of “Affordable” and Section 5-14.105 Exemptions). Food providers may charge a “take-out fee” to cover the difference in cost.

        (b)    All City of Ojai facilities utilizing disposable food service ware shall use products that are biodegradable, compostable, reusable or recyclable.

        (c)    City of Ojai contractors and events promoters utilizing disposable food service ware shall use biodegradable, compostable, reusable or recyclable products while performing under a City of Ojai contract or permit.

(§ 2, Ord. 837, eff. February 28, 2014)

 

Sec. 5-14.104. Prohibited sales.
        No vendor or event promoter in the City of Ojai may sell, rent or otherwise provide any polystyrene/plastic foam product which is not wholly encapsulated or encased within a more durable material, except as exempted in Section 5-14.105. This specifically includes, but is not limited to, cups, plates, bowls, clamshells and other products intended primarily for food service use, as well as coolers, containers, ice chests, shipping boxes, pool or beach toys, packing peanuts, or other packaging materials.

(§ 2, Ord. 837, eff. February 28, 2014)

 

Sec. 5-14.105. Exemptions.
        (a)    There are no exemptions that allow for the use of polystyrene/plastic foam disposable food service ware.

        (b)    The City Manager or his/her designee may exempt a food provider from the requirement set forth in Section 5-14.103(a) of this chapter for a one-year period upon the food provider showing, in writing, that this chapter would create an undue hardship or practical difficulty not generally applicable to other persons in similar circumstances. The City Manager or his/her designee shall put the decision to grant or deny a one-year exemption in writing, and the decision may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with Section 1-4.01.

        (c)    Exemptions to allow for the sale of provision of polystyrene/plastic foam products may be granted by the City Manager or his/her designee if the vendor can demonstrate in writing a public health and safety requirement or medical necessity to use the product. The City Manager or his/her designee shall put the decision to grant or deny the exemption in writing and the decision may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with Section 1-4.01.

        (d)    An exemption application shall include all information and documentation necessary for the City Manager or his/her designee to make a decision, including, but not limited to, documentation showing factual support for the claimed exemption. The City Manager or his/her designee may require the applicant to provide additional information.

        (e)    The City Manager or his/her designee may approve the exemption application, in whole or in part, with or without conditions.

        (f)    Foods prepared or packaged outside the City of Ojai and sold inside the City of Ojai are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Purveyors of food prepared or packaged outside the City of Ojai are encouraged to follow the provisions of this chapter.

        (g)    Packaging for meat is exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

        (h)    Products made from polystyrene/plastic foam which is wholly encapsulated or encased by a more durable material are exempt from the provisions of this chapter. Examples include surfboards, boats, life preservers, and craft supplies which are wholly encapsulated or encased by a more durable material, and durable coolers principally composed of polystyrene/plastic foam.

        (i)     Construction products made from polystyrene/plastic foam are exempted from this chapter if the products are used in compliance with City of Ojai Municipal Code Title 9, Building Regulation, or Title 5, Chapter 12, Storm Water Quality Management, and used in a manner preventing the polystyrene/plastic foam from being released into the environment.

        (j)     Emergency Supply and Services Procurement. In a situation deemed by the City Manager to be an emergency for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, City facilities, food vendors, City franchises, contractors and vendors doing business with the City shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

        (k)    Polystyrene/plastic foam packaging products which have been received from sources outside the City may be reused in order to keep them out of the waste stream.

(§ 2, Ord. 837, eff. February 28, 2014)

 

Sec. 5-14.106. Alternate penalties and fines for violations.
        Violations of this chapter are subject to the provisions of Title 1, Chapter 2 of the Ojai Municipal Code. The City Manager or his/her designee may allow the violating provider, in lieu of payment of any fine levied, to submit receipts, in an amount at least equal to the amount of the fine, demonstrating the purchase after the citation date, of an amount of biodegradable, compostable or recyclable products appropriate as an alternative disposable food service ware.

(§ 2, Ord. 837, eff. February 28, 2014)

Chapter 15 SMALL ENGINE REGULATIONS
Sec. 5-15.01. Definitions.
“Hedge trimmer” or “pole hedge trimmer” means a tool resembling a chainsaw used for cutting back bushes, shrubs, and hedges; and which may include a long handle used for manicuring landscape materials beyond arm reach.

“Internal combustion engine” means an engine within which fuel is burned and performs useful work within a combustion chamber.

“Lawn edger” means a powered cutting tool used to form distinct boundaries between a lawn, typically consisting of a grass, or other botanical ground cover, and another ground surface feature such as paved, concreted or asphalted area, or a granular material such as sand or gravel, or uncovered soil.

“Leaf blower” means a tool that propels air out of a nozzle to move debris, such as leaves or grass cuttings.

“Non-riding lawn mower” means a tool that uses one or more revolving blades to cut grass or other landscape material to an even height and that is not designed to be ridden by the operator.

“Pole saw” means a small curved saw blade mounted on a long handle and used for pruning branches beyond arm reach.

“String trimmer” means a tool that uses a rapidly spinning flexible monofilament line or plastic line to cut grass or other landscape material.

(§ 3, Ord. 906, eff. April 29, 2020)

 

Sec. 5-15.02. Regulation.
(a)    The use of any of the following equipment is prohibited anywhere within the City:

(1)    Hedge trimmer powered by internal combustion engines;

(2)    Lawn edger powered by internal combustion engines;

(3)    Leaf blowers powered by internal combustion engines;

(4)    Non-riding lawn mowers powered by internal combustion engines;

(5)    Pole hedge trimmer powered by internal combustion engines;

(6)    Pole saws powered by internal combustion engines;

(7)    String trimmers powered by internal combustion engines.

(§ 3, Ord. 906, eff. April 29, 2020)

 

Sec. 5-15.03. Enforcement.
(a)    Peace officers, code enforcement officers, and other persons designated by the City Manager shall enforce this chapter. The City Manager may publish written regulations in the manner required by law for the publication of ordinances and may take any and all other actions rational and necessary to enforce this chapter.

(b)    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalty provisions of Chapter 2, Title 1 of this Code. These penalties are cumulative with and in addition to other provisions of this Code and any other remedies available at law.

(c)    In addition to any other remedies available by law and under this Code, a violation of this chapter is subject to the administrative enforcement provisions of Section 1-2.03 of this Code.

(d)    The remedies specified in this chapter shall be cumulative and the City may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation.

(e)    The City Attorney may seek injunctive, legal, or other equitable relief to enforce this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 906, eff. April 29, 2020)

Title 6 BUSINESSES, PROFESSIONS, AND TRADES
Chapter 1 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Chapter 2 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Chapter 3 PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS OR SOLICITORS
Chapter 4 POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS
Chapter 5 CARD ROOMS
Chapter 6 RECREATION HALLS
Chapter 7 AMUSEMENT MACHINES AND ARCADES

Chapter 1 BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 1, consisting of Sections 6-1.01 through 6-1.122, added by Ord. No. 136, as amended by Ord. Nos. 150, 229, 253, and 361, effective January 12, 1966, and Article 2, consisting of Sections 6-1.201 through 6-1.299.22, added by Ord. No. 136, as amended by Ord. Nos. 229 and 386, effective September 27, 1967, as amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 428, effective May 27, 1971, repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 777, effective January 14, 2005.

 

Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 6-1.101. Purpose.
        This chapter is enacted to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for the regulation of businesses.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.102. Registration and fees—When required—Exemptions.
(a)    General requirements. It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to commence or carry on any trade, calling, business, exhibition, avocation or occupation within the City limits of the City without having first procured a business license certificate and paying the registration fee and annual tax therefor. Thereafter, all business license registration renewal fees and annual business license taxes shall be payable in advance on or before the anniversary date of the issuance of the certificate. Doing business shall include, but not be limited to, all individuals and firms who hold a fictitious business name statement, a State Board of Equalization resale permit or a listing in commercial directories such as the Yellow Pages, local business guide, real estate multiple listing book, reverse telephone directory from Pacific Bell or similar listing. Determinations that a firm or individual is doing business in the City may be appealed to the Finance Director.

(b)    Fee exemptions. The Finance Director shall have the authority to waive business license registration fees and annual taxes to service clubs or non-profit charitable organizations.

(c)    Non-profit festivals. Vendors selling items at weekend festivals conducted by non-profit organizations shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

(d)    Child and adult care exemptions. Residential care facilities for children or adults which service six (6) or fewer persons shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(e)    Exhibitions, concerts or lectures. The conduct of any entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious or moral subjects whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, concert, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose within the City shall not be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(f)    Amount of fee. The amount of the business license registration fee required under this chapter shall be Twenty-Five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars or as determined by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

(g)    Multiple businesses. Two (2) or more separate and distinct businesses carried on at the same location, whether or not owned or controlled by the same individual or entity, shall each require a separate business license certificate. A single business carried on at multiple locations within the City shall require a separate business license certificate for each such location.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005, as amended by § 1, Ord. 779, eff. February 25, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.103. Posting required.
        Every person, firm or corporation having a business license certificate under the provisions of this chapter and carrying on a trade, calling, business, profession, exhibition, avocation or occupation at a particular fixed and permanent place of business shall keep such certificate posted and exhibited while the same is in force in some conspicuous place therein.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005, as amended by § 1, Ord. 779, eff. February 25, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.104. No fixed location of business—Possession of registration required.
        Every person, firm or corporation having a business license certificate under the provisions of this chapter who does not carry on a trade, calling, business, profession, exhibition, avocation or occupation at a particular fixed and permanent place of business shall carry his or her certificate with him or her at all times while carrying on such business for which the certificate is issued and shall exhibit the same to any police officer of the City or any person authorized by the City to issue certificates or to collect fees and taxes for the same.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.105. Trade names and separate locations.
        The business license registration application must include each trade name and separate location in the City used in the conduct of any business, delivery, etc., within the limits of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.106. Businesses requiring certificate of occupancy and zoning clearance.
(a)    All commercial, industrial and miscellaneous buildings within the City which are used for a business requiring a business license certificate under this chapter must have a certificate of occupancy issued by the Community Development Department before a business license certificate may be issued. Existing buildings which are structurally altered and which are used for a business requiring a business license certificate under this chapter must also have a certificate of occupancy issued by the Community Development Department before a business license certificate may be issued.

(b)    Businesses that handle hazardous materials and chemicals must receive a Fire Department clearance before a business license certificate may be issued.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.107. Other fees.
(a)    No business license certificate issued to any person shall be transferable to any other person. If a business license certificate is issued authorizing a person to transact, engage in and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor and payment of the fee set forth in this section, have the business license amended to authorize the transacting, engaging in and carrying on of such business under the business license at another location to which the business has been or is to be moved. Businesses requesting an amended business license certificate shall be subject to a new zoning clearance and Fire Department review prior to issuance of the amended business license certificate. Amended business license certificates will be charged a fee of Twenty-Five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars or such other service fee as may be adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

(b)    Businesses which require an immediate duplicate copy of their business license certificate shall pay a fee of Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars or such other service fee as may be adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.108. Thirty-day temporary registration.
        Businesses which need a business license certificate prior to completion of the business certification process may request a thirty (30) day temporary business license certificate upon payment of the first year’s business license registration fee and annual tax. A thirty (30) day temporary business license certificate will be issued by the Finance Director for use during the interim period. However, the temporary business license certificate may be revoked at any time upon failure to meet the requirements for a permanent business license certificate. In such case, the annual tax, but not the registration fee, will be refunded.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.109. Fee and taxes deemed debt to city—Liability.
        The amount of such business license fees and taxes required under this chapter shall be a debt to the City and such person or entity required to have such business license registration shall be liable to the City for the amount of the business license fee and tax, together with costs of suit and any attorney’s fees incurred in a civil action brought to collect the fee and/or tax; provided, however, that criminal prosecution, including arrest and conviction hereunder, shall not be construed as a waiver of the right of the City to bring a civil action to collect a business license registration fee and/or tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.110. Renewal notices.
        The City shall send out an annual notice to all business certificate holders in confirming to them that a renewal payment is due. The City shall send out a second notice prior to the registration certificate due date reminding the business owner that a renewal payment is due. Both of these notices are sent as a courtesy only and receipt of the notice is not required before payment of the annual renewal fee is due.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.111. Renewal fee.
        The amount of the business license renewal fee required under this chapter shall be Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars or such other service fee as may be adopted by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.112. Refunds permitted when.
        Where an application, fees and taxes have been submitted and, because of administrative, legal, procedural or substantive requirements, the Finance Director, in his or her sole discretion, has determined that the collection of such fees or taxes, or both, is inappropriate, a refund of all or a portion of such fees and taxes may be returned to the applicant.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005, as amended by § 2, Ord. 779, eff. February 25, 2005; repealed by § 2, Ord. 779, eff. February 25, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.113. License periods.
(a)    License years. The license year shall commence on January 1 of each year and shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year issued.

(b)    Annual period. Licenses shall be issued upon an annual basis. All fees and taxes shall be due and payable in advance on January 1 of each year.

(c)    Daily licenses. Fees and taxes for business licenses issued upon a daily basis shall be due and payable each day in advance. The amount of such fees and taxes shall be determined by resolution of the City Council.

(d)    Partial periods. When an annual business license is required, any person commencing a business after the expiration of the first quarter of the license year may secure a license for the unexpired portion of the license year for the proportionate part of the full business license fee and tax as determined by the Finance Director.

(e)    Due dates. Except as otherwise provided in this section, payment of the amount of business license fees and taxes shall be made by each licensee at the time the first or initial business license is issued and without deduction in the amount of such fees and taxes for the time elapsed from the commencement of the business license tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005, as amended by §§ 3 and 4, Ord. 779, eff. February 25, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.114. Administration—Licenses—Issuance—Form.
        It shall be the duty of the Finance Director or his or her designee to:

(a)    Administer the provisions of this chapter and issue such rules and regulations necessary for its implementation. All decisions of the Finance Director in this regard are subject to appeal to the City Council;

(b)    Prepare and issue a business license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for every person liable to pay a business license tax. Such license shall state the amount of he tax paid thereof, the period of time covered thereby, the name of the person to whom the license is issued, the business licensed and the location where the business is to be carried on;

(c)    Determine that the proposed business, trade or occupation for which a business license is sought shall be conducted in a proper location for the conduct of such business and that such business will be carried on at such location in such manner that the business will not be in violation of laws or injuriously affect the public health, peace, safety, morals or general welfare.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Article 2. Business License Tax
Sec. 6-1.201. Annual tax.
        The annual business license tax to be paid by each person commencing or carrying on any business or engaging in or carrying on the business of buying, selling or dealing in any of the commodities or engaging in, as a business, any of the activities designated in this article shall be as set forth in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.202. Definitions.
        As used in this chapter:

(a)    “Contractor” means an individual or entity, as defined by and as required to be licensed under the California Business and Professions Code, generally involved in any aspect of design, construction, maintenance or repair of structures and improvements to real property.

(b)    “Employee” means any individual, owner, agent or full-time or full-time equivalent (if one (1) or more part-time employees are engaged to work) employee who is working at the firm or business on the date that the business license certificate is issued or renewed.

(c)    “Space” means a table, booth or location that is rented by an individual, dealer or consignee in an antique or goods outlet on the date that the business license registration fee is due.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.203. Minimum and maximum tax and annual increase.
(a)    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the minimum and maximum annual business license tax for a business in the City subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be One Hundred Eight and no/100ths ($108.00) Dollars and Five Thousand and no/100ths ($5,000.00) Dollars, respectively.

(b)    The annual business license minimum and maximum tax set forth hereinabove may be increased annually by resolution of the City Council using the percentage change in the Los Angeles/Long Beach Consumer Price Index (All Items) published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Statistics, or any successor index (“Index”). Failure of the City Council to adopt a resolution increasing the annual business license minimum or maximum tax in any one fiscal year shall not prevent the City Council from adopting such a resolution in a subsequent year. In the event that the City Council adopts a resolution increasing the minimum and maximum annual business license tax following one (1) or more years wherein no such resolution has been adopted, such resolution may cumulate the percentage change of the Index since the last resolution increasing the minimum and maximum annual business license tax had been adopted.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.204. Business categories and license.
        Business license certificates shall be issued based on the following tax rate categories:

(a)    Group A—Manufacturing, wholesale and retail. All businesses in the manufacturing, wholesale and retail categories shall pay an annual base tax of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars plus Eight and no/100ths ($8.00) Dollars per employee or space. In no event will this annual tax be less than the minimum nor more than the maximum annual tax. Businesses not covered by other business rate categories will also be assessed according to this rate schedule. Businesses in this group include:

(1)    Antique and consignment shops;

(2)    Bakeries;

(3)    Bookstores;

(4)    Candy stores;

(5)    Car dealers;

(6)    Clothing stores;

(7)    Computer stores;

(8)    Department stores;

(9)    Distributors;

(10)  Doughnut shops;

(11)  Drugstores;

(12)  Flower shops;

(13)  Furniture stores;

(14)  Gardening supply stores;

(15)  Gas stations and car washes;

(16)  Grocery stores;

(17)  Hardware, cabinet and paint stores;

(18)  Jewelers;

(19)  Liquor stores;

(20)  Manufacturing;

(21)  Manufacturer’s representative;

(22)  Printing, copying and publishing;

(23)  Restaurants and delicatessens;

(24)  Retail merchants;

(25)  Shoe stores;

(26)  Sporting goods stores;

(27)  Stationery and office supply stores;

(28)  Wholesalers;

(29)  Other similar businesses not specified in this subsection.

(b)    Group B—Services, contractors, property rental, entertainment and utilities. All businesses in the services, contractors, property rental, entertainment and utilities categories shall pay an annual base tax of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars plus Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars per employee. In no event will the annual tax be less than the minimum nor more than the maximum annual tax. Businesses in this group include:

(1)    Agents with no fixed location;

(2)    Aircraft leasing;

(3)    Athletic clubs and gyms;

(4)    Auto repair, paint and body shops;

(5)    Beauty, nail and hair salon;

(6)    Child care (seven (7) or more);

(7)    Computer services and programming;

(8)    Contractors;

(9)    Delivery services (based in the City);

(10)  Dry cleaners and laundries;

(11)  Gardening services;

(12)  Hotels and motels;

(13)  Locksmiths and security;

(14)  Mailing services;

(15)  Photography;

(16)  Property management;

(17)  Property repair;

(18)  Real estate offices and agents;

(19)  Rental (car and equipment);

(20)  Repair;

(21)  Schools and instruction (for profit);

(22)  Services;

(23)  Tailors;

(24)  Travel agents;

(25)  Tree services;

(26)  Other similar businesses not specified in this subsection.

(c)    Group C—Professions. All businesses in the professions category shall pay an annual base tax of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars plus Twelve and no/100ths ($12.00) Dollars per employee; provided, however, that these professions whose principal place of business is outside the jurisdictional boundaries of the City shall pay an annual base tax of One Hundred Dollars ($100.00) plus Twelve Dollars ($12.00) per employee assigned to provide services to entities or individuals who do business or live within the City. Businesses in this group include:

(1)    Accountants;

(2)    Advertising;

(3)    Appraisers;

(4)    Architects and landscape architects;

(5)    Artists;

(6)    Attorneys-at-law;

(7)    Bookkeeping services;

(8)    Chiropractors;

(9)    Consultants;

(10)  Dentists;

(11)  Doctors;

(12)  Engineers;

(13)  Geologists;

(14)  Health care services and labs;

(15)  Medical practitioners;

(16)  Psychologists;

(17)  Surveyors;

(18)  Tax counselors;

(19)  Other similar businesses not specified in this subsection.

(d)    Group D—Amusement devices. The operator of any amusement device or game shall pay an annual tax of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars plus Thirty and no/100ths ($30.00) Dollars per device for the privilege of operating such devices or games.

(e)    Group E—Billiard rooms, pool rooms and bowling alleys. The operator engaged in the operation of a billiard room or pool room or bowling alley shall pay an annual tax of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars for the first pool table or billiard table, alley or track and Thirty and no/100ths ($30.00) Dollars for each additional table, alley or track.

(f)    Group F—Apartment houses, motels and hotels.

(1)    Every person or entity engaged in the business of conducting, managing or operating an apartment house, motel or hotel consisting of a building or buildings in the same ownership, constructed upon one (1) parcel and upon adjoining parcels of land and comprised of two (2) or more living units per building shall pay an annual tax of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars plus Six and no/100ths Dollars ($6.00) per living unit.

(2)    In computing the unit count, a unit occupied by the owner himself or herself personally shall be excluded from the registration fee due.

(3)    In no event shall the annual business license tax be less than the minimum nor more than the maximum tax.

        Motels and hotels shall pay the higher of the business license tax computed in Group B above or this section.

(g)    Group G—Seasonal and specialized. All businesses in the seasonal and specialized category shall pay an annual tax of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars plus Fifty (50¢) Cents per One Thousand and no/100ths ($1,000.00) Dollars of gross receipts as declared by the business owner. In no event shall the annual business license tax be less than the minimum nor more than the maximum tax. Businesses in this group include:

(1)    Adult entertainment;

(2)    Auctions;

(3)    Auto wrecking;

(4)    Carnival, circus, rodeo and outdoor shows;

(5)    Christmas trees and pumpkin patches;

(6)    Cocktail lounges;

(7)    Massage parlors;

(8)    Parking lots;

(9)    Public dance halls;

(10)  Street vendors and solicitors;

(11)  Temporary vendors and businesses;

(12)  Public laundromats;

(13)  Amusement or video machine arcades.

(h)    Group H—Contractors (out of town). Contractors who are headquartered outside of the City shall pay a flat tax of One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars for an annual certificate plus Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars per employee living in the City, if any. Contractors who are headquartered outside of the City and wish to purchase a limited term certificate can obtain a six (6) month registration for Fifty and no/100ths ($50.00) dollars. In no event shall the annual business license tax be less than the minimum tax nor more than the maximum tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005, as amended by §§ 5 and 6, Ord. 779, eff. February 25, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.205. Taxes based upon gross receipts.
(a)    Entire gross receipts. The business license tax for any business which is subject to the provisions of Section 6-1.204(g) of this chapter shall be based upon the entire annual gross receipts of such business which receipts are directly attributable to the business activities conducted within the City.

(b)    Exceptions. No business license hereunder shall be required for the maintenance or operation of:

(1)    Postage stamp machines; and

(2)    Machines dispensing sanitary or hygienic articles or drinking cups, towels or medicines which machines are entirely owned and supplied by the owner or operator of the premises where installed and are maintained solely for the convenience of the employees, visitors and customers and not for profit by any other person.

(c)    Reporting. Each person required to obtain a license under Section 6-1.204(g) shall submit to the Finance Director a sworn statement setting forth such information concerning his or her business during the preceding fiscal year as may be required to enable the Finance Director to ascertain the tentative amount of the business license tax to be paid pursuant to this section. If actual information is not available, the applicant shall submit an estimate of the gross receipts for the period covered by the license. The actual business license tax shall be ascertained within thirty (30) days following the period covered by the license on the basis of the statement upon which the tentative tax is ascertained for the ensuing year, at which time the licensee shall pay any underpayment of tax and be entitled to a credit or reimbursement for any overpayment of tax.

(d)    Revocation. Any license to conduct a business issued by the City in connection with which the City imposes a business license tax upon coin-operated vending machines within the City may be revoked for the failure of the licensee to report to the City the gross receipts from such machines. The City may demand an audit of any such licensee and require him or her to submit a copy of the state sales and use tax returns filed relative to such machines and a copy of any other tax statement filed with any government entity by such person or by any other individual or firm owning, renting, leasing or operating such machines, disclosing the gross receipts received from owning, renting, leasing or operating such machines.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Article 3. Penalties and Enforcement
Sec. 6-1.301. Enforcement.
        The Chief of Police, the Finance Director and the City Attorney shall enforce this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.302. Penalties—Non-payment.
(a)    Whenever a person, firm or corporation fails to pay a business license registration or renewal fee or annual business license tax within fifteen (15) days after the same becomes due, there shall be added a twenty (20%) percent penalty to the business license registration fee and/or annual business license tax on the last day of each month after the due date thereof; provided, however, that the amount of the penalty to be added shall in no event exceed one hundred (100%) percent of the amount of the business license registration fee due and/or annual tax; such penalty to be collected in the same manner as the business license registration or renewal fee and annual business license tax.

(b)    The City can collect business license registration fees and/or annual taxes for up to three (3) prior years if the business has been in operation and unregistered during that period of time; however, in no case will the penalty amount exceed one hundred (100%) percent of the amount of the business license registration or renewal fee and/or annual tax due.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.303. Penalties—Waivers.
        Penalties may be waived in full or in part by the Finance Director for good cause which shall include, but not be limited to, an unintentional error or omission in compliance by a business with this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.304. Continuing violations.
        Each and every day, or fractional part of a day, that such trade, calling, business, profession, exhibition, avocation or occupation specified in this chapter is conducted, carried on or engaged in, or such thing done, without such registration or renewal, shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.305. Violation—Penalty.
        Any person or entity violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. The City Attorney shall have discretion to prosecute any such violation of this chapter as an infraction.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.306. Licenses—Suspension—Revocation.
        The Finance Director shall have the power to suspend or revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter upon proof to his or her satisfaction of the violation by the holder thereof of any rule or regulation of the Ventura County Health Department or Fire Department, any law of the City or any law of the state pertaining to the conduct or operation of the business licensed or upon proof to its satisfaction that the license was procured by fraudulent representations or that a condition of the issuance of the license has been violated or that the continuance of the business by the licensee at the permitted location constitutes a nuisance or is contrary to the public health, morals, safety, peace or general welfare. If a license shall be revoked, no new or other license for the same business shall be issued to the same person within six (6) months after such revocation.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-1.307. Appeal.
        Any decision of the Finance Director made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be appealable to the City Council in accordance with Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

Chapter 2 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 6-2.01 through 6-2.08, added by Ord. No. 171, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 428, effective May 27, 1971.

 

Sec. 6-2.01. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Pawnbroker” shall mean any person engaged in, conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money. whether for himself or any other person, upon personal property, pawns, or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling, or agreeing to resell, such articles to the vendor or his assignee or assignees at prices agreed upon at, or before, the time of purchase.

(b)    “Pawnshop” shall mean any room, store, or place in which the business of a pawnbroker is carried on or conducted.

(c)    “Secondhand dealer” shall mean any person who, in the course of business, buys, sells, or deals in secondhand goods, wares, or merchandise, other than motor vehicles, and whether such person is engaged solely in such purchase, sale, or dealing or buys, sells, or deals therein in connection with engaging in, conducting, managing, or carrying on another business, similar or dissimilar; provided, however, any person who accepts secondhand goods, wares, or merchandise in part payment, and coincidentally with the sale by him or her of new goods, wares, or merchandise in the regular course of his business, shall not, with respect to such goods, wares, or merchandise so acquired, be deemed to be a secondhand dealer within the purview of this chapter.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-2.02. Reports: Filing.
        Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall make out and deliver to the Chief of Police, on a blank form to be obtained by such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer from the office of the Chief of Police for that purpose, a full and complete report of all goods, wares, merchandise, or things acquired or received on deposit, pledged, or purchased during the day preceding the filing of such report; provided, however, no report need be filed for any day in which no such goods, wares, merchandise, or things were acquired, received on deposit, pledged, or purchased.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-2.03. Reports: Contents.
        The report required by Section 6-2.02 of this chapter shall show the hour of the day when such article was acquired, received on deposit, pledged, or purchased and the true name and address, as nearly as known or can be ascertained by such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, of the person by whom such article was left, left on deposit, pledged, or sold, together with a description of such person. The description to be given of every such person shall show the style, color of mustache or beard, or both, where the same was worn, and, if neither is worn, such fact should be noted. If a pawn, such report shall also show the number of the pawn ticket, the amount loaned, and a complete description of each article left on deposit or pledged. If any article so left on deposit, pledged, or purchased has engraved thereon any number, word, or initial, or contains any settings of any kind, the description of such article in such report shall contain such number, word, or initial and shall show the kind of settings and the number of each kind. Blanks to be obtained from the office of the Chief of Police, as provided in Section 6-2.02 of this chapter, shall bear a caption providing blank spaces in which shall be written or printed the date of such report, the name and place of business of the person making the report, and the hour of the day when the report is received at the office of the Chief of Police. Such blanks shall be so printed and subdivided as to contain spaces with proper captions for the furnishing of the information required by this section. A copy of this section and Section 6-2.02 of this chapter shall be printed upon each such blank or upon the back thereof.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-2.04. Records.
        Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall keep a complete record of all goods, wares, merchandise, or things pledged to, purchased, or received by him, which record shall contain all of the matters required by him or her to be shown in the reports referred to and described in Section 6-2.03 of this chapter. Every such record and all goods, wares, merchandise, and things pledged to, purchased, or received by any such pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of the Chief of Police or any police officer of the City.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-2.05. Reports: Filing: Inspections.
        The Chief of Police shall file in a secure place in his office all reports received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and such reports shall be open to inspection only by persons charged with the enforcement of this chapter or upon an order of a court of competent jurisdiction.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-2.06. Storage and sales.
        It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to sell or dispose of any article or thing within twenty-one (21) days after such article or thing has been purchased or received by such pawnbroker.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-2.07. Hours.
        It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, or for any agent or employee of any such person, to accept any pledge of, or to loan any money upon, personal property, or to purchase or receive any goods, wares, merchandise, article, or thing, or in any manner whatsoever to engage in or conduct any such business between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-2.08. Signs.
        Every pawnbroker and secondhand dealer shall maintain on the premises where such business is located a sign, plainly printed in the English language of sufficient size so that the sign may be easily read from the sidewalk in front of such place of business, stating that he is a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer. Where such business is conducted in an office building, the sign shall be placed at the door to such office. Where such business is conducted in a department of any building, the sign shall be placed at the entrance of such department.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

Chapter 3 PEDDLERS AND CANVASSERS OR SOLICITORS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 6-3.01 through 6-3.14, added by Ord. No. 256, effective August 12, 1959, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 428, effective May 27, 1971.

 

Sec. 6-3.01. Licenses required.
        It shall be unlawful for any peddler, canvasser, or solicitor, as defined in Section 6-3.02 of this chapter, to engage in any such business within the City without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, except as exempted by this chapter.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.02. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Peddler” shall mean any person who goes from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street seeking to make concurrent sales and deliveries of the goods, wares, and merchandise in which he deals. “Peddler” shall not include vendors of milk, dairy products, bakery products, groceries, or ice who distribute their products to regular customers on established routes.

(b)    “Canvasser or solicitor” shall mean any person who goes from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street soliciting or taking, or attempting to take, orders for the sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for service to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order, or whether or not he is collecting advance payments on such orders.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.03. Exceptions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not be held to include the acts of persons selling personal property at wholesale to dealers in such articles, nor to newsboys, nor to the acts of resident merchants or their employees in delivering goods and performing services in the regular course of business; nor shall the provisions of this chapter be held to include or apply to any producer or his employee selling agricultural or farm products produced from the soil of the State by such producer or his employee; nor shall the provisions of this chapter apply to the selling of nursery products by the producer thereof from the soil of the State. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be held to prohibit any sale required by statute or by order of any court or to prevent any person conducting a bona fide auction sale pursuant to law.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.04. Licenses: Applications.
        Applicants for a license pursuant to this chapter shall file with the City Manager or his designate a sworn application in writing, on a form furnished by the City Manager or his designate, which form shall give the following information:

(a)    The name and physical description of the applicant;

(b)    The complete permanent home and local address of the applicant and, in the case of transient merchants, the local address from which proposed sales will be made;

(c)    A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods and services to be sold;

(d)    If employed, the name and address of the employer, together with credentials therefrom establishing the exact relationship;

(e)    The length of time for which the right to do business is desired;

(f)    The source of supply of the goods or property proposed to be sold, or orders taken for the sale thereof, where such goods or products are located at the time such applications are filed, and the proposed method of delivery;

(g)    Two (2) recent photographs of the applicant, which photographs shall be approximately two (2″) inches by two (2″) inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and distinguishing manner;

(h)    The fingerprints of the applicant and the names of at least two (2) property owners of the County who will certify as to the applicant’s good character and business respectability or, in lieu of the names of references, such other available evidence as to the good character and business responsibility of the applicant as will enable an investigator to properly evaluate such character and business responsibility;

(i)     A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal law, other than traffic violations, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;

(j)     The last cities or towns, not to exceed three (3), where the applicant carried on business immediately preceding the date of the application and the addresses, if any, from which such business was conducted in those municipalities; and

(k)    At the time of filing the application, a fee of Twenty-Five and no/100ths ($25.00) Dollars for each applicant shall be paid to the City Clerk to cover the costs of the investigation of the facts stated therein.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.05. Exemptions: Religious and charitable organizations and disabled war veterans.
(a)    Any organization, society, association, or corporation desiring to solicit or have solicited in its name money, donations of money, property, or financial assistance of any kind or desiring to sell or distribute any item of literature or merchandise for which a fee is charged or solicited from persons other than members of such organizations upon the streets, in office or business buildings, by house canvass, or in public places for a charitable, religious, or philanthropic purpose shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 6-3.04 and 6-3.07 of this chapter provided there is filed a sworn application in writing, on a form furnished by the City Manager or his designate, which form shall give the following information:

(1)    The name and purpose of the cause for which a permit is sought;

(2)    The names and addresses of the officers and directors of the organization;

(3)    The period during which the solicitation is to be carried on; and

(4)    Whether or not any commission, fees, wages, or emoluments are to be expended in connection with such solicitations and the amount thereof.

        Upon being satisfied that such organization, society, association, or corporation is a religious, charitable, patriotic, or philanthropic organization, the City Manager or his designate shall issue a permit without charge to such organization, association, society, or corporation to solicit in the City. Such organization, association, society, or corporation shall furnish all of its members, agents, or representatives conduction solicitation credentials in writing stating the name of the organization, name of the agent, and purpose of the solicitation.

(b)    Any war veteran who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor and is a voter of the State shall be exempt from the provisions of Sections 6-3.04, 6-3.06, and 6-3.07 of this chapter provided there is filed by him or her or on his behalf a sworn application in writing, on a form furnished by the City Manager or his designate, which form shall give the following information:

(1)    His full name;

(2)    His home address;

(3)    The place of his voting registration in the State;

(4)    The branch of service from which discharged and date of discharge; and

(5)    The period for which he desires a license.

        Upon being satisfied that an applicant qualifies as such a disabled war veteran under this section, the City Manager or his designate shall issue him or her a license for the period requested, but not to exceed one year, without charge.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.06. Licenses: Investigations: Issuance.
(a)    Upon the receipt of each application, the City Manager or his designate shall immediately institute such investigation of the applicant’s business and moral character as he deems necessary for the protection of the public good and shall endorse the application in the manner prescribed in this section within thirty (30) days after it has been filed by the applicant with the City Manager or his designate.

(b)    If, as a result of such investigation, the applicant’s character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the City Manager or his designate shall endorse on such application his disapproval, and his reasons for the same, and shall notify the applicant that his application is disapproved and that no license will be issued.

(c)    If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant are found to be satisfactory, the City Manager or his designate shall endorse on the application his approval and deliver to the applicant his license. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address, and photograph of the licensee, the class of license issued, the kind of goods to be sold thereunder, the amount of fee paid, the date of issuance, the length of time the license shall be operative, and the license number and other identifying description of any vehicle used in such licensed business. Each peddler, canvasser, or solicitor shall secure a personal license. No license shall be used at any time by any person other than the person to whom it is issued.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.07. Use of streets.
        No licensee shall have any exclusive right to any location in the public streets, nor shall any licensee be permitted a stationary location thereon, nor shall any licensee be permitted to operate in a congested area where such operation might impede or inconvenience the public use of such streets. For the purposes of this chapter, the judgment of a police officer, exercised in good faith, shall be deemed conclusive as to whether the area is congested and the public impeded or inconvenienced.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.08. Licenses: Exhibition.
        Licensees shall be required to exhibit their certificates of license at the request of any citizen.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.09. Duty of police to enforce.
        It shall be the duty of the police to require any peddler, solicitor, or canvasser, who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his license and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating such provisions.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.10. Records.
        The City Manager or his designate shall maintain a record of all convictions for violations of this chapter and for each license issued and record the reports of violations therein.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.11. Licenses: Revocation.
(a)    Licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be revoked by the Council, after notice and a hearing, for any of the following causes:

(1)    Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements contained in the application for a license;

(2)    Fraud, misrepresentation, or incorrect statements made in the course of carrying on a business as a solicitor, canvasser, peddler, transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor;

(3)    Any violation of this chapter;

(4)    The conviction of any crime or misdemeanor; or

(5)    Conducting the business of a peddler, canvasser, or solicitor, as the case may be, in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety, or general welfare of the public.

(b)    The City Manager or his designate shall report to the City Clerk the specific grounds for complaint. Notice of a hearing for the revocation of a license shall be given by the City Clerk in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing or shall be delivered by a police officer in the same manner as a summons at least three (3) days prior to the date set for the hearing.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.12. Appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by the action of the City Manager or his designate in the denial of a permit or license as provided in Section 6-3.06 of this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the Council. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the Council, within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, and notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant in the same manner as provided in subsection (b) of Section 6-3.11 of this chapter for notice of a hearing on revocation.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.13. Licenses: Reapplications.
        No licensee whose license has been revoked shall make further application until a period of at least six (6) months shall have elapsed since the last previous revocation.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-3.14. Licenses: Expiration.
        All annual licenses issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall expire on December 31 of the calendar year issued, and those other than annual licenses shall expire on the dates specified on the face of the license.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971, as amended by § 2, Ord. 663, eff. August 10, 1989)

Chapter 4 POOL AND BILLIARD ROOMS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 6-4.01 through 6-4.04, added by Ord. No. 136, as amended by Ord. Nos. 150 and 179, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 428, effective May 27, 1971.

 

Sec. 6-4.01. Billiard room defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, “billiard room” shall mean any place open to the public where billiards or pool is played or any house, room, or place, except a private residence, in which billiard or pool tables are kept and persons are permitted to play, or do play, whether any compensation or reward is charged for the use of such tables or not.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-4.02. Intoxicated persons.
        No person in charge of any public billiard room shall permit any intoxicated, quarreling, or disorderly person to remain in such place.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-4.03. Hours of operation.
        No person in charge of any public billiard room shall keep such room open, or permit such room to be kept open, or permit any game to be played therein from 1:00 a.m. on any day until 6:00 a.m. of the same day. No person in charge of any public billiard room shall permit any person, except the owner, manager, proprietor, or person in charge thereof, or employees thereof, to be or remain in such public billiard room from 1:00 a.m. on any day until 6:00 a.m. on the same day.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

Chapter 5 CARD ROOMS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 6-5.01 through 6-5.04, added by Ord. No. 136, as amended by Ord. No. 150 and Sections 6-5.05 and 6-5.06, as added by Ord. No. 366, effective May 11, 1966, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 428, effective May 27, 1971.

 

Sec. 6-5.01. Public card room defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, “public card room” shall mean any place open to the public where cards are played for money, checks, chips, credit, or other representatives of value, whether any compensation or reward is charged for such playing or not.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-5.02. Minors.
        No person under the age of twenty-one (21) years shall be in, remain in, enter, or visit any public card room unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his parents or his guardian. No owner or person in charge of any public card room shall permit any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be in, remain in, enter, or visit such place unless such minor person is accompanied by one of his parents or his guardian.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-5.03. Alcoholic beverages.
        No person in charge of any public card room shall drink, or permit any other person to drink, any alcoholic beverage therein. No person in charge of any public card room shall permit any intoxicated, quarreling, or disorderly person to remain in such place.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-5.04. Hours of operation.
        No person in charge of any public card room shall keep such room open, or permit any game to be played therein, from 1:00 a.m. on any day until 9:00 a.m. of the same day. No person in charge of any public card room shall permit any person, except the owner, manager, proprietor, or person in charge thereof, or employees thereof, to be or remain in such public card room from 1:00 a.m. on any day until 9:00 a.m. on the same day.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-5.05. Public card rooms prohibited.
        No person shall keep, conduct, or maintain a public card room or knowingly permit any building, room, or place owned by him or her or under his charge or control to be used as a public card room, except that this section shall not apply to the keeping, conducting, or maintaining of a public card room for which there is, on May 11, 1966, a valid and unrevoked public card room license issued by the City prior to April 11, 1966.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971)

 

Sec. 6-5.06. Licenses not transferable.
        The public card room license in effect on April 11, 1966, shall be valid only for operation at 960 East Ojai Avenue and only for the operator stated in the license on April 11, 1966, and shall not be transferred to any other place or person.

(Part I, Ord. 428, eff. May 27, 1971, as amended by § 1, Ord. 585, eff. August 21, 1980)

Chapter 6 RECREATION HALLS
Sec. 6-6.01. Recreation hall defined.
        “Recreation hall,” for the purposes of this chapter, is an enclosed place of business open to the public which provides facilities or equipment for various types of recreational activities, such as pool, table tennis, cards, and other games or amusement; for social activities, such as dancing; and for food and refreshments. A recreation hall differs from billiard rooms or restaurants, cafes, cabarets, cocktail lounges, or bars where dancing is permitted primarily in that no alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the premises. Since it is contemplated that recreation halls will attract primarily persons under the age of eighteen (18), recreation halls shall, so far as possible, be located away from areas in which businesses dispensing alcoholic beverages are located.

(Part 1, Ord. 494, eff. July 11, 1974)

 

Sec. 6-6.02. Minors.
        A recreation hall shall be oriented primarily toward the recreational needs of persons under age eighteen (18) and families. Persons under the age of twelve (12) shall not be permitted to remain on the premises unless accompanied by a related or responsible person over the age of eighteen (18).

(Part 1, Ord. 494, eff. July 11, 1974)

 

Sec. 6-6.03. Supervision.
        A recreation hall shall at all times during which it is open be supervised by the owner or his agent who shall be age eighteen (18) or over.

(Part 1, Ord. 494, eff. July 11, 1974)

 

Sec. 6-6.04. Hours of operation.
        A recreation hall shall not remain open after 12:00 midnight, and no person shall remain on the premises between midnight and 6:00 a.m., except the owner and his agents or employees who shall only engage in cleanup, preparation, or other business activities.

(Part 1, Ord. 494, eff. July 11, 1974)

 

Sec. 6-6.05. Licensing.
        Licenses for recreation halls shall be shall be issued by the Chief of Police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The annual fee for such license shall be set by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

(Part 1, Ord. 494, eff. July 11, 1974, as amended by § 2, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

Chapter 7 AMUSEMENT MACHINES AND ARCADES
Sec. 6-7.01. Definitions.
        For purposes of this chapter:

(a)    “Amusement machines” shall mean any device, game or contrivance, including, but not limited to, pinball machines, video games, computer games, electronic games, shuffleboards, slot machines, juke boxes and mechanical music boxes, for which a charge is made or payment is received for the privilege of playing, using or operating the same and which, as a result of such use, operation or playing, does not entitle the person using, operating or playing such device to receive the same return in market value in the form of tangible merchandise each time such device, game or contrivance is used, operated or played.

(b)    “Arcades” shall mean any business or establishment which has located on its premises four (4) or more amusement machines which are kept thereon for the purpose of being played, operated or used by the patrons of the arcade for money or money’s worth deposited in the amusement machine played, operated or used.

(§ 3, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-7.02. Supervision.
(a)    All amusement machines within a premises shall be visible to and supervised by an adult attendant who shall be present at all times when any amusement machine is being operated.

(b)    The supervision of patrons on the premises shall be adequate to insure that there is no conduct which is detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare.

(§ 3, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-7.03. Minors—Hours of operation.
        During the school year, persons under the age of eighteen (18) shall not be allowed to operate amusement machines Monday through Friday, except legal school holidays, between the hours of 8:00 A.M. and 3:00 P.M., unless accompanied by an authorized agent of the school district or such person’s parent or guardian. It shall be the responsibility of the adult attendant to enforce this regulation.

(§ 3, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-7.04. Noise.
        Provision shall be made to reduce noise caused by the operation of the amusement machines and the patrons thereof.

(§ 3, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-7.05. Fire regulations.
        No amusement machine shall be situated in such a way that its use will violate any applicable fire regulation or hinder reasonable egress from and ingress to the premises of the public.

(§ 3, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

 

Sec. 6-7.06. Licensing.
(a)    Licenses for amusement machines or arcades shall be issued by the Chief of Police pursuant to this chapter. The annual fee for such license shall be set by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

(b)    If, after the original issuance of a license pursuant to this section, an applicant desires to increase the number of amusement machines at the same or at different locations, he or she shall, prior to the installation of such additional machines, file with the Chief of Police an amendment to his or her application indicating that the conditions of this section and all other applicable conditions have been satisfied with respect to such additional machines.

(§ 3, Ord. 777, eff. January 14, 2005)

Title 7 PUBLIC WORKS
Chapter 1 ENCROACHMENTS
Chapter 2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 3 WATER STANDARDS
Chapter 4 INFORMAL BID PROCEDURES

Chapter 1 ENCROACHMENTS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 1, Excavations, consisting of Sections 7-1.01 through 7-1.08, added by Ord. No. 156, as amended by Ord. Nos. 254, 387 and 512, repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 645, effective March 12, 1987.

 

Article 1. Definitions, Permits and Insurance
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 7-1.101 through 7-1.129, added by Ord. No. 645, effective March 12, 1987, repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 673, effective June 8, 1990.

 

Sec. 7-1.101. Title and scope.
        This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Encroachment Law.” The provisions of this chapter shall operate as a supplement to all applicable State Code sections concerning encroachments on City streets and highways. In the event of conflicting provisions, the most restrictive shall prevail.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.102. Construction: Definitions.
        Unless the provisions or the context otherwise requires, the following general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions shall govern the construction this chapter:

(a)    This chapter shall not apply to any officer or employee of the City in the discharge of his official duties. Work performed by any person under a contract with, or at the request of, the City shall be exempt from the fee and bond requirements of this chapter.

(b)    Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, a public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized pursuant to law or ordinance by the officer, unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise.

(c)    Whenever reference is made to any portion of this chapter or any other ordinance or statute, such reference shall apply to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.

(d)    “Encroachment work” shall mean the work of constructing, placing or installing an encroachment in a right-of-way.

(e)    “Section” shall mean a section of this chapter, unless some other ordinance, division, or statute is expressly cited.

(f)    “City” shall mean the City of Ojai.

(g)    “Director” shall mean the Director of Public Works of the City.

(h)    “Street” and “highway” shall include all or part of, or any right in, a City highway or other public highway, road, street, avenue, alley, lane, driveway, place, court, trail, or other public right-of-way or easement, or purported public street or highway, and rights connected therewith, including, but not limited to, restrictions of access or abutters’ rights, sloping easements, or other incidents to a street or highway, whether or not such entire area is actually used for highway purposes.

(i)     “Right-of-way” shall mean any land or interest therein which, by deed, conveyance, agreement, dedication, usage, or other process of law, has been reserved for or dedicated to the City for the use of the general public for public road purposes.

(j)     “Encroachment” shall mean and include any obstruction, tower, pole, pole line, pipe, fence, wire, cable, conduit, stand or building, or any structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this subsection which is placed on, in, along, under, over or across a highway. This subsection shall not apply to the temporary use of a highway for the ordinary maintenance of any existing authorized or permitted encroachment, nor the suspension or stringing on existing pole lines of additional cables, wires, transmission lines, conduits, or service connections solely for telephone or electric power purposes.

(k)    “Driveway” shall mean that portion of the road right-of-way between the property line and curb, or between the property line and the pavement if no curb exists, where vehicles enter or leave the highway onto adjacent property.

(l)     “Permittee” shall mean any person who proposes to encroach upon a right-of-way and has been issued a permit for the proposed encroachment by the Director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(m)   “Applicant” shall mean any person who proposes to encroach upon a right-of-way and has applied for a permit for the proposed encroachment pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(n)    “Pavement” shall mean the surfaced portion of the highway structural section which is composed of various size aggregates mixed with Portland cement and/or asphaltic compounds.

(o)    “Base course” shall mean that portion of the highway structural section located between the pavement and native soil.

(p)    “Native soil” shall mean compacted native material.

(q)    “Public” shall mean any person as defined in this chapter, other than the Department of Public Works of the City, and shall include the United States and the State.

(r)    “Special vehicle” shall mean a vehicle or combination of vehicles, as described in the Vehicle Code of the State, which:

(1)    Whether laden or unladen, is required by the Vehicle Code to have a special permit to be on any highway; or

(2)    Is so laden that it is required to have such special permit.

(s)    “Vehicle Code” shall mean the Vehicle Code of the State in effect at the time of the issuance of a permit.

(t)     “Actual cost” shall mean the amount determined by applying the provisions of the encroachment fee resolution as adopted by the Council.

(u)    “Person,” as used in this chapter, includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, the State of California, incorporated cities, all public districts and other political subdivisions of the State of California, except the City, and any group or combination acting as a unit.

(v)    “Inquiry identification number” shall mean the number which is provided by Underground Service Alert (USA) to every person who requests underground location. (Reference Government Code Section 4216.2)

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.103. Permits required.
        Every person, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall obtain a permit from the Director before he:

(a)    Makes, or causes to be made, any excavation or encroachment in any street, highway or right-of-way;

(b)    Places, changes, or renews an encroachment; provided, however, an owner, lessee, or person in control of property under active agricultural use and immediately abutting the right-of-way, without obtaining a permit, may use the untraveled portion of the right-of-way abutting such property for the growing and maintenance of agricultural crops and the control of weeds so long as such use does not interfere with vehicular or pedestrian traffic or drainage of the right-of-way. Encroachments for which permits are not required shall be subject to removal under the procedure and penalties provided in Sections 1481 through 1485 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State;

(c)    Places, constructs, or repairs any curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway, pavement, base course, retaining wall, storm drain, culvert, pipe, conduit, cable, or other work of similar nature in, over, along, across or through any street or highway;

(d)    Constructs, reconstructs, repairs, or maintains any overhead structure or other appurtenance facility;

(e)    Places or leaves any impediment to travel upon any street, highway or right-of-way;

(f)    Erects or maintains any post, sign, newspaper rack, banner, pole, fence, guard rail, wall, loading platform, or any other structure on, over, under, or within a right-of-way;

(g)    Plants or removes any tree, shrub, or growing thing within a right-of-way (except those plants exempted in Article 5 of this chapter);

(h)    Uses a right-of-way or other City property for commercial motion or still picture photography;

(i)     Uses the right-of-way in any manner for purposes of seismological exploration;

(j)     Conducts land surveying operations or makes traffic counts in such a way that it is necessary to excavate within a right-of-way or in any way interfere with the normal flow of traffic on a public highway or right-of-way;

(k)    Causes or permits water (other than water from natural sources) to flow onto or upon any public street, road or right-of-way wherein such water is contained within the improved section by curbs or berms;

(l)     Moves or causes to be moved on, over, along, or across any public right-of-way any load or vehicle requiring a special permit pursuant to the provisions of the Vehicle Code (Article 6 of Division 15);

(m)   Performs any construction, alteration, or repair of any building or structure, so that it becomes necessary to temporarily obstruct a portion of the sidewalk, street or right-of-way, shall be required to obtain approval from the Director, and if approved, shall obtain an encroachment permit, subject to all conditions as set forth in this Chapter.

(n)    Constructs, modifies, or demolishes any well or wells, as defined per Section 7-3.203

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.104. Application in writing.
(a)    Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made on a form prescribed by the Director. The application shall be signed by the applicant, and by the contractor if the proposed work is to be done by a contractor, and shall include the following information:

(1)    The name and address of the applicant;

(2)    The name and address of the contractor if the proposed work is to be done by a contractor;

(3)    The location, purpose, extent and nature of the proposed work;

(4)    The period of time when the proposed work will be performed;

(5)    The materials to be used in performing the work;

(6)    Subsurface excavation requires “inquiry identification number” (USA) be supplied prior to commencement of any work;

(7)    The name, address and policy number of the applicant/contractor’s insurance carrier;

(8)    Such other information, including plats, plans and specifications, as the Director may require.

(b)    Application: Reference to Chapter. The application for a permit shall refer to, and incorporate by reference, all of the provisions of this chapter.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.105. Harmless agreement.
        Each applicant for a permit shall agree to hold the City and its officers, agents and employees harmless from any and all causes of action, penalties, liabilities or loss resulting from claims or court actions arising out of any accidents, loss or damage to persons or property occurring as a result of any work performed pursuant to the permit.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.106. Insurance.
        Before a permit is issued, the applicant, or the contractor who is to perform the work, shall secure, at

his or her own expense, a policy of broad form comprehensive general, liability insurance. If the work to be performed involves any excavation, the policy shall include an endorsement that affords coverage for explosion, collapse and underground hazards. The policy shall name the City and its officers, employees and agents as co-insureds and shall protect them from claims for personal injury, death or property damage suffered by third persons and arising out of the work authorized by the permit and the manner of its installation or construction. The insurance shall be in effect on the date that the work is commenced and shall expire no sooner than one year after the date on which the work is completed. Insurance cancellation clause shall read, “The issuing company shall mail a thirty (30) day written notice of cancellation to the certificate holder named.” A certificate of the insurance shall be filed with the Public Works Department.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.107. Insurance limits.
        If the work to be performed under a permit will involve an excavation more than six (6) inches in depth in a street, the applicant or contractor shall furnish liability insurance coverage required in Section 7-1.106 in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) aggregate. For all other permits, the applicant shall furnish such liability insurance coverage in an amount not less than that recommended by the most current version of the California Joint Powers Insurance Authority (CJPIA) Contractual Risk Transfer Manual for the type and kind of activity for which a permit is required. If an applicant or a contractor maintains with the City a certificate of continuous insurance coverage, such applicant or contractor shall change the insurance coverage to be in compliance with the requirements of this section on or before the renewal date of the policy. The City Council may, by resolution, increase, decrease, or waive the insurance limits set forth herein in those cases in which the City Council determines that special circumstances justify such an increase, decrease or waiver.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990, as amended by § 1, Ord. 852, eff. April 24, 2015)

 

Sec. 7-1.108. Bonds.
(a)    Before a permit is granted by the Director which authorizes excavation, trenching or removal of the surface of a street, a bond shall be filed with the Director in a form approved by the Director, by the applicant, or by contractor who will do the work. The bond shall be a surety bond and shall be issued by a corporation duly and legally licensed to transact business in the State of California. The bond shall guarantee the performance of the work authorized by the permit in accordance with all of the provisions of the application, the permit and this chapter and shall indemnify the City against faulty or improper workmanship or materials that may be discovered during the performance of the work and for the term of one year after the completion of the work. If an applicant, or the contractor performing the work, intends to perform more than one project requiring a permit under this chapter, the bond may be written so as to apply to more than one permit and it shall indemnify the City against faulty or improper workmanship or materials that may be discovered during the period of one year after the completion of the work authorized by each permit.

(b)    Bond limits. The Director is hereby authorized to establish the amount of bond to be posted based upon his or her estimate of the maximum cost or damages which the City might incur in connection with the work authorized by the permit or permits; provided, however, that the Director shall not fix an amount more than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00).

(c)    Bonds: Exemptions. Public agencies which apply for a permit are not required to furnish the aforementioned bond. However, this exemption shall not relieve the public agency or utility company of faulty or improper workmanship or materials guarantee.

 

(d)    The City Council may increase, decrease, or waive the bond limits set forth above in those cases in which the City Council determines that special circumstances justify such an increase, decrease or waiver, by resolution of the City Council.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.109. Changes in applications.
        The Director may make such changes or additions in any application for a permit as in his or her opinion are necessary for the protection of the highways, for the prevention of undue interference with traffic, for the safety of persons using such highways, as to the route over which to move any overheight, overwidth, overlength or overweight load, as to the location, depth, dimensions, character, and number of excavations, as to encroachments made or placed, and as to other permits issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.110. Exhibits.
        When required by the Director, the applicant shall attach to, or enclose with, the application two (2) copies of a map, plat, sketch, diagram, or similar exhibit which plainly shows any and all information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate, or identify the proposed encroachment.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.111. Additional requirements.
        The Director may establish additional requirements for the work to be done under the permit, including equipment to be used, type of backfill compaction, paving traffic regulations, hours of work, flaggers, lights, inspections, and other similar requirements. He or she also may require whatever advance notice he or she deems proper for requests for inspection. The Director may add such requirements and conditions in writing, or as attachments to the permit, or both, and they shall be an integral part thereof.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.112. Permittees bound by all terms.
        By accepting the permit, the permittee agrees to be bound by all the terms and conditions set forth in the permit and in this chapter.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.113. Expiration of permits: Time extensions.
        Each permit shall specify the time the permit shall become null and void, and the permit shall become null and void on the date so specified, unless the Director extends the time. The Director may extend the time if, in his or her opinion, the work for which the permit was issued was delayed in completion because of inclement weather, strikes, an act of God, or other causes not within the control of the permittee.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.114. Notices before starting work.
        Before commencing any encroachment work authorized by any permit, the permittee shall notify the City of the time of commencing the work and provide the name, address, telephone number, and license number of the contractor, if any, who will perform the work.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

Sec. 7-1.115. Blanket permits.
        Blanket permits, renewable annually, may be issued to any city, municipal utility district, municipal water district, or public utility, subject to compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a blanket permit shall not relieve the permittee from making such reports of activity under the blanket permit as may be required by the Director and for paying for inspection repairs and other costs incurred by the City due to the permittee’s activity. Blanket excavation permits shall be limited to utility trenches not exceeding two (2’) feet in width and sixty-feet (60’) feet in length, dug at a right angle to the center line of the road, or an excavation not exceeding thirty (30) square feet in area. No road may be closed when using the maximum length option. Two-way traffic shall be maintained at all times.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.116. Tree and structure relocation.
        The Director may require the permittee to make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of, the relocation of any structure, publicly owned facility, tree, or shrub where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The Director may elect to do the necessary relocation at the permittee’s expense.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.117. Relocation where rights-of-way are improved.
        If any City improvement to the right-of-way necessitates the relocation of an encroachment, the permittee shall relocate or remove the encroachment at his sole expense (except as provided by the State statute). When relocation is required, the Director shall give the permittee a written demand specifying that the encroachment shall be relocated within the right-of-way to a satisfactory location provided by the Director and a reasonable time within which the encroachment shall be relocated or removed. If the permittee fails to comply with such instructions, the City may relocate the encroachment at the expense of the permittee. In determining what is a reasonable time under this section, the Director shall take into consideration the nature of the encroachment, the urgency of the need for its removal, the cost of its removal, the difficulty of its removal, the value of the impact property to the owner, and other facts peculiar to the particular situation. The provisions of this section shall apply to all permittees, including public agencies and public utilities having authority to occupy City rights-of-way pursuant to a franchise or an express provision of State statute.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.118. Permits nontransferable.
        Permits issued pursuant to the authority of this chapter shall be nontransferable.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.119. Encroachments not hazards.
        The Director may require that evidence be submitted with the application to satisfy him or her that the proposed overhead structure or encroachment will not, insofar as he can foresee, create a hazard of any kind.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.120. Subsequent owners bound.
        All obligations, responsibilities, and other requirements of the permittee as described in this chapter shall be binding on subsequent owners of the encroachment.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.121. Issuance fees and other costs.
        All persons, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall pay an issuance fee and all other costs and charges as established for the work described in this chapter.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.122. Deposit of fees.
        Issuance fees and charges for repairs, inspections, or engineering collected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the respective funds from which the corresponding disbursements were made.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.123. Issuance fees for public works.
        The Director may grant a permit without an issuance fee if he finds that the work to be done has been requested by the City in connection with proposed public works.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.124. Waivers of fees for public welfare.
        If the Council determines that the waiver of any part of the fees is necessary to promote the safety and public welfare, the Council, in specific instances, may waive all fees and deposits.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.125. Schedule of fees: Double fees.
        The schedule of fees or charges will be those recommended by the Director and adopted by resolution of the Council from time to time. Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining such permit, the specified fees shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any person from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work, nor from any other penalty prescribed in this chapter.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.126. Permittees to pay for all costs.
        The permittee shall be liable for, and shall pay for, the City’s costs related to the permit, including, but not restricted to, the following:

(a)    The permit issuance fee, if it has not otherwise been paid;

(b)    Engineering, which includes design, inspection, surveys, and tests;

(c)    The cost of any inspection, transportation, or test made;

(d)    The cost of repairing or restoring the highways, and all appurtenant facilities, to the same or equal condition they were in before being cut or damaged as a result of the permittee’s activities;

(e)    The cost of furnishing and/or maintaining any lights, barricades or warning devices;

(f)    The cost of the alteration, removal, replacement, and/or repair to traffic signals and devices, the removal of temporary and/or permanent traffic stripes, and any other expense for traffic control;

(g)    The cost of removing or remedying any hazardous condition;

(h)    The cost of tree trimming removal;

(i)     The cost of tree replacement;

(j)     Any other cost to the City caused by the permittee’s activities.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.127. Costs to be actual costs.
        Whenever, in the provisions of this chapter, any costs to be charged to any permittee, and no other method for the calculation of such costs is specified, such costs shall be the actual costs, including overhead and depreciation, in accordance with current practices in charging for work performed for the public and as defined in the encroachment fee resolution as adopted by the Council.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.128. No fee when inspected by governmental agencies.
        The Director may issue a permit without any inspection fee or deposit for work which will be inspected by a qualified governmental agency which will furnish evidence to the effect that the work will be inspected and will comply with minimum standards required by the City.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.129. City may inspect if governmental agencies fail to inspect.
        If an applicant receives a permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-1.128 of this article, and the governmental agency fails to make the inspection or fails to file the evidence as required, the City may inspect the work, the permittee shall pay the actual cost of such inspection to the City.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.130. Deposits required: Exceptions.
        Unless exempted from this requirement by law or by the Director, each applicant, before obtaining a permit, shall deposit with the City one of the following: (1) encroachment bond; (2) cash deposit; (3) certified check; (4) cashier’s check in a sum equal to the probable cost of all the work to be performed under the permit, or (5) letter of credit. However, the City may waive such deposit when the City finds that the applicant is financially responsible for such costs by reason of past performance or otherwise.

        All cash deposits posted pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a special fund maintained by the City Treasurer. All deposits shall be liable for all costs and liabilities incurred and sustained by the City on account of any work performed pursuant to this chapter by the applicant or by the City. No deposit or any part thereof shall be released or exonerated until the Director has certified to City Treasurer that the work has been performed to the satisfaction of the Director, and that all costs and liabilities incurred by the City have been paid or fully secured.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.131. Return of deposits.
        Sixty (60) days after the satisfactory completion of authorized work and the fulfillment of all conditions of the permit, the Director will release the deposit upon an application of the permittee.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.132. Billing.
        The Director shall bill the permittee or deduct from the deposit made or maintained by the permittee all fees and costs chargeable pursuant to this chapter.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.133. Issuance fees may be refunded.
        An issuance fee may be refunded when a permit has been issued as the result of an error not made by the permittee.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.134. Inspection fees may be refunded.
        The fee deposited for driveway inspections or any other unit fee established may be refunded if such fee was erroneously collected or if the work was not constructed by the permittee, and no inspection requests were made.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Article 2. General Provisions
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 7-1.201 through 7-1.230, added by Ord. No. 645, effective March 12, 1987, repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 673, effective June 8, 1990.

 

Sec. 7-1.201. Safety devices, lights, and barricades.
        In the conduct of any encroachment work, supplies and excavated material shall be properly placed, and the permittee shall provide and maintain such safety devices, including, but not limited to, lights, barricades, signs, watchmen, as are necessary to protect the public. Any omission on the part of the Director to specify in the permit what safety devices shall be provided by, or preventative action required of, the permittee shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all laws, regulations, and ordinances relating to the protection of persons or property under the circumstances. If the Director finds that suitable safeguards are not being provided, he may provide, maintain and relocate such safety devices or take such action as is deemed necessary, charging the permittee the actual costs of such work.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.202. Warning lights.
        A permittee making any excavation or leaving any obstruction which could be a hazard to persons using a right-of-way shall provide and maintain warning lights far enough away from the persons, and at not more than fifty (50) foot intervals along the excavation or obstruction, from one-half (½) hour before sunset of each day to one-half (½) hour after sunrise the next day, until the work is completed and the right-of-way is made safe for use.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.203. Safety device standards.
        All safety devices shall conform to the requirements of the sign manual issued by the Department of Public Works of the State, the Vehicle Code, and the Work Area Traffic Control Handbook, so far as such manuals are applicable.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.204. Inspectors on jobs.
        If, in the judgment of the Director, it appears desirable to maintain an inspector to determine whether work is being done in compliance with the permit, the Director shall assign an inspector, and the permittee shall pay the City in accordance with the schedule of charges as adopted by the Council. This section shall be applicable to all permittees, including districts and other political subdivisions.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.205. Inspections not to be obstructed.
        No person shall obstruct the Director, or his duly authorized representative, in making any inspection authorized by this chapter or in taking any sample or in making any test.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.206. Work performed with or without permits.
        Whenever this chapter requires a permittee to perform work, take any action, or be liable for any fee or cost, such requirement also shall apply to any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter, whether such person obtains such a permit or not.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.207. No permit procedure.
        Any person who shall commence any work for which a permit is required by this chapter without first having obtained a permit therefor shall stop the work and apply for such permit. Failure on the part of such person to stop the work and to obtain a proper permit shall make him or her in violation of this chapter and subject to all the penalties therefor.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.208. Proof of right to use highways.
        Every permit issued pursuant to this chapter for activity or work in, along, on, over, across or under a highway shall be granted subject to the right of the City, or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of such highway for any purpose for which such highway may lawfully be used. Proof of the applicant’s right to use the highway for the purposes set forth in the application shall be filed with the Director.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.209. Work in accordance with plans and specifications.
        All work shall be performed in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, including revisions, or according to the plans and specifications referred to in the permit and, in addition, any special requirements and/or specifications which are made a part of the permit. In the event of conflict between two (2) specifications, the higher specification shall apply.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.210. Changes.
        No change may be made in the location, dimensions, character, or duration of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit, except on authorization by the Director.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.211. Permits available or in vehicles.
        The permittee shall make the permit available for inspection by the Director, or his representative, or by any peace officer or other person having responsibility for safety or maintenance of a highway. Each permit for moving shall be in or on the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which the permit refers.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.212. Denial of permits.
        The Director may refuse to issue a permit under the following conditions:

(a)    When he finds that it is not in the best interests of the general public to do so; and

(b)    When he finds that it will be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.213. Cancellation of permits.
        A permit may be canceled by the Director for any of the following reasons:

(a)    When permitted work is not started within the time specified and/or is started but not diligently prosecuted to completion.

(b)    For failure on the part of the permittee to comply with all of the requirements of the permit; and

(c)    For failure on the part of the permittee to provide for the public safety.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.214. Restoration of rights-of-way.
        Upon the completion of the encroachment work authorized by a permit, the permittee shall restore the right-of-way, including bridges and any other structure thereon, by replacing, repairing, or rebuilding the right-of-way in accordance with the specifications or any special requirement, but not less than to its original condition before the encroachment work was commenced. The permittee shall remove all obstructions, materials, and debris upon the right-of-way and shall do any other work necessary to restore the right-of-way to a safe and usable condition, as directed by the Director. Where an excavation occurs within an area already paved, the Director may require temporary paving to be installed within twenty-four (24) hours after the excavated area is backfilled. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly to restore the right-of-way as provided in this section, or should the nature of any damage to the right-of-way require restoration before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the Director, at his option, may make the necessary restoration. The permittee shall reimburse the City in accordance with the schedule of charges adopted by the Council.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.215. Base and pavement thickness.
        Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface and, in no event, to a thickness less than five (5″) inches of asphalt or three (3″) inches of asphalt on a four (4″) inch base.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.216. Seal and slurry.
        Where the street surface has been treated with a seal or slurry prior to the work under permit, the seal and/or slurry shall be replaced upon the portion repaired.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.217. Equivalent sections.
        Where the structural section removed varies from or exceeds the average existing section, the Director may elect to require the replacement of an equivalent section which would meet the average structural section requirements.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.218. Resurfacing waived.
        In those instances where the permittee’s excavation is within an area of highway to be reconstructed by the City, and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general City improvement, the Director may waive such resurfacing.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.219. Permittees’ awareness and liability.
        The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the highways which are within the limits of his activity by utilizing a regional underground facilities coordination agency (such as the underground Service Alert). The permittee shall not interfere with any existing public or private facility without the consent of its owner. The cost of moving publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee, unless he makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility, or unless the owner is required by his franchise or agreement to move his facility without cost.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.220. Protection and repair of facilities.
        The permittee shall support and protect all wires, cables, pipes, conduits, poles, and other apparatus, both aerial and underground, by a method satisfactory to the owner. The owner shall have the right to support or protect any of its facilities at the sole expense of the permittee. In the event any of such wires, cables, pipes, conduits, poles, or apparatus should be damaged (and, for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement of devices is considered as part of the structure), they may be repaired by the owner at the expense of the permittee or, if authorized by the owner, may be repaired by the permittee under the supervision of the owner. The expense of repairs to or the maintenance of any damaged facility shall be borne by the permittee.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.221. Interference with utilities.
        No structure/equipment moving contractor shall interfere in any manner whatsoever with any property of any public utility. When any load requiring a special permit is moved along or across any highway, and it is determined that the height, width, or weight of such load exceeds the height, width, or weight as stated in the permit, and property damage results therefrom, the Director is authorized to withhold any other permit from the violator until he produces evidence satisfactory to the Director that each additional permit load complies with all the dimensions and weights as shown upon the application and that the load will not interfere with any public utility.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.222. Aids to visibility.
        Where the location or position of an encroachment impairs visibility to vehicular traffic, the Director may require that the encroachment be painted or equipped with reflectors or other aids to visibility prescribed or authorized by the Public Utilities Commission or Traffic Manual of the State, or the Director may require the encroachment to be relocated at the sole expense of the permittee. No encroachment of any nature shall be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs, denies, or dangerously impairs the sight distance for safe pedestrian vehicular traffic.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.223. All persons to comply.
        All persons shall obey and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule made or presented by the Director in the matters specified on the permit or by attachment, or by any other matter in any way relating to or affecting their use of the highway or right-of-way, and shall do everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its officers, agents, and employees, except in the case of a public utility regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State, when such order, decision, direction, or rule is contrary to, or in conflict with, any order, decision, direction, or rule made or prescribed by the Public Utilities Commission of the State applicable to such public State utility.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.224. Encroachment removal: General.
        The City may require the removal or relocation of any encroachment, lawful or unlawful, on a finding that the encroachment is detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare. The removal and relocation of encroachments pursuant to this section shall be in accordance with the procedures and penalties provided in Sections 1481 through 1485 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.225. Encroachment removal without replacement.
        When an encroachment is removed and not replaced, the entire encroachment shall be removed from the right-of-way and the hole backfilled and compacted and returned to its preexisting condition, unless the Director permits otherwise.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.226. Road closures: Interference with highway use.
        All encroachments shall be planned and executed in such a manner that they will not unreasonably interfere with the safe and convenient travel of the general public.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.227. Encroachment and obstructing upon streets and sidewalks.
(a)    Spilling of substances from vehicle. No person, while carrying, hauling or moving any dirt, trash, garbage, sawdust, sand, gravel or other loose substance upon, along or over any street in this City shall allow or permit any such dirt, trash, garbage, sawdust, sand, gravel or other such substance to sift, leak, spill or go upon such street.

(b)    Water on streets. All water which is caused or suffered to run across or upon any sidewalk, street or alley in such a manner as to cause inconvenience to any person or persons traveling the same is declared to be a nuisance.

(c)    Merchandise obstructing streets and sidewalks. Placing or keeping or permitting to be placed or kept on the sidewalks or pavements of the main business streets in the City of any goods, wares or merchandise, boxes, vehicles, lumber, bricks, dirt, sand, firewood or any other article or thing is declared to be a nuisance.

(d)    Leaving goods upon the sidewalk. It is unlawful to allow any goods, wares, furniture or merchandise, baggage, equipment or freight of any kind to be or remain upon any public sidewalk of this City for any period of time in excess of ten (10) minutes, except when the same is in actual process of being loaded into or discharged from a vehicle.

        Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the unloading of goods, wares or merchandise on any sidewalk where the goods, wares and merchandise are immediately removed.

(§§ 2 and 6, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Article 3. Special Provisions for Construction Permits
Sec. 7-1.301. Provisions for construction permits.
        The provisions of this article shall apply to permits for the laying, constructing, reconstructing, or repairing of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, highway surfaces, retaining walls, storm drains, culverts, highway lights or lighting systems, or other appurtenance structures.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.302. Plans may be required.
        If, in the opinion of the Director, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the Director may require that the application be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent licensed engineer.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.303. Approved lines and grades for work.
        Before a permittee performs any work prescribed in this chapter, he shall obtain from the City the approved lines and grades therefor.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.304. Driveways of concrete.
        Driveways shall be constructed of cement concrete where a cement concrete curb exists.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.305. Driveways not to be constructed for parking.
        A driveway shall not be constructed or maintained where fences, buildings, natural grades, or any other obstacle will prevent a vehicle from being stored entirely off the public right-of-way after entering such driveway.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.306. Width of driveways.
        The width of an individual driveway shall be considered as being the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the line of the curb or center line of the highway. The width of an individual driveway or aggregate widths shall be as prescribed in the adopted City Standards.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987, as amended by § 3, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.307. Distances between driveways.
        The minimum intervening distance between the side slopes or returns of adjacent driveways serving the same lot or parcel shall be twenty-five (25’) feet. In the case of adjacent driveways serving two (2) adjoining lots or parcels, the intervening distance between the side slopes or returns shall be at a minimum of three (3’) feet.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987, as amended by § 4, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-1.308. Modifications.
        Where topographical or traffic conditions are such that a modification of the provisions of Section 7-1.202 of Article 2 of this chapter or Section 7-1.305, 7-1.306, or 7-1.307 of this article is necessary for the promotion of traffic safety, and the Director so finds, he may permit a deviation from the provisions of said sections to the extent he finds necessary.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987, as amended by § 5, Ord. 673, eff. June 8, 1990)

 

Article 4. Special Provisions for Excavation and Encroachment Permits
Sec. 7-1.401. Scope of provisions.
        The provisions of this article apply to permits for the making, or causing to be made, of excavations in any public right-of-way and for the placing, constructing, repairing, changing, or removing of encroachments.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.402. Requirements for plats.
        Each applicant for an excavation or encroachment permit shall file with the application a plat showing the highways in which the proposed excavations or encroachments will be placed, together with the exact location and dimensions of the proposed excavations or the specifications and characteristics of the encroachments, together with any other details which the Director requires. When excavations are made for service connections or for the location of trouble in conduits, cable, or pipe, or for making repairs thereto, the Director may waive the filing of a plat. Approved plats shall become public records.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.403. Maintenance of work areas.
        All materials excavated from trenching or other encroachment operations in the right-of-way shall be piled compactly, kept trim, and maintained in such a manner as not to endanger either the workers or the general public and to cause as little inconvenience as possible to those using the right-of-way or adjacent property. In areas too narrow to permit the proper storage of materials, the Director may require that the permittee remove the materials from the encroachment site.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.404. Preservation of survey monuments.
        A line or elevation shall not be removed or disturbed of a monument set for the purpose of preserving survey points without first obtaining permission from the Director. The replacement of a removed or disturbed monument shall be done by a registered civil engineer or a licensed land surveyor and shall be at the expense of the permittee.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.405. Amount of open trenches.
        In any trenching operation, the open trench shall not be in excess of one day’s work ahead of the trench work proper, unless specifically authorized by the Director.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.406. Preservation of drainage.
        If the encroachment work interferes with the established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage in a manner approved by the Director.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.407. Open excavations.
        No open excavation shall be left within the City road right-of-way after normal working hours. At the end of each workday, all excavations within roads, parkways, medians, shoulders, and the like shall be backfilled to a smooth, level grade free of humps or depressions, satisfactory for public use and acceptable to the City, or covered by trench plates if approved by the Director.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.408. Temporary maintenance.
        Temporary trenches shall be consistently maintained by the permittee or contractor during and after working hours to insure a satisfactory surface for public use and acceptable to the City. Unless permanent paving is placed immediately, temporary bituminous resurfacing two (2”) inches thick shall be placed and continually maintained wherever an excavation is made through pavement, sidewalks, or driveways.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.409. Backfilling and compaction.
        Trench backfill material, compaction, and resurfacing shall conform to the “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction.” Compaction testing and a written compaction report by a registered civil engineer shall be provided by the permittee or contractor as directed by the City. Saw cutting shall be required on all trenches prior to final paving.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.410. Traffic control.
        The permittee or contractor shall provide, and continually maintain, construction area traffic control signs, striping, properly equipped flagmen, and other traffic control devices. All traffic controls shall be in accordance with the California Traffic Manual (most recent edition). Failure to provide acceptable traffic control or to comply with any other condition of the permit will result in a job shutdown until released by the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.411. Replacement.
        All improvements within the road right-of-way, which include road signs, road striping, road symbols, and the like, which are damaged, removed, or obliterated as a result of the permittee’s work shall be repaired and/or replaced. Repairs and replacements shall be equal to, or better than, the existing improvements and shall match them in finish and dimensions.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.412. Resurfacing.
        Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and in no event to a thickness less than three (3″) inches. The base course removed shall be replaced with processed base material to the same thickness as that of the surrounding base course, but in no event less than four (4″) inches. Asphalt may be substituted for the required processed base material on a ratio of one inch of asphalt for each two (2″) inches of required base thickness. When the street surface has been treated with a seal or slurry prior to the work under the permit, the seal and/or slurry shall be replaced upon the portion repaired. Shoulders shall be restored and/or treated with like materials.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.413. Existing facilities.
        The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the highways which are within the limits of his activity. The permittee shall contact the Underground Service Alert, or suggested notification center, and obtain an inquiry identification number prior to making any non-emergency excavation. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing public or private facility without the consent of its owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, the work shall be done by its owner to the satisfaction of its owner. The cost of moving publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee, unless he makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility, or unless the owner is required by his franchise or agreement to move his facility without cost.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.414. Protection of existing facilities.
        The permittee shall support and protect all wires, cables, pipes, conduits, poles, and other apparatus, both aerial and underground, by a method satisfactory to the owner. The owner shall have the right to support or protect any of its facilities at the sole expense of the permittee. In the event any of such wires, cables, pipes, conduits, poles, or apparatus should be damaged (and, for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasements are considered a part of a structure), they will be repaired at the expense of the permittee.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.415. Stockpiling.
        No materials, equipment, or the like shall be left within the right-of-way without prior approval by the Director. Approval shall be indicated in writing on the encroachment permit. Equipment and materials permitted within the right-of-way shall be stored as far as practicable from the edge of pavement, with blinker light barricades if left overnight.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.416. Deviations.
        Any deviation from the conditions set forth in this article shall require prior approval by the Director.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.417. Services to be jacked or bored.
        Laterals, services, and other small diameter pipes shall be jacked, bored, or driven beneath a paved surface, unless other methods are approved by the Director.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.418. Minimum cover.
        The minimum cover over any pipe or conduit installed under any public highway shall be thirty (30″) inches of material measured vertically from the existing or proposed flow line of the nearest gutter to the top of the pipe or conduit. If a gutter flow line is not established, the cover shall be thirty (30″) inches of material measured from the surface of the nearest outermost edge of the traveled way to the top of the pipe or conduit. Where there are existing curbs and gutters or where curbs and gutters are under construction, utilities may maintain a minimum sixteen (16″) inches of cover, starting one foot back from the curb line in the parkway or sidewalk areas. The Director may permit the installation of pipes or conduits at lesser depths where the required cover cannot be provided, or where the Director determines that special construction techniques will be employed which will preclude the need for greater depth and will produce a more beneficial installation.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.419. Repaving by the City.
        With the permittee’s concurrence or as an emergency measure, the Director shall have the power to order the paving of any excavation up to 100 feet in length. The permittee shall reimburse the City for the actual costs of such work.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.420. Clean up after completion.
        Immediately after the completion of the work, the permittee shall clean up and remove all materials, earth, and debris of any kind. If the permittee fails within twenty-four (24) hours after having been notified to do so by the City, the work may be done by the City and the permittee charged for the costs incurred. When a pole, guy-stub, or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the entire length thereof shall be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled and compacted.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.421. Agreements to relocate.
        Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant, that if any tank, pole, pipe, cable, conduit, duct, obstruction, or tunnel placed in an excavation or encroachment for which a permit is issued interferes with the future surface use of the highway by the general public, then the applicant and his successors or assigns, at their own expense, will remove or relocate to a location satisfactory to the Director such tank, pole, pipe, cable, conduit, duct, tunnel, or obstruction. The statement signed by the applicant will not apply in cases where the applicant has an easement superior to the highway easement at the time of the application and can furnish evidence when required of such superior easement.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.422. Emergency excavations.
        Nothing in this article shall prohibit any person from maintaining by virtue of any law, ordinance, or permit any pipe, cable, or conduit in any highway or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property if the person making such excavation applies for a permit not later than the next business day.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.423. Cable television lines.
        The Director shall require all lines for the transmission and distribution of standard television or audio signals to be placed underground in highways when all power and telephone lines are underground and shall also require underground installations in all instances, except where the applicant provides satisfactory proof of permission to use existing pole lines or where the Director finds that the remoteness of the area or other conditions render an underground installation impractical or infeasible.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.424. No interference with others.
        The Director may establish such requirements as he may find necessary to apply to the work to be done by any person in order to prevent interference with users of the highway and with holders of other permits.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Article 5. Provisions for Planting
Sec. 7-1.501. Requirements for planting.
        The applicant for a permit to plant trees or other plants in the right-of-way shall show in his application, or by sketch, the proposed location and the kind of plants. No change shall be made in either the location or kind without the approval of the Director. Upon planting trees or other plants in the right-of-way, such trees or other plants shall become the property of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.502. Denial of planting permits.
        The Director may refuse to issue a permit authorizing the planting of trees or other plants in the right-of-way when, in his opinion, the location, the nature of growth, or the kind of tree, shrub, or other plant will be deleterious to the public highway, will unduly disturb the right-of-way, or in any way will impede construction or the maintenance of facilities.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.503. Removal and/or trimming of trees.
        The trimming of trees shall be permitted only when and in the manner authorized by a permit so that the shapeliness of the tree may be preserved. The removal of non-hazardous live trees shall require Council approval; dead or hazardous trees may be removed at the discretion of the Director. The removal of trees will be approved, and a permit issued, only when a necessity for removal exists. When a tree is removed, the entire stump shall be taken out at least one foot below the existing or proposed subgrade, unless otherwise specified in the permit, and the hole back-filled and compacted. All debris from trimming or removal shall be removed from the site, and the right-of-way shall be restored to its former condition. A suitable replacement tree may be required.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.504. Lawns and ground covers in rights-of-way.
        It shall be permissible to plant and maintain a lawn or similar ground cover not prohibited by law within the right-of-way of a public highway without a permit. However, the lawn or similar ground cover shall not extend into the traveled way of the public highway nor into the drainage ditches, gutters, or other improved facilities.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.505. Uses not denied.
        The public may not be denied the use of the planted area for pedestrian or other lawful uses. The City may use the planted area for any purpose and may issue a permit to any applicant to perform encroachment work pursuant to this chapter. If the lawn or similar ground cover is damaged in the course of an authorized encroachment, the permittee who caused the damage will be responsible for the replacement thereof, unless the permit specifically states otherwise.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.506. Sight distances.
        No hedge, shrub, or other planting and no fence or other structure shall be planted or erected in a right-of-way without a permit, nor shall such hedge, shrub, planting, fence, or other structure be erected or maintained in such manner which unreasonably and dangerously impedes, obstructs, denies, or impairs the sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.507. Plantings neat and orderly.
        The permittee shall maintain hedges and shrubs, or other plantings, and fences or similar structures in a neat and orderly condition. If the encroachment is not so maintained, the Director may direct the permittee to remove the encroachment and restore the right-of-way to its former condition at the expense of the permittee.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.508. Existing plantings exempt.
        Permits for plantings existing on March 12, 1987, shall not be required. However, such existing plantings shall be maintained in accordance with this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Article 6. Special Provisions for Moving Permits
Sec. 7-1.601. Scope of provisions.
        The provisions of this article shall apply to the use of highways by special vehicles.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.602. May require planking.
        When so required by the Director, a moving contractor shall place under each dolly or wheel used in moving a building or structure, or under each wheel of a vehicle, boards or planks of adequate width and strength to carry the load without being broken to serve as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along or across any portion of any highway which has a surface other than natural soil. The moving contractor shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on, or resting on, such surface except upon such board, plank, or runway.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.603. Overweight approval.
        The Director shall not issue a permit to move any load when the weight of the load, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment, exceeds the weight permitted by the Vehicle Code, except that, if it appears to the Director that the size, shape, or physical characteristics of the load, or portion thereof, to be moved makes it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the Director may issue a permit to move a load on a vehicle, every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires, where the Director has determined that such movement will not cause injury to the highways and bridges and appurtenances installed therein or thereunder.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.604. Compliance with general laws.
        When authorized by a permit issued by the Division of Highways of the State or the Director to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles, or the load of dimension or weight or other characteristics generally prohibited by law, the permittee shall comply with the general laws regulating travel over a public highway, including posted signs or notices which limit speed, direction of travel, or weight which may be placed upon a structure, or the width or height that may be moved on, over, or across, or otherwise restrict or control travel on a public highway, unless exempt by special permit.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.605. Inspections.
        The Director may require that the moving of any load or vehicle be under the supervision of any inspector to be appointed by the Director, with reimbursement to the City for actual costs.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.606. Permits may be withheld.
        The Director is authorized to issue or withhold a permit at his discretion or, if a permit is issued, to limit the number of trips, or to establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicles described may be operated on the highways indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicle, when necessary, to assure against undue interference with traffic or damage to the road foundations, surfaces, or structures, and may require the undertaking of other security measures as may be deemed necessary to protect the highways and bridges from injury, or to provide indemnity for any possible injury resulting from the operation of the vehicles.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Sec. 7-1.607. Evidence of clearance.
        Before issuing a permit for the movement of a vehicle or object with a rolling height of over sixteen (16’) feet, the Director shall require evidence or notice of approval of height clearance from the public utility companies having overhead lines crossing the proposed route.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987)

 

Article 7. Outdoor Dining Permits
Sec. 7-1.701. Purpose.
        The purpose of the regulations and standards in this article are to promote safe and visually appealing opportunities for outdoor dining within the City of Ojai.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.702. Definitions.
        Unless the provisions or the context otherwise requires, the following definitions shall govern this article:

(a)    “City” means the City of Ojai.

(b)    “Conditional use permit” means a permit issued by the Planning Commission for a specific use not usually allowed in a zone, with conditions that govern design, construction, operations and other aspects of a proposed development project

(c)    “Director” means the Director of Public Works.

(d)    “Outdoor dining” means the use of City sidewalks and public rights-of-way for the consumption of food or beverages in conjunction with the operation of a food service establishment properly licensed for such service under state and county health regulations and which provides on-premises customer seating.

(e)    “Outdoor dining permit” means a permit issued by the Director permitting the encroachment upon and use of the public right-of-way for outdoor dining.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.703. Outdoor dining permit required.
        Outdoor dining is not permitted within the City without an outdoor dining permit unless the establishment qualifies for an exemption under Section 7-1.704.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.704. Exemptions.
        Food establishments that primarily provide take-out service are exempted from the provisions of this article provided that their outdoor facilities are limited to no more than two (2) chairs and one (1) table or one (1) bench. Such establishments shall apply for an encroachment permit from the Public Works Department pursuant to this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.705. Where outdoor dining in public rights-of-way permitted.
        Outdoor dining shall require a conditional use permit pursuant to Section 10-2.2002 of this Code, in addition to the outdoor dining permit required by this article and shall be in compliance with all adopted rules and regulations for outdoor dining.

        Outdoor dining may be permitted where, in the opinion of the Director, traffic and pedestrian safety is compatible with outdoor dining. All Outdoor dining areas must be adjacent to and incidental to the operation of a food service establishment providing on-premises customer seating properly permitted for such service pursuant to state and county health regulations. Use of the sidewalk or public right-of-way must be confined to the actual sidewalk and public right-of-way frontage of the restaurant or food service building.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.706. Required sidewalk or right-of-way width.
        Outdoor dining is permitted only where, in the opinion of the Director, the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed outdoor dining. Each application request will be field reviewed by the Director or his designee to determine the width of sidewalk which shall remain clear and unimpeded for pedestrian traffic.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.707. Special closures.
        Outdoor dining is a revocable encroachment permit granted by the City. The City shall have the right, acting through the Director, to suspend the operation of outdoor dining at any time because of anticipated or actual conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area or right-of-way. Such conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals or similar special events, parades or marches, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or from emergencies occurring in the area.

        To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the outdoor dining will be suspended by the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.708. Issuance of permit.
        The Director shall issue an outdoor dining permit pursuant to administrative regulations adopted by resolution of the Planning Commission and City Council.

        At a minimum such regulations shall determine and require the following:

(a)    The approval and execution of a standard permit and hold harmless agreement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney;

(b)    Proof of insurance naming the City as additional insured as set forth in Section 7-1.106 of this chapter in an amount of not less than $500,000 combined single limits;

(c)    Special site conditions as are needed or desirable;

(d)    Whether the design for seating and signage meets the minimum standards of the established regulations;

(e)    Such other conditions as are necessary for public safety or to protect public improvements.

(f)    Conditions necessary to restore the appearance of the sidewalk or right-of-way on termination of use;

(g)    Compliance with the applicable City building, signage, zoning and design review requirements;

(h)    Approval by the Planning Commission of a conditional use permit; and

(i)     The payment of an appropriate permit application and encroachment fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.709. Term and renewal.
        The maximum term of an outdoor dining permit shall be one (1) year. Thereafter, the Director may extend the permit for additional periods, not to exceed one (1) year each, following review and approval of the operation of the outdoor dining business. If the Director considers additional or revised conditions necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter, such new conditions may be imposed upon the extension, including the imposition of a permit renewal fee.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.710. Encroachment permits are nontransferable.
        Permits issued pursuant to the authority of this Chapter shall be nontransferable from one owner to another.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.711. Deposits required.
        The provisions of Section 7-1.130 of this chapter shall be applicable to the issuance of an outdoor dining permit.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.712. Cancellation of permit.
        An outdoor dining permit may be cancelled by the Director for the reasons set forth in Section 7-1.213 of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.713. Encroachment removal.
        The provisions of Section 7-1.224 of this chapter shall be applicable to outdoor dining.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.714. Appeals.
        Any appeal of a decision by the Director concerning the refusal or revocation of an outdoor dining permit, or conditions attached to such permit, shall follow the provisions of Article 8 of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Article 8. Appeals
Sec. 7-1.801. Provisions for appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by the refusal or revocation of a permit, or conditions attached to a permit, may appeal to the Council within thirty (30) days after the date of such action. The appeal shall be in the form of a written notice filed with the City Clerk and signed by the applicant. The notice shall have attached a copy of the application as filed with the Director, shall recite such other items as have been filed, and shall state clearly and concisely the grounds upon which the applicant relies in his appeal.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.802. Time of hearings.
        The City Clerk shall set the matter for a hearing within thirty (30) days after the notice is filed and shall notify the applicant and the Director of the setting.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 7-1.803. Council action.
        At the hearing, the applicant shall establish to the satisfaction of the Council that he is entitled to the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter or to the reinstatement of a permit previously revoked. The Director may present his grounds for maintaining conditions or the denial or revocation of the permit. The decision of the Council shall be final.

(§ 1, Ord. 645, eff. March 12, 1987, as amended by § 2, Ord. 720, eff. December 25, 1997)

Chapter 2 STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS FOR PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION
Sec. 7-2.01. Adoption by reference.
        The 1976 Edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, and all subsequent amendments and additions thereto, written and promulgated by the Southern California Chapter of the American Public Works Association and Southern California District of the Associated General Contractors of California, Joint Cooperative Committee, three (3) certified copies of which are on file in the office of the City Clerk, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference as though set forth in full in this chapter.

(§ I, Ord. 448, eff. March 23, 1972, as amended by § 1, Ord. 510, eff. September 25, 1975, and Part 1, Ord. 536, eff. February 24, 1976)

 

Sec. 7-2.02. Violations.
        Any violation of the provisions of said Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction shall be an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ I, Ord. 448, eff. March 23, 1972, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

Chapter 3 WATER STANDARDS
Article 1. Water Works Manual
Note
*       Editor’s note—Sections 7-3.01 and 7-3.02, added by Ord. No. 447, renumbered by codifier.

 

Sec. 7-3.101. Adoption by reference.
        The Water Works Manual of the County, originally adopted by the Board of Supervisors of the County on June 8, 1965, by Resolution No. 415, and all subsequent amendments and additions thereto, is hereby adopted and incorporated in this chapter by reference as though set forth in full in this chapter.

(§ I, Ord. 447, eff. March 23, 1972)

 

Sec. 7-3.102. Violations.
        Any violation of the provisions of said Water Works Manual shall be an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ I, Ord. 447, eff. March 23, 1972, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Article 2. Well Construction, Modification and Demolition Standards
Sec. 7-3.201. Short title.
        This article shall be known as the “Well Construction, Modification and Demolition Standards Ordinance of the City of Ojai.”

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.202. Purpose.
        It is the purpose of this article to provide, in cooperation with the County of Ventura, for the construction, maintenance, operation, use, repair, modification and destruction of wells within the City in such a manner so as to insure a continued adequate supply of drinking water for the citizens of Ojai, to prevent the contamination or pollution of the City’s ground water and to insure that water obtained from wells within the City’s corporate limits shall be suitable for the use of its citizens and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of its people.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 1, Ord. 676, eff. November 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.203. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this article, unless the context otherwise requires:

(a)    “Abandoned well” means any of the following:

(1)    A water well used less than eight hours in any twelve (12) month period;

(2)    A monitoring well from which no monitoring data has been taken for a period of two (2) years;

(3)    A well which is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be made functional for its original use or any other use regulated by this article within six (6) months or such other shorter or longer period as determined by the Director depending on well condition and risk to the aquifer;

(4)    An engineering test hole twenty-four (24) hours after construction and testing work has been completed on the site;

(5)    A cathodic protection well which is no longer used for its intended purposes; or

(6)    A water well for which annual reports of well usage pursuant to Section 7-3.223 have not been submitted.

(b)    “Acre-foot” means the volume of water necessary to cover one acre to a depth of one foot; equal to forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) cubic feet or three hundred twenty-five thousand eight hundred fifty-one (325,851) gallons.

(c)    “Active well” means a water well that has operated for at least eight (8) hours during a calendar year, a monitoring well from which data has been collected at least once during the past two (2) years, or a cathodic protection well maintained and utilized for its intended purpose.

(d)    “Applicant” means the well owner or the well owner’s authorized representative.

(e)    “Aquifer” means a body of rock or sediment that is sufficiently porous and permeable to store, transmit, and yield significant or economic quantities of groundwater to wells and springs.

(f)    “Aquitard” means a confining bed and/or formation composed of rock or sediment that retards but does not prevent the flow of water to or from an adjacent aquifer and that does not readily yield water to wells or springs but stores groundwater.

(g)    “Artesian pressure” means the hydrostatic pressure of artesian water, often expressed in terms of pounds per square inch, or the height, in feet above land surface, of a column of water that would be supported by the pressure and which pressure may cause water to flow from the well.

(h)    “Backup well” or “standby well” means a well that is not the primary well, but is a well used to provide supplemental water when the primary well is out of service or not fully functional. The backup well shall not be used to initiate any new use or increased use of groundwater, and must meet the minimum requirements for an active status well.

(i)     “Cannot locate well” means a classification assigned to a well which the owner cannot locate.

(j)     “Cannot locate well report” means a classification assigned to a well for which the owner has conducted a well search according to the County’s Well Location Procedures, and submitted a report documenting the search efforts and results.

(k)    “Cathodic protection well” means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty (50) feet constructed by any method for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact with the ground, commonly referred to as cathodic protection as defined in Section 13711 of the California Water Code.

(l)     “Certificate of exemption” means a certificate prepared by the City or documenting that a well condition inspection has been conducted by an authorized inspector and a well condition inspection report has been prepared and deemed satisfactory by the City.

(m)   “City” and “City Council” means the City of Ojai and the City Council of the City of Ojai.

(n)    “City inspector” means a person authorized by the Director to inspect all work for which a permit is issued pursuant to this article.

(o)    “Community water supply well” means any water well which provides water for public water systems as defined in Section 116275, subdivisions (h) and (i) of the Health and Safety Code.

(p)    “Completion operation” means any of the following work conducted after artificial excavation:

(1)    Placement of a well casing;

(2)    Gravel packing;

(3)    Sealing;

(4)    Perforation of a well casing; or

(5)    Any other work listed on a permit issued pursuant to this article as being a required part of a completion operation.

(q)    “Contaminant” means any substance or property preventing the use or reducing the usability of water for ordinary purposes such as drinking, preparing food, bathing, washing, recreation, and cooling, or any solute or cause of change in physical properties that renders water unfit for a given use.

(r)    “Confined aquifer” means an aquifer that is bounded above and below by formations of distinctly lower permeability than that of the aquifer itself, or an aquifer containing confined groundwater.

(s)    “De minimis extractor” means a person, who extracts for domestic purposes, two acre-feet or less per year.

(t)     “Department” means the City’s Public Works Department.

(u)    “Demolition” or “destruction” of a well means to fill it (including both interior and annular spaces if the well is cased) completely in such a manner that it will not produce water or act as a conduit for the interchange of water between any water-bearing formations penetrated.

(v)    To “destroy” means to fill a well (including both interior and annular spaces if the well is cased) completely in such a manner that it will not produce water or act as a conduit for the transmission of water between any water-bearing formations penetrated.

(w)   “Director” means the Director of the Department or duly authorized representative.

(x)    “Engineering test hole” means an uncased excavation used to determine the engineering or geological properties of subsurface materials by seismic investigation, direct observation or any other means.

(y)    “Exempt well” means an abandoned well for which a well condition inspection report has been conducted and a certificate of exemption has been approved by the City of Ojai.

(z)    “Flowmeter” means a manufactured instrument for accurately measuring and recording the volume of water pumped from a well or wells.

(aa)  Good state of repair” means a well whose condition is adequate to perform its intended function without allowing contaminants to migrate between zones of water bearing sediments where one or more zones contain water of different quality and where the well has a physical barrier that prevents surface water contaminants from entering groundwater.

(bb)  “Groundwater” means water beneath the surface of the earth within a zone below the water table in which the soil is completely saturated with water, but does not include water that flows in known and definite channels.

(cc)  “Groundwater basin” means an alluvial aquifer or a stacked series of alluvial aquifers with reasonably well defined boundaries in a lateral direction and having a definable bottom.

(dd)  “Individual domestic well” means any water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence, commercial establishment, or farming operation.

(ee)  To “inspect” a well means to personally witness, record, and certify work pursuant to a condition or conditions of a valid permit.

(ff)   To “modify” or to “repair” a well means to replace its casing in a manner which involves removal or partial removal of the old casing, to reperforate its casing, to install a liner in the well, or to change the depth of the well.

(gg)  “Monitoring well” means a cased or uncased well used exclusively for monitoring or sampling the conditions of a water-bearing aquifer, such as water pressure, depth, movement or quality.

(hh)  “Noncompliant well” means an abandoned well for which the owner does not repair or reuse, destroy or obtain a certificate of exemption.

(ii)    A person “owns” a well if such person is the owner of the land on which the well is located.

(jj)    “Person” means any natural person and any artificial person, including any corporation, partnership or governmental entity.

(kk)  “Pollution” means an alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological properties of water by the introduction of any substance into water that adversely affects any beneficial use of water.

(ll)    A person “possesses” a well if such person is in actual possession of the well or has a legal right to the possession thereof.

(mm)        Registered inspector” means a professional engineer or registered geologist currently registered in California and approved by the Director to inspect drilling and sealing operations for engineering test holes and monitoring wells. A technician trained and experienced in drilling and sealing operations who is working under the direct supervision of one of the aforementioned professionals shall be deemed qualified to perform required inspection(s) provided one of the aforementioned professionals reviews the well inspection record and assumes responsibility for the accuracy and completeness of the work by signing the well inspection record.

(nn)  “Replacement well” means a new well that replaces a well but does not increase the former well’s capacity. Well capacity means the name plate performance rating for the existing well equipment or the well’s documented historical production.

(oo)  “Unconfined aquifer” means an aquifer which is not bounded on top by an aquitard and the upper surface of which is the water table.

(pp)  “Unsaturated zone” means the zone below the land surface in which pore space contains both water and air.

(qq)  “Inspector, approval and registration.” Application for approval as a registered inspector shall include proof that the applicant is in compliance with all applicable California State laws pertaining to registration, licensing and compensation insurance. A list shall be maintained by the Director, listing each inspector’s state registration license and compensation insurance number. A listed person shall be dropped from the list automatically on any such expiration date, unless prior to such expiration he or she provides to the Director satisfactory proof of renewal in accordance with State law, in which case he or she shall remain on the approval list of registered inspectors.

(rr)   “Water well” means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of determining the liability of water, extracting water from or injection water into the underground, except the following:

(1)    Oil wells, gas wells, and geothermal wells subject to regulation under the provisions of Division 3 (commencing with Section 3000) of the Public Resources Code; and

(2)    Wells used exclusively for the purposes of dewatering excavation during construction or of stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments.

(ss)   “Well completion report” means a required, confidential report detailing the construction, alteration, abandonment, or destruction of any water well, cathodic protection well, groundwater monitoring well, or geothermal heat exchange well. The reports were called water well drillers’ reports prior to 1991 and are often referred to as “driller’s logs.” The report requirements are described in Water Code Section 13751.

(tt)    “Well condition inspection report” means a report documenting the integrity of a well and its associated components pursuant to Section 7-3.213.

(uu)  “Well field” means two or more water wells located in close proximity or area, and that extract groundwater.

(vv)  “Wellhead protection area” means the surface and subsurface area surrounding a water well or well field that supplies a public water system through which contaminants are reasonably likely to migrate toward the water well or well field.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 2, Ord. 676, eff. November 30, 1990, § 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

 

Sec. 7-3.204. Permit required.
(a)    No person shall within the City drill, dig, sink, deepen, construct, repair, modify, demolish or destroy any cathodic protection well which is over fifty (50) feet deep, any engineering test hole which is over fifty (50) feet deep or any monitoring or water well unless such work is done pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired written permit for such work obtained from the City Council as provided in this chapter. The City Council may issue an annual permit for one or more engineering test holes which are over fifty (50) feet deep and are inspected by a registered inspector.

(b)    Where wells and equipment are currently used to supply water to land within the City, such wells and equipment may continue to supply water and may be maintained, operated, used and repaired for that purpose without permit provided that such maintenance, operation, use or repair shall be in accordance with the standards and provisions of this chapter.

(c)    Types of permits for water wells.

(1)    Permits for construction, modification, replacement, and repair of all water wells;

(2)    Permits for destruction of all wells, except engineering test holes which shall be destroyed immediately after completion of testing in compliance with Section 7-3.213; and

(3)    Annual permits for one or more engineering test holes which are over fifty (50) feet deep and which are inspected by registered inspectors.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 3, Ord. 676, eff. November 30, 1990, § 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

 

Sec. 7-3.205. Application for permit—Contents, hearing, decisions.
(a)    Applications for permits shall be made to the City Council and shall include the following:

(1)    A plot plan indicating the exact location of the well with respect to the following items within a radius of five hundred (500) feet of the well:

(i)     Approximate property lines,

(ii)    Sewage disposal systems or works carrying or containing sewage,

(iii)   All intermittent or perennial, natural or artificial bodies of water or water courses,

(iv)   Drainage pattern of the property,

(v)    Existing wells of all types, regardless of whether they are subject to regulation under this article, and

(vi)   Access roads;

(2)    Location of property;

(3)    Name of person who will perform the work on the well;

(4)    Name and affiliation of registered inspector (monitoring wells and engineering test holes only);

(5)    Proposed depth of well;

(6)    Use of well;

(7)    Proof satisfactory to the City Council that the person who will construct the well is in possession of a valid license appropriate to such work which has been issued in accordance with the Contractors License Law (Chapter 9, commencing with Section 7000, of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code);

(8)    A certificate satisfying the requirements of Section 3800 of the Labor Code (Workers’ Compensation);

(9)    Such other information as the City Council may deem necessary in order to determine whether underground waters will be protected;

(10)  No person shall, within the City right-of-way, cause to construct, repair, modify, demolish or destroy, any well or wells as defined in Section 7-3.203, unless in possession of a valid encroachment permit as per Title 7, Chapter 1 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(b)    Each application for a well permit shall be scheduled for a hearing by the City Council at its regular meeting after the application is filed in proper form or as soon as practicable thereafter. The City shall notify the applicant and such other persons as might be deemed interested or affected by the application of the time of the hearing.

(c)    The City Council may grant or deny an application for a well permit in whole or in part and with such conditions, modifications or limitations on any part of an application as the City Council deems appropriate to carry out the purpose and goals of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 3, Ord. 676, eff. November 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.206. Permit requirements and expiration.
        Permits shall require compliance with all applicable standards set forth in Section 7-3.211. A permit, to be valid, must comply with all other applicable provisions of law. A permit shall expire six (6) months from the date of issuance, unless it is extended by the Director. The Director may grant one or more extensions of a permit, each for a period not to exceed three (3) months, if the permittee proves to the satisfaction of the Director that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee make it infeasible to complete the permitted work prior to the expiration date. Annual permits for engineering test holes shall expire one year from the date of issuance.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.207. Time to complete permitted work and satisfy permit requirements.
        The permittee shall complete work authorized by the permit and satisfy all the requirements of the permit prior to the expiration date of the permit.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.208. Guarantee of permitted work.
        Prior to the issuance of a permit or any extension thereof, the applicant may be required to post with the Department a cash deposit or bond to guarantee compliance with the provisions of this article and the applicable permit, such case or bond to be in an amount deemed necessary by the Director to remedy improper work, but not in excess of the total estimated cost of the permitted work.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.209. License and registration required of persons performing permitted work.
        No person shall perform any work, either on such person’s own property or on the property of another, for which a permit is required by Section 7-3.204, unless such person is in possession of a valid license appropriate to such work which has been issued in accordance with the Contractors’ State License Law (Chapter 9, commencing with Section 7000, of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code) and is registered with the Department to perform work permitted by this article. Licensed water well contractors (Class C-57) registered with the Department may perform all types of permitted work while licensed engineering contractors (Class A) and limited specialty contractors (Class C-61) registered with the Department may only perform permitted work on engineering test holes. The registration shall expire automatically on the expiration date indicated on the copy of the license or the expiration date indicated on the copy of the certificate of workers’ compensation insurance submitted with the application, whichever expiration date is earlier.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

 

Sec. 7-3.210. Suspension or termination of permit.
        Any permit issued pursuant to Section 7-3.204 is subject to suspension or termination prior to expiration as provided in this section.

(a)    Grounds. Any of the following occurrences constitutes a ground for termination of the permit:

(1)    Suspension, revocation or termination of the license, required by Section 7-3.209, of the person who is to perform the work; or

(2)    Failure of such person to comply with any provision of Section 3800 of the Labor Code; or

(3)    Failure of such person or of any person who owns or possesses the well to comply with any provision of this article or any permit issued pursuant thereto.

(b)    Notice. To initiate proceedings to terminate a permit, the Director shall send written notice to the person to whom the permit was issued. The notice shall briefly describe the suspected occurrence which constitutes a ground for termination, shall specify a time and place of a hearing at which such person shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence showing that there has been no such occurrence, and shall state that the failure to appear and present such evidence may result in termination of the permit.

(c)    Hearing. The Director shall conduct the hearing specified in the notice. The hearing shall be informal and shall not be governed by rules of evidence applicable to courts of law. The person to whom the permit was issued shall have the right to present relevant evidence at the hearing. The Director may, but need not, permit other persons to present relevant evidence. At the conclusion of the hearing, or within thirty (30) calendar days thereafter, the Director shall determine, based upon the preponderance of the evidence accepted at the hearing, whether there has been such an occurrence. The determination of the Director shall be final and conclusive. Such determination shall be in writing and shall contain a brief statement of the findings of fact upon which the determination is based. If the determination is that there has been such an occurrence, the Director shall terminate the permit; provided, however, that the Director shall have the discretion not to terminate the permit if the Director determines that the occurrence was not willful, is not ongoing, and is not likely to recur.

(d)    Prehearing suspension. The Director may suspend a permit prior to the hearing when the Director determines that such action is necessary to protect the public health and safety or the environment from imminent danger. The Director shall notify the person to whom the permit was issued of suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the Director makes a final determination based upon the hearing; provided, however, that the Director may lift the suspension at any earlier time at which the Director determines that it is no longer necessary.

        This section shall not deprive the Director or the City of authority to pursue any other action or remedy otherwise available to them under the law.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

 

Sec. 7-3.211. Standards.
        Standards for the construction, relocation, replacement, repair, backup or standby modification or destruction of wells shall be those set forth in the California Department of Water Resources Bulletin Nos. 74-9, Chapter IV, entitled “Water Well Standards—Ventura County,” Bulletin No. 74-81, Chapter II, entitled “Water Well Standards—State of California,” and Bulletin 74-90, entitled “California Well Standards - State of California,” as supplemented or revised from time to time by the California Department of Water Resources, with the following exceptions:

(a)    The City Council may adopt additional or more stringent standards to be applicable to any or all zones as delineated in the aforementioned Bulletins.

(b)    All community water supply wells and individual domestic wells shall be constructed with a sounding tube, tap hole with plug, or similar access for water level measuring equipment. For wells fitted with a well cap, the cap shall have a removable plug for this purpose. (State of California Department of Water Resources’ Bulletin No. 74-81). Well discharge piping shall contain a water sampling port or valve for water quality sampling. Every new water well shall be equipped with a flowmeter. This flowmeter requirement does not apply to de minimis extractors. For those required to have flowmeters, flowmeters will be calibrated and a report submitted to the Agency at a minimum of every three (3) years. The specifications for flowmeter calibration are set forth in Appendix 1. Substitution of comparable flowmeter calibration specifications may be approved upon review by the Director

(c)    All pump discharge pipes not discharging or open to the atmosphere shall be equipped with an automatic device to prevent backflow and/or siphonage into a well. Specific backflow prevention measures are required for drinking water supply wells as prescribed in Title 17, Public Health, California Code of Regulations (Sections 7583 through 7585 and 7601 through 7605), effective June 25, 1987. (State of California Department of Water Resources’ Well Standard Bulletin No. 74-90) Irrigation well systems, including those used for landscape irrigation and other well systems that employ, or which have been modified to employ, chemical feeders or injectors, shall be equipped with a backflow prevention device (State of California Department of Water Resources’ Well Standard Bulletin No. 74-90). A check valve may also be utilized to meet this backflow prevention requirement.

(d)    All community water supply wells and individual domestic wells shall be provided with a pipe or other effective means through which chlorine or other disinfecting agents may be introduced directly into the well. If a pipe is provided, it shall be installed at a height at or above the pump slab, shall be kept sealed, and shall be provided with a threaded or other secure cap. Equivalent protection for preventing contaminants from entering the well shall be provided for subsurface pump discharge installations. If an air relief vent is used, it shall terminate downward and be screened with 16 mesh screen to prevent contaminants from entering the vent.

(e)    Every new, repaired or modified community water supply well or individual domestic water well, after construction, modification or repair, and before being placed into service, shall be thoroughly cleaned of all foreign substances and shall be thoroughly disinfected utilizing the procedures set forth in Appendix C of the aforementioned Bulletin No. 74-81.

(f)    For irrigation and industrial wells chemicals of any type are not to be injected, pumped or poured into the well with the exception of disinfectants following any well rehabilitation work. Rehabilitation work may include use of chemicals to clean or remove scale from the well casing and gravel pack (if installed). Chemicals used for disinfection of groundwater extracted from the well shall be injected downstream from a backflow prevention device. Continuous injection or drip of chemicals into the well is prohibited.

(g)    Engineering test holes deeper than fifty (50) feet shall be destroyed within one working day upon completion of testing by completely filling and/or sealing of the borehole in accordance with criteria established by the Agency. The Agency may waive complete sealing if the permittee demonstrates to the Director’s satisfaction that the purpose of this article as set forth in Section 7-3.202 will be satisfied.

(h)    No well, regardless of status, shall be left unattended without a cap that has been constructed to prevent the accidental access to the well by a person or animal, or have an opening that allows the well to be susceptible• to contaminants or pollution.

(i)     All wells shall be located an adequate horizontal distance from potential sources of contamination and pollution as specified in the Department of Water Resources, California Well Standards Bulletins No. 74-81, Section B.A.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 4, Ord. 676, eff. November 30, 1990, § 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

 

Sec. 7-3.212. Log of well.
Licensed water well contractors who have performed any work for which a permit is required by this Article and which work involves drilling, digging, excavating or boring of a well, except for an engineering test hole, shall, within thirty (30) days of completion of such work, submit to the Agency an accurate and complete well completion report.

For the purpose of obtaining sealing requirements from the Agency, geophysical well logs will be required as described in this article. New water wells in Sealing Zone Ill shall have a geophysical log. New water wells in Sealing Zone II shall either have a geophysical log, or soil samples shall be collected and recorded for every ten (10) feet of depth within potential sealing zones. Geophysical logs must include spontaneous potential, and resistivity (short and normal, or lateral log). All abandoned water wells to be destroyed in Sealing Zones II and Ill shall have a geophysical log by gamma ray if no existing electric log or satisfactory drilling report is available for that well, unless it is determined by the Agency that a log is not warranted.

Any permittee whose water well contractor fails to comply with this provision shall be in violation of this article and shall not be granted any new permits until the violation has been corrected. This shall not preclude the application of other penalties for violation of this article. A well log shall include, at a minimum, all of the following:

(a)    A detailed record of the boundaries, character, distribution and color of all lithologic units penetrated;

(b)    The type and size of well casing;

(c)    The location of perforations, sealing zones and existing seals;

(d)    Reports on the quantity and quality of groundwater (if available); and

(e)    Any other data required by the Director in the permit conditions.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

 

Sec. 7-3.213. Well inspection report.
Well construction seal inspection report. A County inspector will prepare a well seal inspection report for water wells and cathodic protection wells constructed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired permit issued under this article.

(a)    Well destruction seal inspection report. A County inspector will prepare a well seal inspection report for water wells and cathodic protection wells destroyed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired permit issued under this article.

(b)    Monitoring well/engineering test hole construction seal inspection report. The well seal inspection report for monitoring wells and engineering test holes constructed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired permit issued under this article shall be submitted by a registered inspector within thirty (30) days of sealing on a form* satisfactory to the Agency, and shall include:

(1)    Permit number.

(2)    Date(s) of sealing work.

(3)    Number of wells constructed under this permit.

(4)    Diameter and depth of bore hole(s), diameter and depth of casing(s) installed, depth to top and bottom of perforated interval(s), and depth(s) to top of annular filter pack.

(5)    Depth to water.

(6)    Depth and type of sealing material(s).

(7)    Method of placement of sealing material(s).

(8)    Method of protection of wellhead or open (engineering test) bore hole.**

(9)    Signature of registered inspector.

*      Bulletin 74-90 (DWR) requires that monitoring well construction, alteration, and destruction reports be completed on forms provided by the California Department of Water Resources.

 

**    Section 7-3.211(g) requires that all engineering test holes be destroyed within one working day after completion of testing.

(c)    Monitoring well destruction seal inspection report. The well seal inspection report for monitoring wells and engineering test holes destroyed pursuant to and in compliance with an unexpired permit issued under Section 7-3.204 shall be submitted by a registered inspector within thirty (30) days of sealing on a form* satisfactory to the Agency, and shall include:

(1)    Permit number.

(2)    Date(s) of sealing work.

(3)    Number of wells destroyed under this permit.

(4)    Diameter and depth of bore hole(s) and diameter and depth of casing(s) installed (monitoring wells).

(5)    Depth to water.

(6)    Depth and type of sealing material(s).

(7)    Method of placement of sealing material.

(8)    Method of restoration of site area.

(9)    Signature of registered inspector.

*      Bulletin 74-90 (DWR) requires that monitoring well construction, alteration, and destruction reports be completed on forms provided by the California Department of Water Resources.

(d)    Water well condition inspection report for certificate of exemption or returning well to active status. Any person who owns or who possesses a water well that is abandoned or about to become abandoned due to lack of use, but who does not desire to destroy the well, may submit to the Agency a well condition inspection report signed by a registered inspector pursuant to Section 7-3.216. The report shall include:

(1)    State well number.

(2)    Driller’s report.

(3)    Assessor parcel number of the property on which the well is located.

(4)    An accurate location description with respect to nearby wells, septic systems, animal enclosures, roads, and property boundaries.

(5)    Photographs of the well site, taken not more than six (6) months prior to application for a certificate of exemption.

(6)    Video log of well casing, conducted not more than six (6) months prior to application for a certificate of exemption.

(7)    A description of the well casing condition based upon a review of the most recent video log of the well.

(8)    An opinion that the well is, or is not, equipped with an annular seal or seals to prevent the interchange of waters between water-bearing strata penetrated by the well.

(9)    A statement that the well is, or is not, protected from artesian flow and from entry by surface waters.

(10)  A description of any work necessary to assure the safety of local groundwater supplies due to the continued existence of the well.

(11)  A description of any repair work necessary to allow the well to function for its intended purpose.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.214. Corrective actions.
        Any person who owns a well and any person who is in possession of a well, may be required to take corrective action with respect to the well as provided in this section.

(a)    Grounds. Any of the following occurrences constitutes a ground for ordering corrective action:

(1)    Maintenance, operation or use of the well in a manner that will cause or contribute to, or run a substantial risk of causing or contributing to, the pollution or contamination of the groundwater; or

(2)    Construction, maintenance, repair, modification or destruction of the well in a manner that violates any provision of this article.

(b)    Notice. To initiate proceedings to order corrective action, the Director shall send written notice to the person who owns the well or the person in possession of the well or both of them. The notice shall briefly describe suspected occurrence which constitutes a ground for ordering corrective action, shall describe the proposed corrective action, shall specify a time and place of a hearing at which such person shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence showing that there has been no such occurrence or that the proposed corrective action is inappropriate, and shall state that failure to appear and present such evidence may result in an order requiring such person to take some or all of the proposed corrective action.

(c)    Hearing. The Director shall conduct the hearing specified in the notice. The hearing shall be informal and shall not be governed by rules of evidence applicable to courts of law. The person to whom the permit was issued shall have the right to present relevant evidence at the hearing. The Director may, but need not, permit other persons to present relevant evidence. At the conclusion of the hearing, or within thirty (30) calendar days thereafter, the Director shall determine, based upon the preponderance of the evidence accepted at the hearing, whether there has been such an occurrence, and if so, whether the proposed corrective action is appropriate. The determination of the Director shall be final and conclusive.

(d)    Order. If the determination is that there has been such an occurrence and that some or all of the proposed corrective action is appropriate, the Director may issue and serve upon the person or persons who were served with notice of the hearing a written order requiring such appropriate corrective action. The order shall state a deadline for commencing the corrective action if such action is to be ongoing, and shall state a deadline for completing the corrective action if such corrective action is not to be ongoing. The order shall further state that, if the corrective action is not taken in compliance with the order, such action may be taken by the City at the expense of the person served with the order and, in addition, such person may be subject to criminal prosecution.

(e)    Compliance. Any owner or possessor of the well who is served with such an order shall, on or before the deadline stated therein, commence every corrective action described therein as being ongoing, and complete every corrective action described therein as not being ongoing. Any owner or possessor of the well served with such an order, and any person who thereafter acquires ownership or possession of the well with actual or constructive notice of the order, shall, for so long as such person owns or possesses the well, continue to take every corrective action described in the order as ongoing, until such time as either the well is destroyed pursuant to this article or the Director states in writing that such ongoing corrective action is no longer necessary.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.215. Destruction of abandoned wells.
        No person shall own or possess an abandoned cathodic protection well which is over fifty (50) feet deep, an abandoned monitoring well, an abandoned engineering test hole which is over fifty (50) feet deep, or an abandoned water well, unless either such well has been destroyed pursuant to this article or a current certificate of exemption has been issued for such well pursuant to Section 7-3.216.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

Sec. 7-3.216. Certificate of exemption.
Any person who owns or possesses a water or monitoring well which is abandoned or about to become abandoned but who intends to use such well again may apply to the City Council, in a form satisfactory to the City Council, for a certificate of exemption from the requirement that such well be destroyed. If the City Council determines from such application that exemption from the requirement that the well be destroyed would not result in pollution or contamination of ground water and would not create a hazard to health or safety, the City Council may, but shall not be required to, issue such a certificate of exemption. A certificate of exemption shall expire five (5) years after issuance and may be terminated by the City Council at any time prior to expiration upon a determination that destruction of the well is necessary to prevent pollution or contamination of ground water or to avoid a hazard to health or safety. Such successive certificates of exemption may be issued with respect to a well in the same manner as the original certificate.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 5, Ord. 676, eff. November 30, 1990, § 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

 

Sec. 7-3.217. Fees.
        The City Council may, by resolution, establish fees for the processing of any application for approval as a registered inspector, for registration with the Department pursuant to Section 7-3.209, or for a permit, extension of permit, or certificate of exemption pursuant to this article. The payment of such fee, if any, established by such resolution shall accompany the application to which it pertains. If the application is withdrawn before issuance of the permit, the Department shall compute the cost to the City of processing the application up to that point in accordance the City’s standard cost accounting procedures and, if such cost is less than the amount of the fee paid, the difference shall be refunded to the applicant.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.218. Inspection.
        The Director and his or her City inspectors may, at any and all reasonable times, enter any and all places, property enclosures and structures for the purpose of making examinations and investigations to determine whether any provision of this article is being violated. The Director may require that any work for which a permit is required by this article be completed in stages and that work completed for any stage be inspected prior to any further work. Registered inspectors must inspect drilling and sealing operations for engineering test holes and monitoring wells if required by permit conditions.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.219. Penalties.
        Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of City authorities as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.03 of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided therein. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable as provided in this section. The provisions of this section are in addition to and independent of any other sanctions which are or may be imposed under this chapter or any other provision of law.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 7, Ord. 697, eff. June 25, 1993)

 

Sec. 7-3.220. Abatement.
        If any corrective action required by an order issued pursuant to Section 7-3.214 is not taken in full compliance with such order, the Director may cause the corrective action to be taken by the City and all persons required by Section 7-3.214 to take such corrective action shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the cost of such action. In cases where the public health and safety require emergency corrective action, the Director may cause the emergency corrective action to be taken by the City without a prior order or notice and all persons who own or possess the well shall be jointly and severally liable to the City for the cost of such action.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.221. Exemption.
        The foregoing provisions of this chapter do not apply to any leak detection system installed or destroyed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 6.7 (commencing with Section 25280) of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code or of Article 2 (commencing with Section 4521) of Chapter 5 of Division 4 of the Ventura County Ordinance code. The City Council may also waive permit requirements for installation or destruction of monitoring and recovery wells to determine the extent of or remove underground tank contamination, pursuant to the requirements of the State of California or the County of Ventura, if the City Council determines that the purpose of this article as set forth in Section 7-3.202, will be satisfied. The City Council may also waive permit requirements for installation or destruction of natural gas monitoring and recovery wells pursuant to the requirements of the State of California or the County of Ventura if the City Council determines that the purpose of this article as set forth in Section 7-3.202 will be satisfied.

(§ 1, Ord. 671, eff. March 30, 1990, as amended by § 6, Ord. 676, eff. November 30, 1990)

 

Sec. 7-3.222. Flow prevention device.
All wells having a history of flowing as a result of artesian pressure shall be maintained and equipped to prevent flowing due to pressure in the aquifer system. Wells without any history of flowing that begin to flow shall be repaired, or retrofitted as necessary to prevent flowing. Such repair or retrofit shall be completed within a period of thirty (30) days of notice by County. This includes flowing as a result of a failed casing or other deteriorated component, or the absence of a surface seal.

(§ 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

 

Sec. 7-3.223. Aquifer protection program.
The purposes of this program are to allow retention of those wells that are being used and are in good condition and to require either repair or destruction of those wells that are not usable and are causing groundwater pollution.

(a)    Water wells.

(1)    Beginning on January 1, 1999, and on each January first thereafter, any person who owns a water well, or any person who is in possession of a water well, except those wells for which a valid certificate of exemption is in effect, shall submit to the Agency a report of the volume of groundwater extracted, as measured by flowmeter if so equipped, or other reasonable means, and the total time the well was operated within the preceding twelve (12) months. In addition, for water wells constructed to allow access for water level measuring, the static water level in each water well shall be measured and reported annually. Any results from a completed aquifer pump test, or groundwater quality data collected shall also be reported. This report shall be submitted to the Agency prior to February 1 of each year on a form approved by the Agency.

(2)    If a well is classified as abandoned, as defined in Section 7-3.203, a certificate of exemption shall be obtained or the well may be returned to active status by completing a well condition inspection report in the manner provided in Section 7-3.216, or the well shall be destroyed as required by Section 7-3.215.

(b)    Based upon the above information, all wells in the unincorporated areas of Ventura County shall be classified as one of the following:

(1)    Active;

(2)    Abandoned with a valid certificate of exemption;

(3)    Abandoned and requiring destruction;

(4)    Noncompliant-abandoned;

(5)    Noncompliant;

(6)    Cannot locate; or

(7)    Cannot locate report.

(c)    Applicants in violation of this article shall not be entitled to further well permits or any land use entitlement until all violations of this article are corrected.

(§ 2, Ord. 874, eff. July 13, 2017)

Chapter 4 INFORMAL BID PROCEDURES
Sec. 7-4.01. Definitions.
        For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter:

(a)    “City” means the City of Ojai, California.

(b)    “Commission” means the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission.

(c)    “Formal contract” means a contract greater than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).

(d)    “Informal contract” means a contract in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) or less.

(e)    “Public project” means any of the following:

(1)    Construction, reconstruction, erection, alteration, renovation, improvement, demolition, and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility.

(2)    Painting or repainting of any publicly owned, leased, or operated facility.

(3)    In the case of a publicly owned utility system, “public project” shall include only the construction, erection, improvement, or repair of dams, reservoirs and powerplants.

        Public project does not include maintenance work. For purposes of this chapter, “maintenance work” includes all of the following:

(1)    Routine, recurring, and usual work for the preservation or protection of any publicly owned or publicly operated facility for its intended purposes.

(2)    Minor repainting.

(3)    Resurfacing of streets at less than one inch.

(4)    Landscape maintenance, including mowing, watering, trimming, pruning, planting, replacement of plants, and servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems.

(5)    Work performed to keep, operate, and maintain publicly owned water, power, or waste disposal systems, including, but not limited to, dams, reservoirs and powerplants.

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

 

Sec. 7-4.02. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to establish the requirements governing the selection of contractors to perform public projects pursuant to Section 22034 of the Public Contract Code. It is intended to be in accordance with and subject to the requirements and provisions of Public Contract Code, Part 3, Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 22000).

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

 

Sec. 7-4.03. Alternate procedures.
        Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the City Council from utilizing, as an alternative to the procedures set forth in this chapter, the procedures set forth in Public Contract Code, Part 3, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 20100).

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

 

Sec. 7-4.04. Informal bid procedures.
        “Public projects,” as defined by the Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Act of the Public Contract Code and in accordance with the limits listed in Section 22032 of the Public Contract Code, may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Section 22032, et seq., of the Public Contract Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

 

Sec. 7-4.05. Award of contract.
(a)    Public projects of sixty thousand dollars ($60,000.00) or less may be performed by the employees of the City by force account, by negotiated contract, or by purchase order.

(b)    Public projects of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) or less may be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in Public Contract Code, Part 3, Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 22000).

(c)    Public projects of more than two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure.

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002, as amended by § 2, Ord. 896, eff. may 26, 2019)

 

Sec. 7-4.06. Informal advertising and award process.
        When utilizing the informal bid procedure, the following shall apply:

(a)    The City Clerk shall maintain a list of qualified contractors, identified according to the categories of work. The criteria for development and maintenance of the contractor’s list shall be as determined by the Commission. The City by this chapter elects to notify construction trade journals in accordance with subsection (b) when utilizing informal bidding procedures.

(b)    All contractors on the list for the category of work being bid or all construction trade journals specified for Ventura County by the Commission, or both, shall be mailed a notice inviting informal bids unless the product or service is proprietary.

(c)    All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to subsection (b) shall be completed not less than ten (10) calendar days before bids are due.

(d)    The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids.

(e)    The City Council by adoption of this chapter hereby delegates the authority to award those informal contracts set forth in Section 7-4.05(a) above to the City Manager of the City. The City Council reserves the authority to award those informal contracts set forth in Section 7-4.05(b) exclusively to itself.

(f)    If all bids received are in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), the City Council may, by passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, at one hundred ten thousand dollars ($110,000.00), or less, to the lowest responsible bidder, if it determines the City’s cost estimate is reasonable.

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

 

Sec. 7-4.07. Publication of notice inviting formal bids.
        Notice inviting formal bids shall state the time and place for the receiving and opening of sealed bids and distinctly describe the project. The notice shall be published in accordance with Public Contract Code Section 20164 at least ten (10) calendar days before the date of opening the bids. Notice shall be published at least twice, not less than five (5) days apart, in a newspaper of general circulation published or distributed in the City. The notice inviting formal bids shall be mailed to all construction trade journals specified in Section 7-4.06(c) above at least thirty (30) calendar days before the date of opening bids.

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

 

Sec. 7-4.08. Adoption of plans, specifications and working details for certain projects.
        The City Council shall adopt plans, specifications, and working details for all public projects exceeding one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00).

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

 

Sec. 7-4.09. Rejection of bids—Options—No bids.
(a)    The City may reject any bids presented. If after the first invitation of bids all bids are rejected, after reevaluating its cost estimates of the project, the City shall have the option of either of the following:

(1)    Abandoning the project or re-advertising for bids in the manner described by this chapter; or

(2)    By passage of a resolution by a four-fifths vote of the City Council declaring that the project can be performed more economically by City employees and determining that the project may be done by force account without complying further with this chapter.

(b)    If a contract is awarded, it shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder, if two (2) or more bids are the same and the lowest, the City may accept the one it chooses.

(c)    If no bids are received through the formal or informal procedure, the project may be performed by the employees of the City by force account, or negotiated contract without complying further with this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

 

Sec. 7-4.10. Separation of work orders on projects—Evasion of provision of this chapter.
        It is unlawful to split or separate into smaller work orders or projects any project for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter requiring work to be done by contract after competitive bidding.

(§ 1, Ord. 761, eff. Oct. 10, 2002)

Title 8 FINANCE, REVENUE, AND TAXATION
Chapter 1 TAXATION
Chapter 2 SPECIAL FUNDS
Chapter 3 UNINHABITED TERRITORY ANNEXATION REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 4 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 5 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES

Chapter 1 TAXATION
Article 1. Uniform Local Sales and Use Taxes
Note
*       Article 1, Sales and Use Tax, consisting of Sections, 8-1.101 through 8-1.108, added by Ord. No. 219, as amended by Ord. No. 291, effective January 1, 1962, repealed and replaced by Ord. No. 478, effective December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974.

 

Sec. 8-1.101. Short title.
        This article shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law” of the City.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.102. Rate.
        The rate of the sales tax and use tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall be one percent.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974, as amended by § 1, Ord. 484, eff. February 12, 1974, and § 1, Ord. 524, eff. July 13, 1976)

 

Sec. 8-1.103. Operative date.
        The provisions of this article shall be operative on January 1, 1974.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.104. Purpose.
        The Council hereby declares that the provisions of this article are adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes and directs that the provisions of this article be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

(a)    To adopt a sales and use tax law which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State;

(b)    To adopt a sales and use tax law which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code;

(c)    To adopt a sales and use tax law which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor which can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the sales and use taxes of the State; and

(d)    To adopt a sales and use tax law which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the said Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this article.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.105. Contract with State Board of Equalization.
        Prior to the operative date of this article, the City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all the functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax law; provided, however, if the City shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to such operative date, the City shall nevertheless so contract, and, in such a case, the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this article.

(Part 1, Ord. 478. eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.106. Sales taxes.
        For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate set forth in Section 8-1.102 of this article of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the City on and after the operative date of this article.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.107. Place of sale.
        For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.108. Use taxes.
        An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use, or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this article for the storage, use, or other consumption in the City at the rate set forth in Section 8-1.102 of this article of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.109. Adoption of State law provisions.
        Except as otherwise provided in this article, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth in this article.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.110. Limitations on adoption of State law provisions.
        In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, wherever the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the provisions of this article; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use, or other consumption remains subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provisions of said Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797, or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of said Code or in the definition of that phrase in said Section 6203.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.111. Permits not required.
        If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer pursuant to the provisions of Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by the provisions of this article.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.112. Exclusions and exemptions.
        There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

(a)    The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer;

(b)    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State by any city and county, county, or city in the State;

(c)    The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use, or other consumption of property purchased by operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside the City; and

(d)    The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property, or communications, or in the generation, transmission, or distribution of electricity, or in the manufacture, transmission, or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the State.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.113. Exclusions and exemptions (operative January 1,1984).
(a)    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

(b)    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State by any city and county, county, or city in the State, shall be exempt from the tax due under the provisions of this article.

(c)    There shall be exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government.

(d)    In addition to the exemptions set forth in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government shall be exempted from the use tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 616, eff. December 13, 1983)

 

Sec. 8-1.113. Exclusions and exemptions.
(a)    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

(b)    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State by any city and county, county, or city in the State, shall be exempt from the tax due under the provisions of this article.

(c)    There shall be exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

(d)    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes shall be exempted from the use tax.

(e)    There shall be exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government.

(f)    In addition to the exemptions set forth in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government shall be exempted from the use tax.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974, as amended by § 2, Ord. 616, eff. December 13, 1983)

 

*       Operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the State which amends Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State or which repeals and reenacts said Section 7202 to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same or substantially the same language as that existing in subsections (7) and (8) of subsection (i) of said Section 7202 as said subsections read on October 1, 1983.

 

Sec. 8-1.114. Application of provisions relating to exclusions and exemptions.
(a)    The provisions of Section 8-1.113 of this article shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property, which ratio is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by the provisions of Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, at which time the provisions of Section 8-1.112 of this article shall become inoperative.

(b)    In the event the provisions of Section 8-1.1113 of this article become operative, and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property, which ratio is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by the provisions of said Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the provisions of Section 8-1.112 of this article shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time the provisions of Section 8-1.113 of this article shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which said Board again adopts an assessment ratio for State-assessed property, which ratio is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by the provisions of said Section 401, at which time the provisions of said Section 8-1.113 shall again become operative, and the provisions of said Section 8-1.112 shall become inoperative.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.115. Amendments.
        All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, which amendments relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of said Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this article.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.116. Enjoining collection forbidden.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this article or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Sec. 8-1.117. Violations.
        Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of this Code.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 8-1.118. Severability.
        If any provision of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this article and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

(Part 1, Ord. 478, eff. December 27, 1973, operative January 1, 1974)

 

Article 2. Property Taxes
Sec. 8-1.201. Assessments and collections to be made by County.
        The Council hereby elects to avail itself of the provisions of an act of the Legislature of the State entitled “An Act to Provide for the Levy and Collection of Taxes by and for the Use of Municipal Offices, and to Provide That Their Duties May Be Performed by Certain Officers of the County, and Fixing the Compensation to Be Allowed for Such County Officers for the Service So Rendered to Such Municipal Corporations,” approved March 27, 1895, and all amendments thereto.

        All assessments shall be made and taxes shall be collected by the County Assessor and County Tax Collector for the City until the City shall, by ordinance, elect not to avail itself of the provisions of said Act, and all amendments thereto, or any longer time.

(§ 1, Ord. 4)

 

Article 3. Real Property Transfer Taxes
Sec. 8-1.301. Title.
        This article shall be known as the “Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the City of Ojai.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.302. Tax imposed.
        There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument, or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the City shall be granted, assigned, transferred, or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half ($0.275) cents for each Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars or fractional part thereof.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.303. Person responsible for payment.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of Section 8-1.302 of this article shall be paid by any person who makes, signs, or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed, or issued.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.304. Debt security instruments exempted.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.305. Governmental agencies exempted.
        The United States, or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.306. Bankruptcies and receiverships.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not apply to the making, delivering, or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

(a)    Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

(b)    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subsection (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

(c)    Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subsection (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

(d)    Whereby a mere change in identity, form, or place of organization is effected.

        The provisions of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery, or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such confirmation, approval, or change.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.307. Securities and Exchange Commission.
        Any tax imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subsection (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if:

(a)    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

(b)    Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; and

(c)    Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.308. Partnerships.
(a)    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise if:

(1)    Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

(2)    Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

(b)    If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for the purposes of this article such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

(c)    Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article by reason of a termination described in subsection (b) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.309. Administration.
        The County Recorder shall administer the provisions of this article in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.310. Claims for refunds.
        Claims for the refund of the taxes imposed pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-1.311. Operative date.
        The provisions of this article shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County pursuant to the provisions of Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State, or on January 1, 1968, whichever is the later.

(§ 1, Ord. 390, eff. January 1, 1968)

 

Article 4. Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax
Sec. 8-1.401. Title.
        This article shall be known as the “Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law of the City of Ojai.”

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.402. Definitions: Scope.
        Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions set forth in this article shall govern the construction of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

 

Sec. 8-1.403. Person defined.
        “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.404. Hotel defined.
        “Hotel” shall mean any commercial establishment or any portion of any commercial establishment, which provides for the occupancy of transients for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes, whether by the day, week, or month, and shall include any hotel, inn, motel, or commercial establishment of similar nature.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.405. Occupancy defined.
        “Occupancy” shall mean the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room, or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.406. Transient defined.
        “Transient” shall mean any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license, or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to August 26, 1971, may be considered.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.407. Rent defined.
        “Rent” shall mean the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel, inclusive of resort fees, cancellation fees, parking fees, and other fees tied to the occupancy of a space in a hotel, valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971, as amended by § 2, Ord. 907, eff. March 13, 2020)

 

Sec. 8-1.408. Operator defined.
        “Operator” shall mean the person who is the proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this article and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this article by either the principal or the managing agent, however, shall be considered to be compliance by both.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.409. Tax Collector defined.
        “Tax Collector” shall mean the Tax and License Collector of the City as designated by the City Manager.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.410. Tax imposed.
        For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel in the City, each transient shall be subject to and shall pay a tax which is a percentage of the rent. Such tax shall constitute a debt owed by the transient to the City, which tax shall be extinguished only by payment to the operator. The rate of such tax shall be fifteen (15%) percent of the rent in total, divided into a general tax rate of ten (10%) percent and a special tax rate of five (5%) percent for City capital improvement and maintenance projects, including street paving; and fire mitigation, code enforcement, and climate change mitigation, or such lower rates as may be established by the City Council by resolution.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971, as amended by Part 1, Ord. 511, eff. December 12, 1975, § 1, Ord. 626, eff. March 28, 1985, and § 3, Ord. 907, eff. March 13, 2020)

 

Sec. 8-1.411. Payment by transients.
        The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the Tax Collector may require the transient to pay such tax directly to the Tax Collector.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.412. Duties of operators.
        Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by the provisions of this article to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of the tax shall be charged separately from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. The operator of a hotel shall not advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax, or any part thereof, will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.413. Records of operators.
        Every operator liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall keep and preserve, for not less than three (3) years, all records which may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the City. The Tax Collector may inspect these records at any reasonable time. The operator shall make such records available at any reasonable time requested by the Tax Collector.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

 

Sec. 8-1.414. Registration required.
        On or before September 25, 1971, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the Tax Collector. Upon such registration the Tax Collector shall issue to such operator a “Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate.”

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

 

Sec. 8-1.415. Posting of certificates.
        The operator shall post, and at all times keep posted, in a conspicuous place on the premises of the hotel the Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.416. Contents of certificates.
        The Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

(a)    The name of the operator;

(b)    The address of the hotel;

(c)    The date upon which the certificate was issued; and

(d)    The following notice: “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Law by registering with the Tax Collector for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting such tax to the tax collector. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all applicable laws. This certificate does not constitute a permit.”

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.417. Reporting and remitting by operators.
        Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of the calendar quarter, or at the close of any other reporting period which may be established by the Tax Collector, make a return to the Tax Collector, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of the tax collected for transient occupancies.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.418. Payment of taxes.
        At the time the return is filed, the operator shall remit the full amount of the tax collected to the Tax Collector. The Tax Collector may establish shorter, longer, or other reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary or expedient in order to insure collection of the tax. The Tax Collector may require further information in the return. Returns and payments shall be due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.419. Taxes held in trust.
        Every operator shall hold in trust, for the account of the City until payment thereof is made to the Tax Collector, all taxes collected by such operator.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.420. Original delinquencies.
        Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this article within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10%) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.421. Continued delinquencies.
        Any operator who shall fail to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10%) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10%) percent penalty first imposed.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.422. Fraud.
        If the Tax Collector determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due pursuant to the provisions of this article is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25%) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the other penalties provided for in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.423. Interest.
        In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who shall fail to remit any tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall pay interest at the rate of one-half (½) of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.424. Penalties and interest merged with taxes.
        Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues, pursuant to the provisions of this article shall become a part of the tax required to be paid by the provisions of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.425. Determinations by Tax Collector.
        If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this article, any report and remittance of the tax, or any portion thereof, required by this article, the Tax Collector shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information upon which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the Tax Collector shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this article and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, the Tax Collector shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest, and penalties provided for in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.426. Determinations by Tax Collector: Notices.
        If the Tax Collector makes such a determination pursuant to the provisions of this article, he shall give a notice of the amount so assessed, either by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of business.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.427. Determinations by Tax Collector: Applications for hearings.
        Within ten (10) days after the serving upon any operator of such notice, such operator may apply in writing to the Tax Collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If an application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest, and penalties, if any, determined by the Tax Collector shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.428. Determinations by Tax Collector: Hearings.
        If such an application is made, the Tax Collector shall give not less than five (5) days’ written notice in the manner prescribed in this article to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest, and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest, and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing, the Tax Collector shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this article of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest, and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 8-1.429 of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.429. Notices of appeals.
        Any operator or other person deeming themselves aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Collector with respect to the amount of the tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of the tax due. Except as otherwise provided herein, appeals of decisions of the Tax Collector shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971, as amended by § 7, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Sec. 8-1.430. Notices of appeals: Hearings: Notices.
        Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the City Clerk shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal and shall give the appellant not less than five (5) days’ notice in writing, either personally or by mail, postage prepaid.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.431. Notices of appeals: Hearings: Conduct.
        At the time set for the hearing, or at the date to which the hearing may be continued by the Council, the Council shall hear the appellant and any other competent witnesses and decide whether the determination of the Tax Collector was correct or not and, if not, what tax, interest, or penalties, if any, are due to the City from the appellant. The Council may place any witnesses, including the appellant, under oath.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.432. Notices of appeals: Hearings: Decisions.
        The Council shall determine from the evidence what tax, interest, or penalties, if any, are due to the City from the operator. This decision shall be final and conclusive. The City Clerk shall serve a copy of the decision upon the appellant and the operator, if the appellant is someone other than the operator, either personally or by mail, postage prepaid. Any amount due shall be immediately due and payable upon service of the notice.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971, as amended by § 8, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Sec. 8-1.433. Refunds: Filing of claims.
        Whenever the amount of any tax, interest, or penalty has been overpaid, or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City pursuant to the provisions of this article, the operator so paying may have such amount applied to subsequent taxes due, or such amount may be refunded as provided in this article if, within three (3) years after the date of payment, the operator files with the Tax Collector in writing a claim therefor. In such claim the operator shall state, under penalty of perjury, the specific grounds and specific facts upon which the claim is founded. Such claims shall be on forms furnished by the Tax Collector.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.434. Refunds: Credit to operators.
        An operator may take as credit against subsequent taxes the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the Tax Collector that the person from whom the tax was collected was not a transient and that the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.435. Refunds to operators.
        When an operator establishes a right to a credit as provided in this article and also shows to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector either that he no longer is operating a hotel in the City or will cease such operation before the credit can be applied, and files a proper claim therefor, in lieu of such credit the City shall refund to such operator the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.436. Refunds to transients and guests.
        A transient or other guest of a hotel may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City by filing a claim in the manner provided in this article if the tax was paid by the transient or other guest directly to the Tax Collector, or if the transient or other guest has paid the tax to the operator, and establishes to the satisfaction of the Tax Collector that the transient or other guest has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.437. Refunds: Written records.
        A refund shall not be paid pursuant to the provisions of this article unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing that he is entitled thereto.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.438. Taxes deemed a debt to City.
        Any tax required to be paid by any transient pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the City. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the City shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.439. Actions to collect.
        Any person owing money to the City pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such amount.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971)

 

Sec. 8-1.440. Violations.
        Any violation of the provisions of this article shall be an infraction. The following violations shall also constitute misdemeanors, and any person committing any such violation may be charged either with an infraction or a misdemeanor:

(a)    Failure or refusal to register as required by this article;

(b)    Failure or refusal to furnish any return required to be made or refusal to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the Tax Collector;

(c)    Rendering a false or fraudulent return;

(d)    Making any false or fraudulent report or claim required by this article with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due; and

(e)    Collecting the tax due pursuant to the provisions of this article from any transient and failing to pay the same to the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971, as amended by Part 3, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 8-1.441. Violations: Punishment.
(§ 1, Ord. 433, eff. August 26, 1971; tax operative October 1, 1971; repealed by Part 4, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 8-1.442. Payment of tax prior to suit.
        No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the City or an officer thereof to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter and payment of all tax, interest and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability.

(Ord. No. 809, § 1, eff. October 22, 2009)

 

Article 5. Park and Recreational Tax
Sec. 8-1.501. Purpose.
        The Council finds that the continued increase in the development and construction of dwelling units in the City has created an urgent need for the planning, acquisition, improvement, and expansion of public parks, playgrounds, and other recreation facilities to serve the City’s increasing population and that there exists a need to find sources of revenues with which to finance, in part, these required additional public facilities. The Council hereby declares that the taxes required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this article are assessed pursuant to the taxing powers of the City and are assessed solely for the purpose of producing revenue.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972)

 

Sec. 8-1.502. Dwelling unit defined.
        As used in this article, “dwelling unit” shall mean a separate, single-family habitation structure or unit and shall include:

(a)    A single-family dwelling;

(b)    Each separate apartment or habitation unit comprising a multiple dwelling structure; and

(c)    Each space or pad designed and allocated to accommodate a mobile home within a mobile home park.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972)

 

Sec. 8-1.503. Exclusions.
        The following shall not be considered dwelling units for the purpose of the tax provided for in this article:

(a)    Any habitation unit within a structure designed, constructed, and used exclusively for transient occupancies;

(b)    Any habitation unit, intended and used exclusively to house the elderly or handicapped, which is constructed for and operated by a foundation, agency, or entity which, pursuant to the provisions of Section 1c of Article 13 of the Constitution of the State, has been granted a property tax exemption by the State Legislature; and

(c)    A new dwelling which replaces a dwelling on the same lot or parcel if the construction of the new dwelling is commenced within twelve (12) months after the date the previous dwelling was substantially removed from the lot and if the new dwelling contains the same number of dwelling units and bedrooms as the previous dwelling. If the new dwelling contains more bedrooms, or more units, or both, than the previous dwelling, then the new dwelling shall be considered a “dwelling unit” or “units,” and a tax shall be payable thereon in accordance with the provisions of this article; provided, however, a credit against the tax imposed shall be given. The amount of the tax credit to be given shall be computed by taking the dwelling units and bedrooms of the previous dwelling and calculating the tax that would have been due thereon under the provisions of this article if a building permit was to be issued therefor on the same day the building permit for the new dwelling was actually issued. The tax credit shall be equal to the amount of the tax which would have been due on the previous dwelling.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972)

 

Sec. 8-1.504. Person defined.
        As used in this article, “person” shall mean and include any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, or organization of any kind.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972)

 

Sec. 8-1.505. Imposition of tax.
        Every person constructing a new dwelling unit in the City shall be taxed and shall pay to the City the following fees:

(a)    Seventy and no/100ths ($70.00) Dollars for each dwelling unit and, if the dwelling contains more than one bedroom, Thirty-Five and no/100ths ($35.00) Dollars for each additional bedroom; and

(b)    One Hundred and no/100ths ($100.00) Dollars for each mobile home park pad.

        The term “bedroom,” as used in this article, shall include any room, such as a den, which is readily usable for sleeping.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972, as amended by Part 1, Ord. 512, eff. January 8, 1976)

 

Sec. 8-1.506. Payment of tax.
        The payment of the tax imposed by the provisions of this article shall be made at the time of, and shall be a condition precedent to, the issuance of the building permit authorizing the construction of the dwelling unit. Where the taxes imposed by the provisions of this article have not previously been paid, any extension of time granted on a building permit shall, for the purposes of this article, be deemed the issuance of a new building permit, and the taxes imposed by the provisions of this article shall be paid prior to the granting of any such extension.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972)

 

Sec. 8-1.507. Conversions.
        If the use of a dwelling unit, which, when constructed, was not subject to the provisions of this article, is changed from a tax exempt use to a use which at the time of construction would have been taxable under the provisions of this article, such tax shall, on the date the new use is initiated, be due and payable. The tax in such instance shall be payable by the person making the conversion.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972)

 

Sec. 8-1.508. Refunds.
        The taxes paid pursuant to the provisions of this article for the construction of a new dwelling unit which is not built shall be refundable. A refund shall be made upon the application of the taxpayer to the Finance Director and upon the showing of the taxpayer that the construction of the new dwelling unit has not been commenced, and the building permit issued therefor has expired or been cancelled. Applications for such refunds shall be made within one year after the cancellation or expiration of the building permit.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972, as amended by § 6, Ord. 747, eff. October 26, 2000)

 

Sec. 8-1.509. Park and Recreational Fund.
        All funds collected pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be deposited in the Park and Recreational Fund and used only for the purposes for which such fund can be used.

(Part I, Ord. 463, eff. December 14, 1972)

 

Article 6. Library Special Tax
Sec. 8-1.601. Definitions.
        For purposes of this article the following definitions shall apply:

(a)    “Apartment” means a dwelling unit rented or leased which is a part of a larger building with two (2) or more such units.

(b)    “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls for the housing, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.

(c)    “Condominium project” means a condominium, as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code.

(d)    “Director of Finance” means the Director of Finance of the City of Ojai.

(e)    “Dwelling unit” means a unit which is used as a principal residence.

(f)    “Library” means the Ojai Valley Library System, as the same may exist from time to time, together with any additions or betterments thereto, or improvements, extensions or expansions thereof.

(g)    “Maintenance and operating costs” of the library means all reasonable and necessary costs expended or incurred by the County of Ventura and/or the City of Ojai for maintaining and operating the library, calculated in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles including, but not limited to:

(1)    Those amounts necessary to maintain a “foundation program” which means those elements of library service which are basic to its function as a provider of information, education and cultural enrichment to all segments of the community, including, but not limited to, collection, development and maintenance, lending services, information services, facility maintenance, and administration, and may include, but is not limited to, amounts paid or payable, from time to time, for books, periodicals, reference materials, research materials, subscription services or other information sources; the reasonable expenses of management and repair and other expenses necessary to maintain and preserve the library in good repair and working order; compensation of employees, including, but not limited to, salaries, wages and benefits; fees of auditors, accountants, attorneys or engineers; and insurance premiums; and

(2)    Depreciation, replacement and obsolescence charges or reserve therefor; but shall not be construed to mean costs to provide support services to the library by any other departments of the City or County or for costs of major capital improvements.

(h)    “Multiple family residential” means any building which contains more than one (1) dwelling unit.

(i)     “Parcel” means a unit of real property identified by a separate and distinct number or other designation on a plat recorded in the office of the Ventura County Recorder.

(j)     “Single-family residential” means the same as dwelling unit.

(§ 1, Ord. 713, eff. May 24, 1996)

 

Sec. 8-1.602. Exemptions.
(a)    Nothing in this article shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of either the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the State of California.

(b)    The tax imposed by this article shall not be levied upon the federal government, the state government, any state agency or any local governmental agency.

(c)    The tax imposed by this article shall not be levied upon a parcel of property or improvement to property which is owned by a house of worship or charitable or community service organization which qualifies for an exemption from ad valorem taxation under California law.

(§ 1, Ord. 713, eff. May 24, 1996)

 

Sec. 8-1.603. Special tax.
(a)    There is hereby imposed a special tax on each residential dwelling unit or nonresidential parcel within the City of Ojai for the purposes set forth in this article at the rate specified herein.

(b)    This tax is enacted under the authority of Section 53717 of the California Government Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 713, eff. May 24, 1996)

 

Sec. 8-1.604. Purpose.
(a)    This special tax revenue shall be used by the City only to pay for:

(1)    Maintenance and operating costs of the library;

(2)    Administrative expenses incurred in implementing this article, including refunds involved in the collection of the special tax provided for herein.

(b)    The City may provide for the collection of the special tax in the same manner and subject to the same penalties as, or with, other charges and taxes fixed and collected by the City, or by the County of Ventura on behalf of the City. If the special tax is collected by the County on behalf of the City, the County may deduct its reasonable costs incurred in such service.

(c)    Any money raised by the special tax, including any interest accrued thereon, that remains unencumbered at the end of any fiscal year shall only be used in a succeeding fiscal year for the purposes stated in this article. The availability of a surplus for any succeeding year shall be considered by the City when levying the tax for that year.

(§ 1, Ord. 713, eff. May 24, 1996)

 

Sec. 8-1.605. Tax rate; contingency.
(a)    Unless, prior to June 30 of the first and each ensuing fiscal year, the City Council by resolution determines not to impose this special tax, an annual special tax is hereby levied on the following categories of property in the jurisdiction of the City:

 

Property Categories

Tax Rate

Single family residential or condominium (per unit)

$35.00

Apartment (per unit)

$25.00

Non-residential property (per parcel)

$35.00

 

(b)    The annual special tax provided for herein shall equal approximately One Hundred Thousand and no/100ths ($100,000.00) Dollars each fiscal year, which shall restore funding available to the library to approximately the 1992-93 level in conjunction with the County of Ventura baseline budget for limited services.

(c)    In no event shall the amount of the tax rate to be levied under this article exceed the amount established by this article without the approval of a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the electors of the City voting upon such change at a municipal election called for such purpose in accordance with applicable law.

(§ 1, Ord. 713, eff. May 24, 1996)

 

Sec. 8-1.606. Term.
        The annual special tax provided for herein shall be and hereby is levied in consecutive fiscal years, commencing with the first fiscal year in which there is a levy pursuant to this article, unless the City Council determines not to impose the special tax for a particular year pursuant to Section 8-1.605. Such levy may only be changed or amended with the approval of the voters by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the electors of the City voting upon such change at a municipal election called for such purpose in accordance with applicable law.

(§ 1, Ord. 713, eff. May 24, 1996)

 

Sec. 8-1.607. Adjustments and refunds.
(a)    Requests for adjustments involving imposition of this special tax shall be filed with the Director of Finance. Upon applicant’s production of reasonably sufficient evidence of error in the computation of the tax or exemption therefrom, the Director of Finance, or his/her designee, shall cause the tax to be recalculated, and shall so advise the Ventura County Tax Collector or other appropriate official.

(b)    Whenever it is alleged that the amount of any tax has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the City under this article, the refund procedure shall be as follows:

(1)    No claim for refund of tax payment shall be allowed in whole or in part unless filed with the City Clerk within a period of three (3) years from the date of the claimed overpayment. All such claims for refund of the amount of the overpayment must be filed on forms furnished and in the same manner prescribed by the Finance Department of the City. Refunds may be made solely from the special tax revenues collected under this article.

(2)    In the event the Director of Finance denies the claim, he/she shall notify the claimant pursuant to California Government Code Section 913.

(c)    The Director of Finance shall have the power to settle claims involving the special tax, and the power to accept and record underpayments or overpayments of such tax. The Finance Director shall have the authority to make refunds of this tax.

(d)    If the County of Ventura does not collect any tax due under this article, the Finance Director shall have the power and duty to enforce all of the provisions of this article. In such cases, an assessment may be made against the owner of a parcel in the manner provided by law. Any unpaid tax due under this article shall be subject to all remedies provided under the Ojai Municipal Code and as provided by law.

(e)    The special tax shall be due in two (2) equal installments in accordance with the collection procedures of the Ventura County Tax Collector, with the first installment due November 1 and the second installment due in the next succeeding February 1, in each fiscal year. The owner of land, at the time set forth in California Revenue and Taxation Code Sections 405 and 2192 for each fiscal year, shall have a personal obligation to the City until the tax is paid for such fiscal year.

(f)    The Finance Director may prepare a questionnaire to be served on the owner of a parcel subject to this special tax. The questionnaire may request information which would be useful to the Finance Director in the enforcement or administration of this article. The failure by an owner to provide the information requested within thirty (30) days of receipt of the request, or the act of an owner in knowingly providing false information, shall be a misdemeanor.

(§ 1, Ord. 713, eff. May 24, 1996)

 

Sec. 8-1.608. Amendments.
        Procedural provisions of this article may be amended by ordinance duly enacted by the City Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 713, eff. May 24, 1996)

Chapter 2 SPECIAL FUNDS
Article 1. Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund
Sec. 8-2.101. Created.
        To comply with the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State, with particular reference to the amendment made thereto by Chapter 642, Statutes of 1935, there is hereby created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.”

(§ 1, Ord. 77)

 

Sec. 8-2.102. Deposits.
        All moneys received by the City from the State pursuant to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for the construction, maintenance, or improvements of streets or highways, other than State highways, shall be paid into said fund.

(§ 2, Ord. 77)

 

Sec. 8-2.103. Use of fund.
        All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to, all of the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 77)

 

Article 2. Sanitation Fund
Sec. 8-2.201. Created.
        There is hereby created a fund which shall be known as the “Sanitation Fund.” All moneys collected pursuant to the charges herein fixed shall be placed in said fund. Said fund shall be used only for such purposes as are permitted by law. (See Chapter 3 of Title 5.)

(§ 7, Ord. 126)

 

Article 3. Park and Recreational Fund
Sec. 8-2.301. Created: Use: Payments into.
        There is hereby created a special fund to be known and designated as the “Park and Recreational Fund.” The City Treasurer shall deposit to said fund all sums received by him or her under this section. Said fund shall be used for the acquisition, improvement, or maintenance of public parks, playgrounds, or equipment thereof.

(§ 18, Ord. 209, as amended by § 1, Ord. 352, eff. August 25, 1965)

 

Article 4. Capital Outlay Fund
Sec. 8-2.401. Created.
        Pursuant to the provisions of Section 53731 of the Government Code of the State, there is hereby created for the City a fund to be known as the “Capital Outlay Fund.”

(§ 1, Ord. 321, eff. August 7, 1963)

 

Sec. 8-2.402. Taxes.
        Taxes may be levied and collected for deposit in the Capital Outlay Fund provided, in accordance with the provisions of Section 53732 of the Government Code of the State, the Council shall not exceed any limitation upon its right to impose taxes prescribed by law.

(§ 1, Ord. 321, eff. August 7, 1963)

 

Sec. 8-2.403. Transfers to fund.
        In accordance with the provisions of Section 53735 of the Government Code of the State, the Council may transfer to the Capital Outlay Fund any unencumbered surplus funds remaining on hand at the end of a fiscal year.

(§ 1, Ord. 321, eff. August 7, 1963)

 

Sec. 8-2.404. Budget.
        All or part of the Capital Outlay Fund may be shown in the budget as reserves for future expenditures in subsequent years and, when so shown, shall be identified as to purpose but need not be itemized.

(§ 1, Ord. 321, eff. August 7, 1963)

 

Sec. 8-2.405. Use of fund.
        Moneys in the Capital Outlay Fund may be used only for the purposes authorized by State law.

(§ 1, Ord. 321, eff. August 7, 1963)

 

Article 5. Cemetery Fund
Sec. 8-2.501. Created.
        There is hereby created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the Cemetery Fund.

(§ 1, Ord. 325, eff. October 23, 1963)

 

Sec. 8-2.502. Deposits.
        All moneys collected from the sale of cemetery lots by the City, other than charges made by the City in connection with cemetery operations, and moneys transferred to the City by any person or agency for cemetery purposes shall be deposited in the Cemetery Fund.

(§ 1, Ord. 325, eff. October 23, 1963)

 

Sec. 8-2.503. Use of fund.
        The Cemetery Fund shall be used only for the maintenance, operation, construction, expansion, or improvement of City cemeteries.

(§ 1, Ord. 325, eff. October 23, 1963)

 

Article 6. Wastewater Capital Reserve Fund
Sec. 8-2.601. Created.
        Pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Clean Water Act Grant Guidelines, there is hereby created a Wastewater Capital Reserve Fund.

(§ 1, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 8-2.602. Deposits.
        All sewer connection fees collected pursuant to Article 3 of Chapter 3 of Title 5 of this Code shall be paid into the Wastewater Capital Reserve Fund.

(§ 1, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 8-2.603. Moneys already deposited.
        On June 12, 1984, moneys already set aside for the purposes described in this article shall be paid into the Wastewater Capital Reserve Fund.

(§ 1, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 8-2.604. Transfers.
        In addition to the revenue sources set forth in Sections 8-2.602 and 8-2.603 of this article, the Council may transfer to the Wastewater Capital Reserve Fund from the Sanitation Fund or other available sources funds as may be needed to undertake and complete the projects authorized by this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 8-2.605. Budget.
        All or part of the Wastewater Capital Reserve Fund may be shown in the budget as reserves for future expenditures in subsequent years for the uses authorized by this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

 

Sec. 8-2.606. Use of fund.
        The Wastewater Capital Reserve Fund shall be used for major sewer transport and treatment capital expenditures, including treatment plant capacity acquisition, treatment plant expansion, and treatment plant or trunk sewer capital improvements or replacements.

(§ 1, Ord. 623, eff. July 12, 1984)

Chapter 3 UNINHABITED TERRITORY ANNEXATION REQUIREMENTS
Sec. 8-3.01. Annexation fees.
        No uninhabited territory shall be annexed to the City unless and until there has been paid to the City for deposit in its General Fund an annexation fee; provided, however, where annexation procedures are initiated by action of the Council, there shall be no annexation fee.

(§ 1, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961, as amended by § 1, Ord. 399, eff. August 21, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-3.02. Uninhabited territory defined.
        For the purposes of this chapter, uninhabited territory shall have the meaning prescribed by Section 35303 of the Government Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961)

 

Sec. 8-3.03. Amount of fees.
        Such fees shall be equal to the amount required to meet the expense of the publication of legal notices of the proposed annexation as required by State laws.

(§ 1, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961, as amended by § 1, Ord. 314, eff. April 24, 1963, and § 1, Ord. 399, eff. August 21, 1968)

 

Sec. 8-3.04. Payment of fees.
        Such fees shall be determined and paid with respect to each proposed annexation as a condition precedent to the effective date of final discretionary action by the Council with respect to such annexation.

(§ 1, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961)

 

Sec. 8-3.05. Special expenses.
        In the event that uninhabited territory annexed requires the extension of streets, sewers, or other City utilities, it shall be the policy of the Council not to take final discretionary action approving the proposed annexation until arrangements are made for such extensions to be made without cost to the City. Such arrangements may provide for the owners of the uninhabited territory to be annexed to make such extensions at their own expense, or in the alternative may provide for the City to make such extensions and for such owners to reimburse the City for their cost.

(§ 1, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961)

 

Sec. 8-3.06. Bonded debt assumption.
        In the absence of special circumstances, it shall be the policy of the Council to not take final discretionary action approving any proposed annexation unless the territory to be annexed will be subject to taxation to pay all then existing bonded indebtedness of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961)

 

Sec. 8-3.07. Compliance with City regulations.
        In the absence of special circumstances, it shall be policy of the Council not to take final discretionary action approving any proposed uninhabited territory unless the improvements in the territory proposed to be annexed comply in all respects with then existing City regulations applicable to improvements, including, but without limitation, regulations relating to fire protection, trailer parks, buildings, plumbing, electrical installations, sign regulations, and zoning regulations.

(§ 1, Ord. 280, eff. August 1, 1961)

Chapter 4 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Note
*       Editor’s note—For statutory provisions authorizing cities to adopt policies and procedures governing purchases of supplies and equipment, see Government Code Sections 54201, et seq.

 

Sec. 8-4.01. Purpose.
        In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the City supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.02. Purchasing officer—Powers and duties.
        There is created the position of purchasing officer. He shall be the City Manager or such other full-time City employee appointed by the City Manager. The purchasing officer shall exercise general supervision over the purchasing function. The duties of the purchasing officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to provide general supervision of the following functions:

(a)    Purchasing or contracting for supplies and equipment required by any City department in accordance with the purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer may adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing division or such other rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the City Council and/or City Manager;

(b)    Negotiating and executing contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

(c)    Procuring for the City supplies and equipment at maximum quality and least expense to the City;

(d)    Obtaining as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

(e)    Preparing and recommending to the City Council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for the City;

(f)    Preparing and recommending to the City Council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules;

(g)    Education regarding current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

(h)    Prescribing and maintaining such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter;

(i)     Supervising the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications;

(j)     Recommending the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed; and

(k)    Maintaining records needed for the efficient purchase of supplies and equipment.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.03. Inspecting purchases and testing samples.
        The purchasing officer shall have authority to inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with specifications set forth in the order. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids as well as to inspect samples.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.04. City departments—Justification of requirements.
        All City departments shall justify their requirements in supplies and equipment in preparation and as a component of the City’s annual budget.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.05. Recycled products.
        Each City department shall make every reasonable effort to purchase and use recycled products or those with recycled content whenever feasible to the extent such use does not adversely affect health, safety or operational efficiency and effectiveness as determined by each City department. The term “recycled products” shall be construed to mean products which contain recycled materials or are reusable or recyclable, provided, however, that recycled paper products must contain recycled materials.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.06. Surplus supplies—Trade-ins authorized.
        The purchasing officer shall have authority to supervise the exchange or trade-in of all supplies and equipment which have become unsuitable for City use for new supplies and equipment.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.07. Review of expenditures—Budget adjustment.
        The purchasing officer shall review the expenditures of City departments on a regular basis to ensure that budgetary appropriations are not exceeded. If City departmental budgets are exceeded by the purchase of supplies and equipment, prior consent for such purchases shall be required.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.08. Purchases—Bidding required—Exception.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to this section and Sections 8-4.09 through 8-4.20. Bidding may be dispensed with when an emergency requires that an order be placed with the nearest available source of supply, or when the unit value of the goods involved is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or when the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.09. Formal contract bidding—When required.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchase of supplies and equipment of an estimated unit value greater than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall be by written contract with the lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed in Sections 8-4.10 through 8-4.16.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.10. Formal contract bidding—Solicitation of bids.
(a)    Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased and state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids.

(b)    Published Notice. Notices inviting bids shall be published at least ten (10) days before the date of opening of the bids. Notices shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the City, or, if there is none, shall be posted in at least three (3) public places in the City that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices.

(c)    Bulletin Board. The purchasing officer may also advertise pending purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.11. Formal contract bidding—Bidder’s security.
        When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder’s security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, however, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon his refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten (10) days after the City mails to him or her notice of award of contract, unless the City is solely responsible for the delay in executing the contract. The City Council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the City Council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the City to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. If the City Council rejects all bids presented, and re-advertises, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security may be used to offset the cost of receiving new bids and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.12. Formal contract bidding—Opening procedure—Tabulation open to public.
        Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as ‘bids’ on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be op en for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.13. Formal contract bidding—Rejection and re-advertising authorized.
        In its discretion, the City Council may reject any and all bids presented and re-advertise for bids pursuant to the procedure prescribed in Section 8-4.10.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.14. Formal contract bidding—Award of contract to low bidder.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, contracts shall be awarded by the City Council to the lowest responsible bidder.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.15. Formal contract bidding—Tie bid procedure.
        If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the City Council may, in its discretion, accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made after negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.16. Formal contract bidding—Performance bond authorized—Notice.
        The City Council shall have the authority to require a performance bond before entering into a contract in such amount as it finds necessary to protect the best interest of the City. If the City Council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.17. Open market purchase—When authorized.
        Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated unit value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or less may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market pursuant to the procedure hereinafter prescribed and without observing the procedure prescribed in Sections 8-4.10 through 8-4.16.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.18. Open market purchase—Solicitation of bids.
        The purchasing officer shall solicit bids or place orders by written requests to prospective vendors, by telephone and/or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board at City Hall.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.19. Open market purchase—Records required and open to public.
        The purchasing officer shall keep a record of all open market orders for a period of one (1) year after such orders are placed. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

 

Sec. 8-4.20. Open market purchase—Minimum number of bids—Award to low bid.
        Open market purchases shall, wherever practicable, be based on at least three (3) bids or responses by vendors.

(§ 1, Ord. 754. eff. October 23, 2001)

Chapter 5 STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
Sec. 8-5.01. Authority.
        On January 1, 2007, the State of California became the sole authority with power to grant state video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“DIVCA”). Pursuant to DIVCA, the City of Ojai shall receive a franchise fee from all state franchisees. Additionally, each state franchisee must remit to the City its pro rata share of any cash payments for the ongoing costs of public, education, and governmental access channel facilities or institutional networks, as long as there are such payment obligations imposed by a City issued franchise. Upon the termination of such payment obligations, the City intends to impose a fee for public, educational and/or government (“PEG”) purposes from all state video franchise holders operating within the City. DIVCA confirmed that the City may establish and enforce penalties, consistent with state law, against all state video franchise holders operating within the City for violations of customer service standards. DIVCA precludes the City from adopting its own standards and grants all authority to adopt customer service standards to the State. DIVCA leaves unchanged the City’s authority to regulate, in accordance with City Ordinance No. 803, the City’s current cable franchise and any City cable franchise issued on or before January 1, 2008, until the expiration of any such franchise.

(Ord. No. 803, § 1, eff. March 10, 2009)

 

Sec. 8-5.02. Purpose/Application.
        It is the purpose and intent of the Ojai City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish regulations for video service providers holding state video franchises and operating within the City.

(Ord. No. 803, § 1, eff. March 10, 2009)

 

Sec. 8-5.03. State video franchise and PEG fees.
(a)    Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City shall also pay a fee to the City equal to five (5%) percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder.

(b)    Any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City shall pay a fee to the City in the amount of its pro rata share of any cash payments for the ongoing costs of public, education, and governmental access channel facilities or institutional networks, so long as there are such payment obligations imposed by a City issued franchise, or until January 1, 2009, whichever is later.

(c)    Effective the first date on which state franchisees operating within the boundaries of the City are not obligated to make payments pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, each state franchisee shall pay a fee to the City equal to one (1%) percent of gross revenue of that state video franchise holder to support PEG channel facilities consistent with federal law.

(d)    Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860.

(Ord. No. 803, § 1, eff. March 10, 2009)

 

Sec. 8-5.04. Audit authority.
        Not more than once annually, the City Manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 8-5.03 hereinabove.

(Ord. No. 803, § 1, eff. March 10, 2009)

 

Sec. 8-5.05. Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
(a)    The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

(b)    The City Manager or his or her designee shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager or his or her designee will provide the state video franchise holder with written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty (30)-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the City:

(1)    For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to Five Hundred Dollars ($500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed One Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($1,500.00) for each violation.

(2)    For a second violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of up to One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) for each violation.

(3)    For a third or further violation of the same nature within twelve (12) months, a fine of up to Two Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($2,500.00) may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed Seven Thousand Five Hundred Dollars ($7,500.00) for each violation.

(c)    A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager to the City Council within sixty (60) days of the initial assessment. The City Council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final.

(Ord. No. 803, § 1, eff. March 10, 2009)

 

Sec. 8-5.06. City response to state video franchise applications.
(a)    Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the City must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”). One complete copy must be provided to the City Manager.

(b)    Within thirty (30) days of receipt, the City Manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise.

(Ord. No. 803, § 1, eff. March 10, 2009)

 

Sec. 8-5.07. Severability.
        Should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter be determined or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.

(Ord. No. 803, § 1, eff. March 10, 2009)

Title 9 BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1 UNIFORM CODES
Chapter 2 PERMITS
Chapter 3 FIRE ZONES
Chapter 4 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW (Repealed)
Chapter 5 HOUSE NUMBERING REGULATIONS
Chapter 6 SIGN REGULATIONS (Repealed)
Chapter 7 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 8 UNDERGROUND UTILITY FACILITIES
Chapter 9 FLOOD PROTECTION
Chapter 10 PLANNED DRAINAGE FACILITIES
Chapter 11 HILLSIDE EROSION CONTROL
Chapter 12 SEISMIC SAFETY
Chapter 13 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Chapter 14 TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION FEES FOR MAINTENANCE AND IMPROVEMENT OF CITY STREETS
Chapter 15 VACANT PROPERTY MAINTENANCE, SECURITY AND REGISTRATION
Chapter 16 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS

Chapter 1 UNIFORM CODES
Article 1. State Building Standards Code
Sec. 9-1.101. Adoption by reference.
        Pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17958 and Government Code Section 50022.2, the State Building Standards Code (the “State Code”) and other regulations adopted pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17922, including, but not limited to, the 2019 edition of the following:

(a)    The California Building Code (CBC), Volumes 1 & 2, and Appendices I and J;

(b)    The California Residential Code (CRC) and Appendix H;

(c)    The California Mechanical Code (CMC);

(d)    The California Existing Building Code (CEBC);

(e)    The California Administrative Code;

(f)    The California Electrical Code (CEC);

(g)    The California Plumbing Code (CPC) and Appendices H and L;

(h)    The California Fire Code:

(i)     The California Energy Code;

(j)     The California Green Building Code (CGBC);

(k)    The California Reference Standard.

(§ 1, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997, as amended by § 3, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019, and § 3, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Sec. 9-1.102. Adoption as City Building Code.
        The State Code and other Uniform Codes set forth in this chapter, including certain modifications and other provisions set forth herein, as amended from time to time, are hereby adopted as the City Building Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997)

 

 

Article 2. Administrative Provisions
Sec. 9-1.201. Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “City of Ojai Building Code,” may be cited as such, and will be referred to in this chapter as “this Code.”

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 9-1.202. Purpose.
        The Council expressly finds that the purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life and limb, health, property, and the public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of materials, use and occupancy, location, relocation and maintenance of all buildings and structures within the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 9-1.203. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter and the Codes adopted by reference by this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter and said Codes are defined as follows:

(a)    “Administrative Authority” shall mean the Building Official.

(b)    “Board of Appeals” shall mean the Building Appeals Board as established in Section 9-1.214 of this Title.

(c)    “Building Official” shall mean the designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code.

(d)    “City” shall mean the City of Ojai.

(e)    “Council” shall mean the City Council of the city.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985 as amended by § 2, Ord. 772, eff. June 25, 2004, and § 3 Ord. 829, eff. July 25, 2013)

 

Sec. 9-1.204. Fees.
        Fees for permits and services rendered pursuant to this Code shall be paid to the City as established by resolution of the Council. Said resolution of fees shall be in addition to any fee schedules mentioned in the State Code and other Uniform Codes adopted by reference pursuant to this chapter; provided, however, that in the event that said resolution conflicts with any such fee schedules, the resolution of the Council shall prevail.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985, as amended by § 2, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 9-1.205. Violations: Penalties.
        Any violation of the provisions of this Code or any amendment thereto shall be an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Ojai Municipal Code. It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to any of the provisions of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 9-1.206. Fines and imprisonment.
        Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code shall be deemed guilty of an infraction, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day, or portion thereof, during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continued, or permitted and, upon the conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 9-1.207. Permit issuance.
        The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of any primary Code adopted by this chapter. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of any primary Code adopted by this chapter shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorizes is lawful.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 9-1.208. Approvals required.
        No work shall be done on any part of a building or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the Building Official or his authorized representative. Such written approval shall be given only after an inspection shall have been made of each successive step in the construction as indicated by this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985)

 

 

Sec. 9-1.209. Final inspections and approval.
        There shall be a final inspection and approval on all buildings when completed and ready for occupancy. Clearance to connect utilities will be issued by the Building Official after the building or premises are found to meet all applicable Codes and City laws. The Building Official may refuse to allow any or all of the public utilities to be connected to any building or structure until a final inspection and building approval has been issued.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 9-1.210. Powers and duties.
        The Building Official is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the provisions of this Code, the State Code and other Uniform Codes adopted by reference hereby. The decision of the Building Official in enforcing the provisions of this Code or the State Code and other Uniform Codes adopted by reference, or in interpreting the provisions thereof or in exercising the authority delegated thereby shall be final, subject to appeal as provided in this Code. The Building Official may arrest a person without a warrant whenever he has reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has violated any provision of this Code, the State Code or other Uniform Codes adopted by reference herein in his presence. In any case in which a person is arrested for violation of the provisions of this Code, the State Code or other Uniform Codes adopted by reference pursuant hereto and the person does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the Building Official making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to appear as provided by the California Penal Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985, as amended by § 3, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 9-1.211. Interpretation and compliance.
        Whenever in this Code, the State Code or the Uniform Codes adopted by reference herein another Code or publication of standards or of rules or regulations is referred to, any language to the contrary notwithstanding, such reference shall not incorporate by reference such other Codes, standards or rules and regulations as part of this Code or of the State and other Uniform Codes adopted by reference hereby unless set out in full herein, but they shall be considered and used by the Building Official as guides to assist in determining whether or not there has been compliance with the provisions of this Code. The Building Official shall not be bound by the provisions of any such other Codes, standards or rules and regulations not expressly adopted by reference in this Code in determining such compliance.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985, as amended by § 4, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 9-1.212. Liability.
        Any person, firm, or authorized representative charged with the enforcement of this Code, acting in good faith for the City and without malice in the discharge of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and he is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required, or by reason of any act or omission performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of this Code, and he shall be defended by the legal department of the City until the final termination of the proceedings.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 9-1.213. Amendments, additions, and deletions.
        The Council, following due considerations, hereby finds and determines that due to the geographical location of the City, unusual soil, areas subject to liquefaction, geological and topographical conditions pre-

vailing within the City, high wind and fire protection requirements, the need for minimum desirable design features, as well as the fact that the public health and welfare would be best served, modifications and changes to the State Code and other Uniform Codes adopted hereby are needed and, therefore, the State Code and other Uniform Codes adopted by this chapter are hereby modified, amended, added to and changed as set forth in Articles 3 through 9 of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985, as amended by § 5, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997)

 

Sec. 9-1.214. Building Appeals Board.
(a)    There is hereby established in the City a Building Appeals Board consisting of five (5) members to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the Council. The Building Appeals Board shall be the “local appeals board,” the “housing appeals board,” and the “board of appeals” as those phrases are defined and used in the California Building Standards Code or any other code under this title as the same may apply to the city of Ojai either by express adoption or by operation of law.

(b)    Each member shall become knowledgeable in the California Building Standards Code and applicable ordinances of the city of Ojai. Members need to be residents of the City.

(c)    The members of the Building Appeals Board shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years and shall hold office until their successors have been appointed and qualified. A person who has been appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any member of the Board may be removed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council. Members may be reappointed.

(d)    The Board shall elect its chair and vice-chair from among its members and shall appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the Commission. Such officers shall be chosen for a period of one (1) year. In the absence or disability of either the chair, vice-chair, or secretary, the Commission may designate a chair or secretary pro tempore.

(e)    The Board shall meet when:

(1)    An appeal is filed pursuant to this chapter; or

(2)    The Building Official requests advisory comments regarding issues related to this chapter, such as the potential adoption of new codes, proposed code changes, or alternate methods and materials.

(f)    Unless otherwise designated by the City Manager, the Building Official shall be the principal city staff liaison to the Board.

(Ord. No. 829, § 1, eff. July 25, 2013)

 

Sec. 9-1.215. Appeals to Building Appeals Board.
        Any person adversely affected by a determination made by the Building Official in administering or enforcing any provision of this chapter may appeal the determination to the Building Appeals Board.

(a)    Appeals shall be in writing, state the grounds for the appeal, and be accompanied by a fee in the amount set by resolution of the City Council. Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

(b)    The appeal shall be filed with the Building Official no later than ten (10) days after receipt of written notice of the determination and the appeal provisions of this chapter. Failure to timely request an appeal constitutes a waiver of the right to a hearing before the Building Appeals Board and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

(c)    Within forty-five (45) days of receiving an appeal, the Building Official shall schedule a hearing before the Building Appeals Board which shall consider relevant evidence presented at the hearing. Appellant shall be given at least ten (10) days’ written notice of the date and time of the hearing.

 

(d)    The Building Appeals Board shall render a final written decision with findings within a reasonably prompt time after the filing of the appeal. The authority of the Building Appeals Board to render a written decision shall be limited to the scope of authority of the Building Official in the first instance and the Building Appeals Board shall have no authority to waive a requirement of this title.

(e)    The decision of the Building Appeals Board shall be final and conclusive. The written decision shall be sent to the appellant and shall provide that, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, any action to review said decision shall be commenced in an appropriate court of law not later than the ninetieth day after the date that the decision becomes final.

(Ord. No. 829, § 2, eff. July 25, 2013)

 

Sec. 9-1.216. Small residential rooftop solar energy system review process.
(a)    The following words and phrases as used in this section are defined as follows:

(1)    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

(i)     E-mail;

(ii)    Facsimile.

(2)    “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following.

(i)     A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.

(ii)    A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

(iii)   A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

(iv)   A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.

(3)    “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

(b)    Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that, on or before September 30, 2015, every City, County, or City and County shall adopt an ordinance that creates an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems.

(c)    Section 65850.5 of the California Government Code provides that in developing an expedited permitting process, the City, County, or City and County shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to develop and adopt such checklist.

(d)    The checklist shall be published on the City’s Internet website. The applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the City’s Building Division by personal, mailed, or electronic submittal together with any required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications and other documentation may be used in lieu of a wet signature.

(e)    Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:

(1)    Verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

(2)    At the applicant’s cost, verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

(f)    For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner and may include a consolidated inspection by the building official. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection.

(g)    An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

(h)    Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.

(§ 1, Ord. 860, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Article 3. California Building Code and California Residential Code
Sec. 9-1.301. Amendments.
The 2019 California Building Code is hereby amended as follows:

(a)    CBC 105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work will be deemed abandoned one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of filing, corrections issued or plan approval unless a permit has been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant up to two extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension must be requested in writing. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant must resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

(b)    CBC 105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued will become invalid, unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within three hundred sixty-five (365) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the time of work is commenced. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit must first be obtained to do so, and the applicable fee will be one half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made, nor will be made, in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. If the suspension or abandonment has exceeded one year, the permit will be considered expired. In order to renew a permit after expiration, the permittee must pay a new full permit fee. The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, two extensions of time, for periods not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension must be requested in writing.

(c)    CBC 109.4 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee equal to the permit fee, that shall be in addition to any required permit fees.

(d)    CBC 109.7 Reinspection fees. A reinspection fee may be imposed for each inspection or reinspection, when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete, access is denied, access is not available or when required corrections are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the technical codes, but as a method of controlling the practice of calling inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be imposed when the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector; for failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, the permit will not be finaled nor occupancy granted until the required fees have been paid. Reinspection fees are established by City Ordinance.

(e)    CBC 109.9 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize a refund of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty (80) percent of the applicable permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit. The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty (80) percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended. The Building Official may not authorize a refund of any fee paid except upon written request, filed by the original permittee no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after date of fee payment.

(f)    CBC 202 Definition. Barrier. A barrier is a fence, wall, building wall or any combination of these that completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.

(g)    CBC 202 Definition. Swimming pools. Any body of water created by artificial means which is designed, intended for use, or used for swimming or immersion purposes, which has a water depth exceeding 18 inches. The term, “pool,” includes swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, above-and below-ground, and vinyl-lined pools; pool does not include plumbing fixtures such as bathtubs nor does it apply to man-made lakes, reservoirs, farm ponds, or ponds used primarily for public park purposes, water conservation purposes, irrigation purposes or for the watering of livestock.

(h)    CBC 701A.1 Scope. This chapter applies to building materials, systems and or assemblies used in the exterior design and construction of new buildings and building alterations located within a Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area as defined in Section R337.2A.

(i)     CBC 701A.3 Application. New buildings and building alterations located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or any Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area designated by the enforcing agency constructed after the application date shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

(j)     CBC 701A.3.1 Application date and where required. New buildings for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after July 1, 2008 located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland Interface Fire Area shall comply with all sections of this chapter, including all of the following areas:

(1)    All unincorporated lands designated by the State Board of Forestry and Fire Protection as State Responsibility Area (SRA) including:

1.1.  Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zones.

1.2.  High Fire Hazard Severity Zones.

1.3.  Very-High Fire Hazard Severity Zones.

(2)    Land designated as Very-High Fire Hazard Severity Zone, High Fire Hazard Severity Zone and Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zone by cities and other local agencies.

(3)    Land designated as Wildland Interface Fire Area by cities and other local agencies.

(k)    CBC 703A.5.2 Weathering. Fire retardant-treated-wood shall meet the fire test performance requirements of this chapter after being subjected to the weathering conditions contained in the following standards, as applicable to the materials and conditions of use.

(l)     CBC 703A.5.2.2 Fire-retardant-treated wood shingles and shakes. This section is deleted in its entirety.

(m)   CBC 704A.4 Alternative methods for determining ignition-resistant materials. This section is deleted in its entirety.

(n)    CBC Table 1505.1 Minimum roof covering classification for types of construction. Change Table so Minimum Class A would be required for all construction types. Exception may be granted by the Building Official for City or County registered historic landmarks. The applicant shall submit evidence of historical registry and proposed materials.

(o)    CBC 1511.3 Roof replacement. Roof replacement shall include the removal of all existing layers of roof covering down to the roof deck. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than ten (10) percent of the total roof area is repaired or replaced within any one-year period, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A. When a roof is being replaced the following must also be upgraded:

(1)    Spark arrestors must be installed on any fireplace chimney. Manufactured fireplace must have a spark arrestor installed approved by the manufacturer.

(p)    CBC 1511.3.1.2 Roof recover upgrade entire roof. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than ten (10) percent of the total roof area is repaired or replaced within any one-year period, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.

(q)    CBC 1803.1 General. Geotechnical investigations shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 1803.2 and reported in accordance with Section 1803.6. Where required by the building official or where geotechnical investigations involve in-situ testing, laboratory testing or engineering calculations, such determination must be made by a California licensed engineer experienced in soil engineering. The Soil Expansion Index must be listed in all soils investigation reports.

(r)    CBC 3109.1 General. The design and construction of swimming pools, spas and hot tubs shall comply with this Code.

(s)    CBC 3109.3 Residential swimming pools. Residential swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a barrier complying with Sections 3109.3.1 through 3109.4.3.

(t)     CBC 3109.3.1 Barrier height and clearances. The top of the barrier must be at least sixty (60) inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier must be two (2) inches measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. Where the top of the pool structure is above grade, the barrier is authorized to be at ground level or mounted on top of the pool structure, and the maximum vertical clearance between the top of the pool structure and the bottom of the barrier must be four inches.

(u)    CBC 3109.3.1.1 Openings. Openings in the barrier must not allow passage of a four (4)-inch-diameter sphere.

(v)    CBC 3109.3.1.2 Solid barrier surfaces. Solid barrier surfaces which do not have openings shall not contain indentations or protrusions except for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.

(w)   CBC 3109.3.1.3 Closely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal and vertical members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is less than forty-five (45) inches, the horizontal members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not be greater than one and three-quarter inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing with the cutouts shall not be greater than one and three-quarter inches in width.

(x)    CBC 3109.3.1.4 Widely spaced horizontal members. Where the barrier is composed of horizontal members and the distance between the tops of the horizontal members is forty-five (45) inches or more, spacing between vertical members must not be greater than four (4) inches. Where there are decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing must not be greater than one and three-quarter inches in width.

(y)    CBC 3109.3.1.5 Chain link dimensions. Mesh size for chain link fences must not be greater than one and three-quarter inches in width, unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the top or bottom that reduce the openings to not more than one and three-quarter inches in width.

(z)    CBC 3109.3.1.6 Diagonal members. Where the barrier is composed of diagonal members shall not be greater than one and three-quarter inches.

(aa)  CBC 3109.3.1.7 Gates. Access gates must comply with the requirements of Sections 3109.3.1 through 3109.3.1.6 and must be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates must open outward away from the pool and must be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Doors or gates other than pedestrian access gates must have a self-latching device and must be equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and must remain locked at all times when not in use. Release mechanisms must comply with Sections 1010.1.9 and 1109.13. Where release mechanisms of the self-latching device are located less than sixty (60) inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool, the release mechanism must be located on the pool side of the gate at least three (3) inches below the top of the gate and the gate barrier may have no opening greater than one-half inch within eighteen (18) inches of the release mechanism.

(bb)  CBC 3109.3.1.8 Dwelling wall as a barrier. Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the barrier, two (2) safety devices must be provided in accordance with Section 115922 of the California Health and Safety Code.

(cc)  CBC 3109.3.1.9 Pool structure as barrier. Where an above-ground pool structure, and the means of access is a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps either shall be capable of being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a barrier that meets the requirements of Sections 3109.3.1.1 through 3109.3.1.8. Where the ladder or steps are secured, locked or removed, any opening shall not allow the passage of a four (4)-inch-diameter sphere.

(dd)  CBC 3109.3.2 Indoor swimming pools. Wall surrounding indoor swimming pools shall not be required to comply with Sections 3109.3.1.8. through 3109.3.3

(ee)  CBC 3109.3.3 Prohibited locations. Barriers shall be located as to prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from being used to climb the barriers. There shall be a clear zone of not less than thirty-six (36) inches between the exterior of the enclosure and any permanent structures or equipment such as pumps, filters and heaters that can be used to climb the enclosure.

The 2019 California Residential Code is hereby amended as follows:

(a)    CRC R105.3.2 Time limitation of application. An application for a permit for any proposed work will be deemed abandoned one hundred eighty (180) days after the date of filing, corrections issued or plan approval unless a permit has been issued; except that the Building Official is authorized to grant up to two (2) extensions of time for additional periods not exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension must be requested in writing. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant must resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

(b)    CRC R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued will become invalid, unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within three hundred sixty five (365) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the time of work is commenced. Before such work can be recommenced, a new permit must first be obtained to do so, and the applicable fee will be one half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made, nor will be made, in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. If the suspension or abandonment has exceeded one year, the permit will be considered expired. In order to renew a permit after expiration, the permittee must pay a new full permit fee. The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, two (2) extensions of time, for periods not more than one hundred eighty (180) days each. The extension must be requested in writing.

(c)    CRC R108.5 Refunds. The Building Official may authorize a refund of any fee that was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty (80) percent of the applicable permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit. The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty (80) percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended. The Building Official may not authorize a refund of any fee paid except upon written request, filed by the original permitee no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after date of fee payment.

(d)    CRC R108.6 Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee equal to the permit fee, that shall be in addition to any required permit fees.

(e)    CRC R108.7 Reinspection fees. A reinspection fee may be imposed for each inspection or reinspection, when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete, access is denied, access is not available or when required corrections are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the technical codes, but as a method of controlling the practice of calling inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be imposed when the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector; for failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, the permit will not be finaled nor occupancy granted until the required fees have been paid. Reinspection fees are established by City Ordinance.

(f)    CRC R314.9 Heat sensor detector.

(g)    CRC R314.9.1 General. Heat sensor shall comply with Section 314.9.

(h)    CRC R314.9.1.1 Listings. Heat sensor detectors shall be listed by a listing agency approved by the Building Official.

(i)     CRC R314.9.2 Where required. Heat sensor detectors shall be installed within attached and unattached garages when any permit is issued with a valuation greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00).

(j)     CRC 314.9.3 Power source. Heat sensor detectors shall be either hard wired or plugged in to an outlet receiving power from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup. Heat sensor detector shall emit a signal when the batteries are low.

(k)    CRC R337.1.1 Scope. This chapter applies to building materials, systems and or assemblies used in the exterior design and construction of new buildings and building alterations located within a Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area as defined in Section R337.2A.

(l)     CRC R337.1.3 Application. New buildings and building alterations located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or any Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Area Designated by the enforcing agency constructed after the application date shall comply with the provisions of this chapter.

(m)   CRC R337.1.3.1 Application date and where required. New buildings for which an application for a building permit is submitted on or after July 1, 2008 located in any Fire Hazard Severity Zone or Wildland Interface Fire Area shall comply with all sections of this chapter, including all of the following areas:

(1)    All unincorporated lands designated by the State Board of Forestry and Fire Protection as State Responsibility Area (SRA) including:

1.1.  Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zones.

1.2.  High Fire Hazard Severity Zones.

1.3.  Very-High Fire Hazard Severity Zones.

(2)    Land designated as Very-High Fire Hazard Severity Zone, High Fire Hazard Severity Zone and Moderate Fire Hazard Severity Zone by cities and other local agencies.

(3)    Land designated as Wildland Interface Fire Area by cities and other local agencies.

(n)    CRC R337.3.5.2 Weathering. Fire retardant-treated-wood shall meet the fire test performance requirements of this chapter after being subjected to the weathering conditions contained in the following standards, as applicable to the materials and conditions of use.

(o)    CRC R337.3.5.2.2 Fire-retardant-treated wood shingles and shakes. This section is deleted in its entirety.

(p)    CRC R337.4.3 Fire-retardant-treated wood shingles and shakes. This section is deleted in its entirety.

(q)    CRC R337.3.5.2.2 Fire-retardant-treated wood shingles and shakes. This section is deleted in its entirety.

(r)    CRC R337.8.2.1 Exterior windows and exterior glazed doors assembly requirements. Exterior windows and exterior glazed doors assemblies shall comply with one of the following requirements:

(1)    Be constructed of multiplane glazing with a minimum of one tempered pane meeting the requirements of Section R308 Safety Glazing, or

(2)    Be constructed of block glass units, or

(3)    Have a fire-resistance rating of not less than twenty (20) minutes when tested according to NFPA 257, or

(4)    Be tested to meet the performance requirements of SFM Standard 12-7A-2.

(s)    CRC R401.1 Application. The provisions of this chapter control the design and construction of the foundation and foundation spaces for all buildings. In addition to the provisions of this chapter, the design and construction of foundations in areas prone to flooding as established by Table R301.2(1) must meet the provisions of Section R322. Wood foundations must be designed and installed in accordance with AF&PA PWF (American Forest & Paper Association permanent wood foundation).

Exception: The provisions of this chapter are permitted to be used for wood foundations only in the following situations:

(1)    In buildings that have no more than two(2) floors and a roof.

(2)    When interior basement and foundation walls are constructed at intervals not exceeding fifty (50) feet.

(3)    Wood foundations in Seismic Design Category D0, D1, D2, or E are not permitted.

(t)     CRC R403.1.2 Continuous footing in seismic design categories D0, D1, D2 and E. Exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1, D2, and E, shall be supported by continuous solid or fully grouted masonry or concrete footings. Other footing materials or systems shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice. The braced wall panels at exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D0, D1, D2 and E must be supported by continuous footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings must be supported by continuous footings. The exception is deleted in its entirety.

(u)    CRC R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A roof shall be installed in all areas or where the edge of the roof is less than three (3) feet from a lot line. Class A roofing shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E108.

(v)    CRC R902.1.1 Roof coverings within very-high fire hazard severity zones. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than ten (10) percent of the total roof area is repaired or replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in alteration, repair or replacement of the roof or every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.

(w)   CRC R902.1.2 Roof coverings within state responsibility zones. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than ten (10) percent of the total roof area is repaired or replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.

(x)    CRC R902.1.2 Exception. The exception is deleted in its entirety.

(y)    CRC R903.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than ten (10) percent of the total roof area is repaired or replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class A.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985; as amended and renumbered by § 7, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997, §§ 3, 4, Ord. 743, eff. March 10, 2000, § 10, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019, and § 4, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Sec. 9-1.302. CBC Appendix and CRC Appendix.
The 2019 California Building Code Appendices I and J adopted as parts of this Code.

The 2019 California Residential Code Appendix H adopted as part of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985; as amended and renumbered by § 8, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997, § 11, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019 , and § 5, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 4. California Mechanical Code
Sec. 9-1.401. Amendments.
The 2019 California Mechanical Code is hereby amended as follows:

(a)    CMC 104.5.3 Fee refunds. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of a fee as follows:

(1)    The amount paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

(2)    The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty (80) percent of the applicable permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit. The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty (80) percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

(b)    CMC 105.2.6 Reinspection fees. A reinspection fee may be imposed for each inspection or reinspection, when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete, access is denied, access is not available or when required corrections are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the technical codes, but as a method of controlling the practice of calling inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be imposed when the approved plans are not readily avail-

able to the inspector; for failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, the permit will not be finaled nor occupancy granted until the required fees have been paid. Reinspection fees are established by City Ordinance.

(§ 12, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019, as amended by § 6, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 5. California Existing Building Code
Sec. 9-1.501. Adoption.
        That certain Code known as the “2019 The California Existing Building Code,” promulgated and published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary Code governing the administration of this Code and is made a part of this Code by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth herein. Such Code will be referred to herein as the California Existing Building Code (“CEBC”).

(§ 13, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019, as amended by § 7, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 6. California Administrative Code
Sec. 9-1.601. Adoption.
        That certain Code known as the “2019 The California Administrative Code,” promulgated and published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary Code governing the administration of this Code and is made a part of this Code by reference with the same force as if fully set forth herein. Such Code will be referred to herein as The California Administrative Code (CAC).

(§ 13, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997, as amended by § 14, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019, and § 8, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 7. California Electrical Code
Sec. 9-1.701. Amendments.
The 2019 California Electrical Code is hereby amended as follows:

(a)    CEC Sec. 89.108.48. Permit application. To obtain an electrical permit, an application shall be filed therefor and appropriate fees paid as set forth by resolution of the Council.

(b)    CEC Sec. 89.108.9.3. Authority to disconnect. The Building Official is hereby authorized to order the discontinuance and/or disconnection of any electrical wiring, device, appliance, apparatus or equipment which is found to be hazardous to life, health or property.

(1)    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or serving utility to make connections with a source of electrical energy or to supply electrical service to any electrical wiring, device, appliance, apparatus or equipment which has been disconnected or ordered disconnected by the Building Official until approval has been granted for reconnection of such equipment.

(c)    CEC Sec. 89.108.9.4. Connection to electrical installations. Except where work is done under an annual electrical maintenance permit, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make connection from a source of electrical wiring, device, appliance or equipment which requires a permit for installation unless such person, firm or corporation shall have obtained evidence from the Building Inspector that such equipment is authorized to be energized.

 

(d)    CEC Sec. 89.108.9.5. Authority to abate. Any portion of an electrical system found by the Building Official to be unsafe as defined in this Code or which the Building Official finds is manifestly unsafe is hereby declared to be a nuisance.

(1)    Where a nuisance exists or an electrical system is maintained in violation of this Code or any notice issued pursuant to this section, the Building Official shall require the nuisance or violation to be abated and, where necessary, shall seek such abatement in the manner provided by law.

(e)    CEC Sec. 110.5. Conductors. Conductors normally used to carry current shall be of copper unless otherwise provided in this Code. Where the conductor material is not specified, the sizes given in this Code shall apply to copper conductors. Where other materials are used, the size shall be changed accordingly.

(1)    For aluminum and copper-clad aluminum conductors, see Tables 310-16 through 310-19 of the NEC. Aluminum wire used under the provisions of this Code shall be a minimum of #6 A.W.G. stranded conductor.

(f)    CEC Sec. 110.8. Wiring methods. Only wiring methods recognized as suitable are included in this Code. The recognized methods of wiring shall be permitted to be installed in any type of building or occupancy, except as otherwise provided in this Code.

(1)    Wiring installations and equipment in existence at the time of passage of this Code may have their existing use continued if such use was legal at the time of passage and provided such continued use is not unsafe.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985, as amended and renumbered by § 15, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997, § 15, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019 , and § 9, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 8. California Plumbing Code.
Sec. 9-1.801. Amendments.
The 2019 California Plumbing Code is hereby amended as follows:

(a)    CPC 104.5.3 Fee refunds. The Authority Having Jurisdiction shall be permitted to authorize the refunding of a fee as follows:

(1)    The amount paid hereunder that was erroneously paid or collected.

(2)    The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty (80) percent of the applicable permit fee paid when no work has been done under the permit. The Building Official may authorize a refund of not more than eighty (80) percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

(b)    CPC 105.2.6 Reinspection fees. A reinspection fee may be imposed for each inspection or reinspection, when such portion of work for which inspection is called is not complete, access is denied, access is not available or when required corrections are not made. This section is not to be interpreted as requiring reinspection fees the first time a job is rejected for failure to comply with the requirements of the technical codes, but as a method of controlling the practice of calling inspections before the job is ready for such inspection or reinspection. Reinspection fees may be imposed when the approved plans are not readily available to the inspector; for failure to provide access on the date for which the inspection is requested; or for deviating from plans requiring the approval of the Building Official. In instances where reinspection fees have been assessed, the permit will not be finaled nor occupancy granted until the required fees have been paid. Reinspection fees are established by City Ordinance.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985, as amended by § 1, Ord. 672, eff. June 7, 1990; as amended and renumbered by § 17, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997, § 16, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019, and § 10, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 9. California Fire Code
Sec. 9-1.901. Adoption.
        That certain Code known as the “2019 California Fire Code,” most recent edition, promulgated and published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary Fire Code of the City and made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this chapter, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. Said Code shall be referred to in this article as the California Fire Code (CFC).

(§ 18, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997, as amended by § 17, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019 , and § 11, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 10. California Energy Code
Sec. 9-1.1001. Adoption.
        That certain Code known as the “2019 California Energy Code,” most recent edition, promulgated and published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary Code of the City and made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this chapter, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. Said Code shall be referred to in this article as the California Energy Code.

(§ 18, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019 , as amended by § 12, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 11. California Green Building Code
Sec. 9-1.1101. Adoption.
That certain Code known as the “2019 California Green Building Code,” most recent edition, promulgated and published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary Code of the City and made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this chapter, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. Said Code shall be referred to in this article as the California Green Building Code (CGBC).

(§ 19, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019 , as amended by § 13, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

Article 12. California Referenced Standards
Sec. 9-1.1201. Adoption.
        That certain Code known as the “2019 California Referenced Standard,” most recent edition, promulgated and published by the California Building Standards Commission, is hereby adopted and enacted as the primary Code of the City and made a part of this chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if fully set forth in this chapter, subject to the amendments set forth in this article. Said Code shall be referred to in this article as the California Referenced Standard (CRS).

(§ 20, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019, as amended by § 14, Ord. 904, eff. January 1, 2020)

 

 

 

Article 13. Severability
Sec. 9-1.1301. Severability.
        If any article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each article, section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more articles, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, and/or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid.

(§ 1, Ord. 627, eff. April 11, 1985, as renumbered by § 20, Ord. 718, eff. April 25, 1997, and § 21, Ord. 891, eff. March 25, 2019)

Chapter 2 PERMITS
Sec. 9-2.01. Approval.
        No building permit shall be issued and no construction of any building shall be commenced in any subdivision for which the final map was recorded after August 13, 1948, unless and until written approval therefor has been given by the Architectural Board of Review or the Council pursuant to the procedures and standards established by Chapter 4 of this title.

(Part I, Ord. 459, eff. September 21, 1972)

 

Sec. 9-2.02. Exceptions.
        It is recognized that situations may exist or arise wherein it is impossible, impractical, oppressive, or unfair to the owner to require literal compliance with all of the requirements of Chapter 1 of this title and that a certain flexibility is necessary and desirable. In such situations the Council is authorized by resolution to grant specific variances and deviations from the literal requirements of Chapter 1 of this title.

(Part I, Ord. 459, eff. September 21, 1972)

 

Sec. 9-2.03. Compliance with laws.
        No permit shall be issued with respect to any land which has been subdivided or with respect to any lot which has been divided in violation of any State law or any provision of this Code.

(Part I, Ord. 459, eff. September 21, 1972)

 

Sec. 9-2.04. Frontage on public streets.
        No permit shall be issued with respect to any land which is not part of a lot as defined in Chapter 2 of Title 10 of this Code, which lot is immediately adjacent to and has direct access to a public street; provided, however, an exception to this prohibition may be authorized by the Council in any case in which the Council finds that adequate access to such land from a public street has been provided by permanent easements for

 

the benefit of the owner of such land and for the benefit of public officers and employees acting within the scope of their public duties.

(Part I, Ord. 459, eff. September 21, 1972)

 

Sec. 9-2.05. Plot plans.
        No permit shall be issued for any commercial or multi-residential development in excess of three (3) dwelling units until the applicant has first submitted a plot plan of the development to the Planning Commission, if so designated by the Planning Commission, and obtained the approval of the Commission for such plan. An applicant or other aggrieved person shall have the right to appeal to the Council any decision made by the Planning Commission pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such appeal shall be controlled by the provisions of Section 10-2.2002(e)(5) of this Code.

(Part I, Ord. 459, eff. September 21, 1972, as amended by § 9, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Sec. 9-2.06. Conditions of approval.
        Whenever the Planning Commission or Council finds that any proposed improvement of use of property will cause an increase in vehicular or pedestrian traffic which will constitute a substantial burden upon existing streets and create a need for additional rights-of-way, street extensions, or other required improvements to meet the needs created by such proposed improvements or use, or whenever the Planning Commission or Council finds that the proposed improvements or use of property will create a need for on-site or off-site drainage, sewage, or other public facilities, the Planning Commission or Council may require, as a condition to the approval of such proposed improvements or use or the issuance of a building permit, that sufficient rights-of-way be dedicated and improvements be installed to meet such needs.

(Part I, Ord. 459, eff. September 21, 1972)

 

Sec. 9-2.07. Travel trailers and mobile homes on construction sites.
(§ 1, Ord. 608, eff. July 28, 1983; repealed by § 1, Ord. 647, eff. June 25, 1987)

 

Sec. 9-2.08. Swimming pool fences.
(a)    Enclosure required. Every outdoor swimming pool shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall not less than five (5′) feet in height, which shall be so constructed as not to have openings, holes, or gaps larger that four (4″) inches in any dimension, except for doors and gates. If a picket fence is erected or maintained, the vertical dimension between pickets shall not exceed four (4″) inches. A dwelling house or accessory building may be used as a part of such enclosure. A gates or doors opening through such enclosure shall be equipped with a self-closing and self-latching device for keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use, except that the door of any dwelling which forms a part of the enclosure need not be so equipped.

(b)    Applicability. The requirements of this section shall be applicable to all new outdoor swimming pools constructed on or after December 24, 1958, and shall apply to all pools existing on December 24, 1958, which have a depth of more than ten (10″) inches of water below the adjacent grade. No person in possession of land within the City upon which is situated an outdoor swimming pool having a depth of more than ten (10″) inches of water below the grade shall fail to provide and maintain such enclosure as required by this section.

(c)    Variances. The Planning Director may make modifications of the requirements imposed by this section upon a showing of good cause with respect to the height, nature, or location of the fence, wall, gates, or latches or the necessity therefor provided the protection as sought by this section is not reduced thereby. The Planning Director may permit other protective devices or structures to be used as long as the degree of protection afforded by the substitute devices or structures is not less than the protection afforded by the wall, fence, gate, and latch described in this section.

(§ 5, Ord. 649, eff. September 24, 1987)

 

Sec. 9-2.09. Expiration.
        All building permits shall expire and become null and void 180 days after their issuance; provided, however, that, if the holder of a building permit has made substantial progress toward completion of the building or structure under construction, at the discretion of the Building Official, such permit may be extended for two (2) additional terms of 180 days each. Any requests for extension of a building permit beyond one and one-half (1-½) years shall be made to and approved by the Planning Commission. All applications for extension of the term of a building permit shall be made prior to the expiration of the existing permit. For purposes of this section, the term “substantial progress” shall mean, in the case of the first 180-day extension, the satisfactory completion of at least three (3) of the five (5) major inspections required by the Uniform Building Code during the progress of construction and at least four (4) of such inspections in the case of the second 180-day extension.

(§ 5, Ord. 743, eff. March 10, 2000)

 

Sec. 9-2.10. Re-application.
        If, upon expiration of a building permit, construction of the building or structure which is the subject of the permit is not complete, including final inspection thereof, a new permit must be issued subject to all current rules, regulations and fees prior to re-commencement of construction.

(§ 5, Ord. 743, eff. March 10, 2000)

 

Sec. 9-2.11. Partial completion.
        Any incomplete or partially completed building or structure for which no current building permit exists must be removed by the owner thereof and the property returned to its condition prior to the date construction was commenced. Any partially completed building or structure not removed by the owner, after notice to do so is given by the building inspector, shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and may be abated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6 of Title 5 of this Code.

(§ 5, Ord. 743, eff. March 10, 2000)

Chapter 3 FIRE ZONES
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 3, Electrical Code, consisting of Sections 9-3.01 through 9-3.04, 9-3.07 and 9-3.08, added by Ord. No. 292, as amended by Ord. No. 426, repealed by Ord. No. 460, effective October 12, 1972; Sections 9-3.05 and 9-4.06, added by Ord. No. 292, repealed by Ord. No. 426.

 

Sec. 9-3.01. Established.
        The entire incorporated area of the City shall be a fire district known as Fire Zone 3 as defined in the Uniform Building Code. In addition, certain areas of the City may from time to time be designated as Fire Zone 4 by the Ventura County Fire Protection District, with the additional requirements set forth in this chapter.

(Part I, Ord. 458, eff. September 21, 1972)

Sec. 9-3.02. Fire Zone 4 defined.
        Fire Zone 4 is defined as any area of noncultivated brush-covered hillside, so designated by the Ventura County Fire Protection District.

(Part I, Ord. 458, eff. September 21, 1972)

 

Sec. 9-3.03. Fire Zone 4 requirements.
        The requirements in Fire Zone 4 for the fire-resistive protection of exterior walls and openings, as determined by their location on property, shall be the same as required for Fire Zone 3. In addition, the following special requirements shall be imposed:

(a)    Roof coverings. Roof coverings shall be of “fire-retardant” roofing, as specified in subsection (e) of Section 3203 of the Uniform Building Code, or of materials and methods approved by the Building Official.

(b)    Horizontal protection. Portions of the structure which have combustible construction elements in the horizontal plan shall be protected as required for one-hour fire-resistive construction, but such protection need be installed only on the exposed side. The following are examples of such horizontal elements:

(1)    Exposed rafter tails and roof sheathing (eaves);

(2)    The floor system of “stilt” construction; and

(3)    Stairways and balconies.

(c)    Opening protection. Openings from outside the building into attics or underfloor spaces shall be covered with solid noncombustible materials or be screened with corrosion-resistant wire mesh not in excess of one-fourth (¼″) inch.

(Part I, Ord. 458, eff. September 21, 1972)

Chapter 4 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW (Repealed)
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 4, Architectural Board of Review, consisting of Sections 9-4.01 through 9-4.08, added by Ord. No. 210, amended by Ord. Nos. 216, 242, 349, 415, 467, 519, 527, 579, 696 and 708, repealed by Ord. No. 771, effective February 13, 2004. Sections 9-4.09 through 9-4.16, added by Ord. No. 467, effective March 22, 1973, amended by Ord. Nos. 579, 624, 684 and 696, repealed by Ord. No. 771, effective February 13, 2004.

Chapter 5 HOUSE NUMBERING REGULATIONS
Sec. 9-5.01. Designation of numbers.
        The City Clerk shall have the authority, and it shall be his duty, to designate the respective numbers for buildings fronting on streets heretofore laid out or to be hereafter laid out or extended. He shall prepare, from time to time, and keep on file maps showing the system of numbering authorized by the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 151)

 

Sec. 9-5.02. Numbering mandatory.
        Each person owning or having the custody or control of any building within the City may obtain the appropriate number for such building from the City Clerk. No person owning or having the custody or control of any building or structure shall fail, neglect, or refuse to place and maintain numbers as provided in this chapter upon all entrances from the streets of the City within ten (10) days after the receipt of a notice by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant, or subtenant of such building from the City Clerk of the numbers designated for such building. All numbers other than those provided for in this chapter for the respective entrances shall be removed from every building by the owner, occupant, lessee, tenant, or subtenant thereof within ten (10) days after the service of the notice designating the appropriate numbers to be placed thereon.

(§ 2, Ord. 151)

 

Sec. 9-5.03. Base lines.
        The following shall be the respective base lines for numbers on buildings fronting on streets heretofore laid out or hereafter to be laid out or extended:

(a)    From north to south: Ventura Street and its extension northerly parallel to that portion of Signal Street north of Grand Avenue.

(b)    From east to west: Ojai Avenue easterly of Foothills Road, Foothills Road easterly of El Paseo Road, and El Paseo Road.

(§ 3, Ord. 151)

 

Sec. 9-5.04. Odd and even numbers.
        Numbers on the northerly and easterly sides of the street shall be even numbers, and the numbers on the southerly and westerly sides shall be odd numbers, provided, that such determination shall be made as to each street by the direction of the block thereof nearest its baseline and shall not be changed or effected by changes in compass directions of such street in succeeding blocks.

(§ 4, Ord. 151)

 

Sec. 9-5.05. Allocation of numbers to blocks.
        One hundred (100) numbers, or as many thereof as may be necessary, shall be allotted to each block of not to exceed six hundred (600′) feet. Number 101 shall be the first number used commencing at the respective base lines on the sides of the streets which are to contain the odd numbers, and Number 102 for the sides which are to contain the even numbers. At the beginning of the second block from the base line, the first number shall be 201 and 202 respectively and so continue throughout the system. On streets not intersecting a baseline street, the numbering shall be done as if the street extended to the base line bearing nearest to a right angle from the general direction of such street.

(§ 5, Ord. 151)

 

Sec. 9-5.06. Frontage per number within block.
        Except on Ojai Avenue between Canada Street and the easterly City limit, approximately fifty (50′) feet of frontage shall be allowed for each number, to be calculated from the beginning of the block in which the numbering begins. On Ojai Avenue between Canada Street and the easterly City limit, approximately thirteen (13′) feet of frontage shall be allowed for each number, to be calculated from the beginning of the block in which the numbering begins.

(§ 6, Ord. 151)

 

Sec. 9-5.07. Prefixes.
        Where numbers assigned increase from south to north, the respective street shall be designated by the prefix “North,” and where they decrease from south to north, they shall be designated by the prefix “South.” Where the assigned numbers increase from west to east, the respective streets shall be designated with the prefix “East,” and where they decrease from west to east, they shall be designated with the prefix “West.”

(§ 7, Ord. 151)

 

Sec. 9-5.08. Multiple buildings.
        If there is more than one building on property to which a single number is assigned by this chapter, or if one building has living quarters for more than one group, with separate entrances for each, the number assigned to the frontage shall be used, followed by the letters A, B, C, etc., to designate the separate buildings or the separate entrances, as the case may be.

(§ 8, Ord. 151)

 

Sec. 9-5.09. Enforcement.
        In the event any person who is obligated by the provisions of this chapter to place and maintain appropriate numbers at the entrance of any building within the City shall fail to do so after receiving a written notice from the City Clerk in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-5.02 of this chapter, the City Clerk may cause the appropriate numbers to be so placed at the expense of the City, which expense shall be collected from the person liable therefor, and any person failing to pay such sum shall be liable to a penalty of not less than Five and no/100ths ($5.00) Dollars nor more than Ten and no/100ths ($10.00) Dollars.

(§ 9, Ord. 151)

Chapter 6 SIGN REGULATIONS (Repealed)
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 814, Section 1, effective June 14, 2011, and Ord. No. 815, Section 4, effective August 12, 2011, repealed Chapter 6, Sections 9-6.101—9-6.508, which pertained to sign regulations and derived from Ord. 707, Section 1, adopted April 13, 1995. See Sections 10-2.1601—10-2.1614 for sign standards.

Chapter 7 STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 7, Sidewalks, Curbs and Gutters, consisting of Sections 9-7.01 through 9-7.04, added by Ord. No. 324, effective October 16, 1963, amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 391, effective January 10, 1968.

 

Sec. 9-7.01. Declaration of public danger.
        The existence of earthen sidewalks and earthen curbs and gutters adjoining dwellings and buildings within the City, or, conversely, the lack of adequate curbs and sidewalks, is hereby found and declared to be dangerous to the public health and safety of the inhabitants of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.02. Intent.
        It is the intent of this chapter not to conflict with or to have any effect whatsoever on street dedications and improvement obligations required of developers under the Subdivision Map Act and City laws enacted pursuant thereto or on matters processed by the Planning Commission and/or Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

Sec. 9-7.03. Improvements required.
        Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every owner, lessee, or other person constructing, or substantially modifying, or causing to be constructed or substantially modified, any building, structure, or off-street parking facility in the City shall also provide for the construction of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, and street paving. Such improvements shall be made, in accordance with City standard specifications and design, for all public street frontage adjoining the property upon which the construction is to be done unless curbs, gutters, sidewalks, and paving constructed and located in accordance with City standards and design already exist.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.04. Exemptions.
        As concerns residential buildings containing three (3) or fewer dwelling units, the requirements of Section 9-7.03 of this chapter shall apply to new construction only and shall not apply to modifications of any kind.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.05. Substantial defined.
        For the purposes of Section 9-7.03 of this chapter, a modification shall be considered substantial where its total cost is in excess of Six Thousand and no/100ths ($6,000.00) Dollars as established by the valuation set by the Building Inspector for building permit fee purposes.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.06. Improvement plans.
        Any required street or road improvement plans shall be referred to the Director of Public Works for approval. Such plans shall be accompanied by an estimate of the costs of the construction and shall be used as a basis for the amount of improvement security for an agreement to construct, or shall be used as a basis for the amount of a cash deposit in lieu of construction, and shall be subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works. The approval of the plans shall also be subject to plan-check, permit, and inspection fees imposed by the Department of Public Works.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.07. Removal or relocation of encroachments: General.
        The City may require the removal or relocation of any encroachment, lawful or unlawful, on a finding that the encroachment is detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare. The removal and relocation of encroachments under this section shall be as prescribed by Sections 1481 through 1485 of the Streets and Highways Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.08. Engineering.
        Upon the written request of any person who must conform with the requirements of Section 9-7.03 of this chapter, and within ninety (90) days after such request, the Director of Public Works shall establish a street line and grade for the public street frontage adjacent to the property upon which the construction is to take place. The applicant shall reimburse the City for the costs associated with establishing such line and grade and the approval of plans on a pro rata basis of the percentage of street frontage.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968, as amended by Part 1, Ord. 512, eff. January 8, 1976)

Sec. 9-7.09. Bond or deposit for construction.
        In lieu of the construction of required curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving, and drainage facilities, the owner, lessee, or other person shall, if the Director of Public Works finds that deferring such improvements is in the public interest, post with the City a sufficient bond, cash deposit, or other security, which bond, cash, or security shall be approved as to amount and form by the Director to guarantee the installation of such improvements within such period as the Director shall specify. If the amount required is less than Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars, a cash deposit shall be made.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.10. Improvement waiver.
        Upon the application of any interested person, the Director of Public Works may waive the construction of sidewalks, curbs, gutters, paving, or drainage facilities hereunder where the public health, safety, and welfare will not be adversely affected, taking into consideration the contour of the ground, the relation of the adjacent property to the street elevation, the use made of other property in the area, and the convenience of the public.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.11. Building Official: Duties.
        The Building Official shall not conduct a final inspection of any building, structure, or other facility and shall withhold approval of public utility connections thereto unless the curbs, gutters, sidewalks, paving, and drainage facilities required by the provisions of this chapter have been completed, or, when permitted, a bond, cash deposit, or deposit of securities to guarantee such construction have been posted with the City and approved by the Director of Public Works, or unless such requirements have been waived in accordance with the provisions of Section 9-7.10 of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.12. Dedication to City.
        Prior to the issuance of any building permit or other permit for the improvement or use of property adjoining a public street, where it is reasonably contemplated by the Director of Public Works that the proposed improvement or use of the property will cause an increase in vehicular or pedestrian traffic so as to make necessary a widening of the existing City right-of-way for the protection of the public safety and welfare, there shall be dedicated to the City that part of such property sufficient to bring such public street up to the width line established therefor. In the event existing buildings or other structures are located within the right-of-way to be dedicated, the City shall compensate the owner for the costs of removing and relocating the improvements or structures to the remaining property or may permit such encroachment to remain.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.13. Maintenance.
        Maintenance of curbs, gutters, and sidewalks within the City limits shall be as prescribed by Sections 5600 et seq. of the Streets and Highways Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-7.14. Appeals.
        Interested persons shall have the right to appeal to the Council from determinations made by the Director of Public Works and the Building Official. Such appeals shall be controlled by the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.

(§, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968, as amended by § 11, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Sec. 9-7.15. Exceptions to provisions.
        It is recognized that situations may arise wherein it may prove to be impractical or impossible or unfair or oppressive to the owner to require literal compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and that a certain flexibility is necessary. It is accordingly hereby specifically provided that if the Council shall determine that any of the provisions of this chapter should be modified or omitted, thereupon the Council is authorized and empowered to deviate from the full requirements of this chapter and may authorize other modifications as the conditions may warrant.

(§ 1, Ord. 391, eff. January 10, 1968)

Chapter 8 UNDERGROUND UTILITY FACILITIES
Sec. 9-8.01. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Commission” shall mean the Public Utilities Commission of the State.

(b)    “Underground Utility District” or “District” shall mean that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-8.03 of this chapter.

(c)    “Person” shall mean and include individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.

(d)    “Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures” shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located aboveground within a District and used or useful in supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service.

(e)    “Utility” shall include all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.02. Public hearings by Council.
(a)    Hearings: Notice. The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten (10) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive.

(b)    Report by City official. Prior to holding such public hearing, the City Manager or such other person as he may designate shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at such hearing containing, among other information, the extent of such utilities participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected property owners. Such report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.03. Council may designate Underground Utility Districts by resolution.
        If, after any such public hearing, the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety, or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an Underground Utility District and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such District and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners shall be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials, and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.04. Unlawful acts.
        Whenever the Council creates an Underground Utility District and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 9-8.03 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures in the District after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 9-8.03 of this chapter, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.05. Exceptions: Emergencies or unusual circumstances.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed thirty (30) days, without authority of the Council in order to provide emergency service. The City Manager may grant special permission, on such terms as he may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use, or operate poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.06. Other exceptions.
        The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-8.03 of this chapter shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

(a)    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Manager;

(b)    Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

(c)    Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a District within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a District, where such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

(d)    Poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;

(e)    Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

(f)    Antennae, associated equipment, and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

(g)    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; and

(h)    Temporary poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.07. Notices to property owners and utility companies.
        Within ten (10) days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-8.03 of this chapter, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the District created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

        Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-8.03 of this chapter, together with a copy of the provisions of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.08. Responsibility of utility companies.
        If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a District created by any resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-8.03 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs on file with the Commission.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.09. Responsibility of property owners.
        Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting a building or structure within a District shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 9-8.08 of this chapter and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations, and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

        In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying, or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-8.03 of this chapter, the City Manager or his designate may utilize either or both of the following procedures:

(a)    Disconnection by utility. He may post written notice on the property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property.

(b)    Work by City. He may give notice in writing to the persons in possession of such premises and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll to provide the required underground facilities within ten (10) days after receipt of such notice.

(1)    Service of notice. The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice shall be deposited in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice shall be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner’s name appears, and shall be addressed to such owner’s last known address as the same appears, on the last equalized assessment roll. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the City Manager shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight (8″) inches by ten (10″) inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on such premises.

(2)    Contents of notice. The notice to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice, the City will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof shall be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon such property.

(3)    Disconnection, construction, and assessment. If, upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the City may forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the City may, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work, the City Manager shall file a written report with the Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the costs thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such costs are to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the costs of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than ten (10) days thereafter.

(4)    Notice of protest hearing. The City Manager shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place the Council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

(5)    Protest hearing. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify, or reject the assessment.

(6)    Lien upon property. If any assessment is not paid within five (5) days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made, and the City Manager is directed to turn over to the Assessor and Tax Collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the Assessor and Tax Collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which such assessment was not paid. Such assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as property taxes are due and payable and, if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six (6%) percent per annum.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.10. Responsibility of City.
        The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-8.03 of this chapter.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.11. Extension of time.
        In the event any act required by the provisions of this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 9-8.03 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act shall be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

 

Sec. 9-8.12. Violations: Penalties.
(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968; repealed by Part 4, Ord. 508, eff. July 24, 1975)

 

Sec. 9-8.13. Constitutionality.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid.

(Part I, Ord. 397, eff. August 7, 1968)

Chapter 9 FLOOD PROTECTION
Note
*       Editor’s note: Chapter 9, Flood Protection Regulations, added by Ord. No. 566, effective October 10, 1978, as renumbered by Ord. No. 569, effective January 11, 1979, as amended by Ord. No. 593, effective September 10, 1981, repealed by Ord. No. 655, effective May 19, 1988.

 

Article 1. Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and Methods
Sec. 9-9.101. Statutory authorization.
        The Legislature of the State, in Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 of the Government Code of the State, has conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of their citizenry.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.102. Findings of fact.
(a)    The flood hazard areas of the City are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, the disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

(b)    Such flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazard which increase flood heights and velocities and, when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses which are inadequately floodproofed, elevated, or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to flood losses.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.103. Statement of purpose.
        It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

(a)    To protect human life and health;

(b)    To minimize expenditures of public moneys for costly flood control projects;

(c)    To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

(d)    To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

(e)    To minimize damages to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone, and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

(f)    To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the reuse and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

(g)    To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

(h)    To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.104. Methods of reducing flood losses.
        In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

(a)    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

(b)    Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damages at the time of initial construction;

(c)    Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

(d)    Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damages; and

(e)    Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 9-9.200. Scope.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set forth in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.201. Appeal.
        “Appeal” shall mean a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.202. Area of shallow flooding.
        “Area of shallow flooding” shall mean a designated AO or AH Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three (3′) feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.203. Base flood.
        “Base flood” shall mean the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”).

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.204. Basement.
        “Basement” shall mean any area of a building having its floor subgrade (below the ground level) on all sides.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.205. Breakaway wall.
        “Breakaway wall” shall mean any type of wall, whether solid or lattice, and whether constructed of concrete, masonry, wood, metal, plastic, or any other suitable building material, which wall is not part of the structural support of the building, and which is designed to break away under abnormally high tides or wave action without causing any damage to the structural integrity of the building on which it is used or any building to which it might be carried by floodwaters. A breakaway wall shall have a safe design loading resistance of not less than ten (10) and no more than twenty (20) pounds per square foot. The use of breakaway walls shall be certified by a registered engineer or architect and shall meet the following conditions:

(a)    Breakaway wall collapse shall result from a water load less than that which would occur during the base flood; and

(b)    The elevated portion of the building shall not incur any structural damage due to the effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously in the event of the base flood.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.206. Development.
        “Development” shall mean any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures or mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.206.2. Existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
        “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before January 11, 1979.

(§ 1, Ord. 844, eff. September 12, 2014)

 

Sec. 9-9.206.4. Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision.
        “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

(§ 2, Ord. 844, eff. September 12, 2014)

 

Sec. 9-9.207. Flood or flooding.
        “Flood” or “flooding” shall mean a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: (1) the overflow of flood waters; (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or (3) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as a flash flood or abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.208. Flood Boundary and Floodway Map.
        “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map” shall mean the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of flood hazard and the floodway.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.209. Flood Insurance Rate Map.
        “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” shall mean the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.210. Flood Insurance Study.
        “Flood Insurance Study” shall mean the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration which includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.211. Floodplain or flood-prone area.
        “Floodplain or flood-prone area” shall mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see “Flooding,” Section 9-9.207 of this article).

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.212. Floodplain management.
        “Floodplain management” shall mean the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventative measures for reducing flood damages, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, and floodplain management regulations.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.213. Floodplain management regulations.
        “Floodplain management regulations” shall mean the zoning provisions, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose regulations (such as floodplain regulations, grading regulations, and erosion control regulations), and other applications of police powers. “Floodplain management regulations” describes such State or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.214. Floodproofing.
        “Floodproofing” shall mean any combination of structural or nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damages to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, or structures and their contents.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.215. Floodway.
        “Floodway” shall mean the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas which must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot, also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.216. Functionally dependent use.
        “Functionally dependent use” shall mean a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.217. Highest adjacent grade.
        “Highest adjacent grade” shall mean the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.217.2. Historic structure.
        “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

(a)    Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

(b)    Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

(c)    Individually listed on the State of California inventory of historic places; or

(d)    Individually listed as a landmark under Title 4, Chapter 8 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 844, eff. September 12, 2014)

 

Sec. 9-9.218. Lowest floor.
        “Lowest floor” shall mean the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including the basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.219. Manufactured home.
        “Manufactured home” shall mean a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For floodplain management purposes, “manufactured home” shall also include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for more than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.220. Manufactured home park or subdivision.
        “Manufactured home park or subdivision” shall mean a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.221. Mean sea level.
        “Mean sea level” shall mean, for the purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodedic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, or other datum, to which the base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.222. New construction.
        “New construction” shall mean, for floodplain management purposes, structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.222.2. New manufactured home park or subdivision.
        “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after January 11, 1979.

(§ 4, Ord. 844, eff. September 12, 2014)

 

Sec. 9-9.223. One hundred-year flood or 100-year flood.
        “One hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood” shall mean a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equaled or exceeded. “One hundred-year flood” is identical to the “base flood,” which will be the term used in this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.224. Person.
        “Person” shall mean an individual, or his or her agent, firm, partnership, association, or corporation, or agent of such, or the State or its agencies or political subdivisions.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.224.8. Recreational vehicle.
        “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

(a)    Built on a single chassis;

(b)    Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(c)    Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

(d)    Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

(§ 5, Ord. 844, eff. September 12, 2014)

 

Sec. 9-9.225. Remedy a violation.
        “Remedy a violation” shall mean to bring the structure, or other development, into compliance with State or local floodplain management regulations or, if such is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing Federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.226. Riverine.
        “Riverine” shall mean relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including its tributaries), stream, brook, or the like.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.227. Special flood hazard area (SFHA).
        “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” shall mean an area having special flood or flood-related erosion hazards and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, or AH.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.228. Start of construction.
        “Start of construction” shall mean and include substantial improvement and shall mean the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. “Actual start” shall mean either the first placement of the permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. “Permanent construction” shall not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor shall it include excavations for basements, footings, piers, or foundations for the erection of temporary forms; nor shall it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds, not occupied as dwelling units or not a part of the main structure.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.229. Structure.
        “Structure” shall mean a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, which is principally above the ground, as well as a manufactured home.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.229.2. Substantial damage.
        “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(§ 6, Ord. 844, eff. September 12, 2014)

 

Sec. 9-9.230. Substantial improvement.
        “Substantial improvement” shall mean any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50%) percent of the market value of the structure either:

(a)    Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(b)    If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred.

        For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” shall be considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not such alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. “Substantial improvement” shall not include, however, either:

(a)    Any project for the improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

(b)    Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.231. Variance.
        “Variance” shall mean a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which variance permits construction in a manner which would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

Sec. 9-9.232. Violation.
        “Violation” shall mean the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the City’s floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter shall be presumed to be in violation until such time as such documentation is provided.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Article 3. General Provisions
Sec. 9-9.301. Lands to which this chapter applies.
        This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas within the jurisdiction of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.302. Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas.
        The special flood hazard areas identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency or the Federal Insurance Administration in a scientific and engineering report entitled “Flood Insurance Study for the City of Ojai,” dated October 17, 1978, and revised April 19, 1983, with an accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Map, as well as all future or subsequent revisions, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Said Flood Insurance Study is on file at the City Hall, 401 South Ventura Street, Ojai, California. Said Flood Insurance Study is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow the implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the Council by the Floodplain Administrator.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988, as amended by § 1, Ord. 699, eff. October 15, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-9.303. Compliance.
        No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing set forth in this chapter shall prevent the Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.304. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
        This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.305. Interpretation.
        In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(a)    Considered as minimum requirements;

(b)    Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

(c)    Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other power granted under State statutes.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

Sec. 9-9.306. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
        The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the special flood hazard areas or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, or any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration for any flood damage which results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made pursuant to this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.307. Severability.
        This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof, other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Article 4. Administration
Sec. 9-9.401. Development permits.
        A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any special flood hazard area established by Section 9-9.302 of Article 3 of this chapter. Applications for development permits shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, the storage of materials, and drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information shall be required:

(a)    The proposed elevation, in relation to the mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including the basement) of all structures; in Zone AO, the elevation of the highest adjacent grade and the proposed elevation of the lowest floor of all structures;

(b)    The proposed elevation, in relation to the mean sea level, to which any structure will be floodproofed;

(c)    All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (d) of Section 9-9.403 of this article; and

(d)    A description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.402. Designation of the Floodplain Administrator.
        The Building Inspector is hereby appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.403. Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
        The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

(a)    Permit review.

(1)    Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied,

(2)    Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State, or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required,

(3)    Determine that the site is reasonably safe from flooding, and

(4)    Determine that the proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For the purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” shall mean that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point;

(b)    Use of other base flood data. When the base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 9-9.302 of Article 3 of this chapter, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source in order to administer Article 5 of this chapter. Any such information shall be submitted to the Council for adoption;

(c)    Alteration or relocation of watercourses/changes in base flood elevations. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated or base flood elevations change due to physical alterations:

(1)    Notify adjacent communities and the State Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, and

(2)    Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse is maintained,

(3)    In the case of changes in base flood elevations due to physical alterations within six (6) months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR);

(d)    Certifications. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed:

(1)    The certification required by subsection (1) of subsection (c) of Section 9-9.501 of Article 5 of this chapter (floor elevations),

(2)    The certification required by subsection (2) of subsection (c) of Section 9-9.501 of Article 5 of this chapter (elevations in areas of shallow flooding),

(3)    The certification required by subsection (iii) of subsection (3) of subsection (c) of Section 9-9.501 of Article 5 of this chapter (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures),

(4)    The certification required by subsection (i) or (ii) of subsection (4) of subsection (c) of Section 9-9.501 of Article 5 of this chapter (floodproofing standards),

(5)    The certified elevation required by subsection (b) of Section 9-9.503 of Article 5 of this chapter (subdivision standards), and

(6)    The certification required by subsection (a) of Section 9-9.505 of Article 5 of this chapter (floodway encroachments);

(e)    Boundary locations. Make interpretations, where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the special flood hazard areas (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Article 6 of this chapter; and

(f)    Remedy violations. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as provided in Section 9-9.303 of Article 3 of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988, as amended by § 7, Ord. 844, eff. September 12, 2014)

Article 5. Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
Sec. 9-9.501. Standards of construction.
        In all special flood hazard areas, the following standards shall be required:

(a)    Anchoring.

(1)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

(2)    All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of Section 9-9.504 of this article.

(b)    Construction materials and methods.

(1)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damages.

(2)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices which minimize flood damages.

(3)    All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities which are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

(4)    Within Zones AH or AO, adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures shall be required.

(c)    Elevations and floodproofing.

(1)    The new construction or substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures shall meet the standards set forth in subsection (3) of this subsection. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the Building Inspector, to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

(2)    The new construction or substantial improvement of any structure in Zone AO shall have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified. Nonresidential structures shall meet the standards set forth in subsection (3) of this subsection. Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including the basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the Building Inspector, to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

(3)    Nonresidential construction shall be elevated either in conformance with subsection (1) or (2) of this subsection or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

(i)     Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

(ii)    Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

(iii)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

(4)    For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor, which areas are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement shall either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(i)     Either a minimum of two (2) openings, having a total net area of not less than one square inch, for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above the grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters; or

(ii)    Be certified to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration.

(5)    Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards set forth in Section 9-9.504 of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.502. Standards for utilities.
(a)    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from systems into floodwaters.

(b)    On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.503. Standards for subdivisions.
(a)    All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

(b)    All final subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed structures and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood, the final pad elevation shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

(c)    All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damages.

(d)    All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damages.

(e)    All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.504. Standards for manufactured homes.
        All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions to manufactured homes shall:

(a)    Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; and

(b)    Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.505. Floodways.
        Located within the special flood hazard areas established by Section 9-9.302 of Article 3 of this chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions shall apply:

(a)    Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge; and

(b)    If the provisions of subsection (a) of this section are satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all the other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.506. Standards for recreational vehicles.
All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either:

(a)    Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; or

(b)    Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

(c)    Meet the permit requirements of Section 9-9.401 of this Code and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 9-9.504.

(§ 8, Ord. 844, eff. September 12, 2014)

 

Article 6. Appeals and Variances
Sec. 9-9.601. Appeal Board.
(a)    The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

(b)    The Planning Commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

(c)    Applications for variances shall be submitted in writing to the Planning Department with the required fee. The applicant shall be responsible for providing all of the necessary information as determined by the City.

        In passing upon such applications, the Planning Commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, the standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

(1)    The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(2)    The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(3)    The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damages and the effect of such damages on the individual owner;

(4)    The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(5)    The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(6)    The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(7)    The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(8)    The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for such area;

(9)    The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(10)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site;

(11)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including the maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges; and

(12)  Any other inspection deemed necessary by the City.

(d)    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level provided the factors of subsection (c) of this section have been considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance shall increase.

(e)    Upon the consideration of the factors of subsection (c) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the Planning Commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(f)    The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Insurance Administration upon request.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

Sec. 9-9.602. Conditions for variances.
(a)    Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation, or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places without regard to the procedures set forth in this section.

(b)    Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(c)    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(d)    Variances shall only be issued upon:

(1)    A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(2)    A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and

(3)    A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to the public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or the victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws.

(e)    Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided the provisions of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods which minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threat to the public safety.

(f)    Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

 

 

Article 7. Amendments
Sec. 9-9.701. Amendments: Hearings: Notices.
        The regulations, restrictions, and boundaries set forth in this chapter may be amended, supplemented, changed, or appealed from time to time to reflect any and all changes in the National Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973; provided, however, no such action may be taken until after a public hearing in relation thereto at which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. At least fifteen (15) days’ notice of the time and place of such hearings shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City. The regulations of this chapter are in compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program Regulations contained in 24 C.F.R. 1909, et seq.

(§ 1, Ord. 655, eff. May 19, 1988)

Chapter 10 PLANNED DRAINAGE FACILITIES
Sec. 9-10.01. Findings and purpose.
        The City hereby finds and declares that the construction of new buildings and parking areas within City increases the amount of hard surface runoff during rainstorm activity. In order to preserve the health and safety of its citizens and to protect public and private property, it is necessary to construct new drainage facilities within City to accommodate in a safe manner the increased surface runoff of storm and rain waters attributable to such new construction. Accordingly, it is the purpose of this chapter to provide for the payment of fees to defray a portion of the actual or estimated cost of constructing new planned drainage facilities for the removal of surface and storm waters from various areas of the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 591, eff. June 9, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 665, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 9-10.02. Scope.
        The fees provided for in this chapter shall be assessed on any property requiring a building permit for any new building, any addition to a commercial or industrial building, or any new paved parking area within the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 591, eff. June 9, 1981)

 

Sec. 9-10.03. Reference drainage plan.
        The fees required by this chapter shall be determined partially on the basis of construction cost estimates, which from time to time may be adjusted to reflect current costs, for planned drainage facilities as set forth in the Master Plan Drainage Study for the City adopted by resolution of the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 591, eff. June 9, 1981)

 

Sec. 9-10.04. Fees.
        A fee formula or structure appropriate to carry out the purposes of this chapter shall be established by a resolution of the Council; provided, however, that all fees required to be paid pursuant to this chapter shall be payable in accordance with Chapter 9 of Title 10 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 591, eff. June 9, 1981, as amended by § 1, Ord. 665, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 9-10.05. Basis of fees.
(§ 1, Ord. 591, eff. June 9, 1981; repealed by § 1, Ord. 594, eff. September 24, 1981)

 

 

Sec. 9-10.06. Drainage Improvement Fund.
        The fees required pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the City and deposited into a separate fund to be known as the “Drainage Improvement Fund.” Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for one or any of the following:

(a)    The construction or reimbursement for the construction of drainage facilities consistent with the purposes of the Master Plan Drainage Study for the City;

(b)    To reimburse the City for costs incurred administrating grants for such purpose; and

(c)    To reimburse the City for costs incurred for engineering and administrative services to form a district and design and construct such facilities.

        The City may accept considerations in lieu of the payment of fees as approved by the Council. The City may advance money from its General Fund to pay the costs of constructing such facilities subject to reimbursement from the fund, or the City may incur indebtedness for such costs secured solely by moneys in the fund. The City may reimburse any person who provided such facilities, the costs for which exceed the amount of the calculated fee, such reimbursement not to exceed the difference between the actual costs incurred by such person and the amount of such fee.

(§ 1, Ord. 591, eff. June 9, 1981)

Chapter 11 HILLSIDE EROSION CONTROL
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 9-11.101. Purpose and intent.
        The purpose of this chapter is to control erosion and the production of sediment and related environmental damage by establishing minimum standards and providing regulations for the construction and maintenance of land fills, excavations, cutting and clearing of vegetation, revegetation of cleared areas, and drainage control, as well as for the protection of exposed soil surfaces, in order to promote the safety, public health, convenience, and general welfare of the City. The intent of this chapter is to ensure that there is no increase in runoff or sediment as a result of hillside improvements.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.102. Scope.
        This chapter shall provide for the approval of grading and related erosion and sediment control on parcels of land in the foothill or hillside areas of the City. In general, such hillside areas are located adjacent to the Los Padres National Forest on the north and Black Mountain on the south. In addition, this chapter shall provide for particular grading, erosion, and sediment control of parcels which require extensive grading, cut, and fill in order to facilitate development or use.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982, as amended by § 2, Ord. 624, eff. August 9, 1984)

 

Sec. 9-11.103. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Clearing” (land preparation) shall mean the removal of plants, shrubs, and trees, and the roots thereof, and structures or other objects from the surface of the land.

(b)    “City” shall mean the City of Ojai.

(c)    “Debris” shall mean loose material arising from the disintegration of rocks and vegetative material and any man-made material transportable by storm water runoff, streams, or floods.

(d)    “Drainage” shall mean the removal of surface water or groundwater from land by means of surface or subsurface drains.

(e)    “Drainageway” shall mean a natural depression in the earth’s surface or a man-made channel or depression in which surface waters collect as a result of rain or melting snow but at other times is destitute of water.

(f)    “Drainage control facility” shall mean a device for controlling drainage; or a structure designed to regulate the flow rate or course of runoff water.

(g)    “Erosion” shall mean the wearing away of the land surface by running water, wind, ice, or other climatic and geological agents, including such processes as gravitational creep or mass wasting.

(h)    “Erosion control plan” or “plan” shall mean a plan which fully indicates the necessary land treatment and structural measures, installations, and treatments which effectively minimize soil erosion and sediment and debris yield.

(i)     “Erosion control plan condition” or “condition” shall mean a requirement which will be executed in accordance with the plan.

(j)     “Excavation” shall mean any activity by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.

(k)    “Fill” shall mean a deposit of earth material placed by artificial means; or any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.

(l)     “Grading permit” shall mean a permit issued by the City in conformance with Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code as amended by the City.

(m)   “Groundwater table” shall mean the upper surface of the groundwater or that level below which the soil is saturated with water.

(n)    “Hillside area” shall mean an area where the average slope before grading is ten (10%) percent or more or where a cut and fill slope after proposed grading will exceed three (3′) feet in vertical height.

(o)    “Hydrologic” shall mean of or dealing with water on the land, including its properties, laws, geographical distribution, and the like.

(p)    “Land disturbance” shall mean any activity involving clearing, grading, or filling and any other activity which causes land to be exposed to the danger of erosion.

(q)    “Land preparation” shall mean the conditioning of land, including clearing, land leveling for related gradient control, and soil preparation for seeding, planting, or replanting crop land or soil protection developments.

(r)    “Landslide” shall mean earth materials which are moving or have moved downward on a hillside slope as a result of the action of external forces, such as gravity, seeping water, or earthquakes, or a combination thereof.

(s)    “Native vegetation” shall mean the plants, shrubs, and trees, and the roots thereof, which grow naturally or have become adapted to a local environment without being planted or cultivated by man.

(t)     “Original surface” shall mean the surface of the ground at the time of the initial investigation of a proposed project prior to any proposed land modification.

(u)    “Parcel” shall mean a parcel of real property as defined by the County Assessor.

(v)    “Person” shall mean any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(w)   “Physical land condition report” shall mean a written summary containing data describing physical conditions, including land use, topographic relationships, critical site limitations, land treatment measures, and any other significant data relating to the land.

(x)    “Public nuisance” shall mean any condition which threatens the health, safety, property, or general welfare of the public.

(y)    “Sediment detention measure” shall mean a facility which retains flow sufficiently to cause the deposition of transported sediment.

(z)    “Sedimentation” shall mean the process by which mineral or organic matter is removed from its site of origin, transported, and deposited by water, wind, or gravity.

(aa)  “Site work plan” shall mean a plan delineating the limits of work to be done on a particular lot or parcel of land where grading is permitted.

(ab)  “Soil Conservation Service Land Capability Classification” shall mean a classification adopted by the United States Department of Agriculture Soil Conservation Service defining the ability of the land to produce under specified uses and conservation treatments with due regard to the inherent limitations and hazards of the land.

(ac)  “Soil series” shall mean a category of soil classification in which soils with similar sequences of natural layers are grouped together and named; or soils which are essentially alike in all major profile characteristics, with the exception of surface texture.

(ad)  “Soil type” shall mean a subdivision of soil series consisting of or describing soils which are alike in all characteristics, including soil texture.

(ae)  “Storm water drainage” shall mean drainage resulting from any rainfall.

(af)   “Swale” shall mean a low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water runoff.

(ag)  “Ten-year frequency rainstorm” shall mean a rainstorm of such intensity that, on the average, could be expected to be equaled or exceeded once every ten (10) years in a twenty-four (24) hour period; or a rainstorm of such intensity which has a ten (10%) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

(ah)  “Terrace” shall mean a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope for drainage and maintenance purposes.

(ai)   “Vegetation” shall mean the plant life (flora) which covers the ground surface of an area.

(aj)   “Watercourse” shall mean a permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook, creek, channel, or ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.

(ak)  “Watershed” shall mean all the land and water within the confines of a drainage divide.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982, as amended by § 3, Ord. 624, eff. August 9, 1984)

 

Article 2. Requirements and Procedure
Sec. 9-11.201. Grading permits: Required.
        No person shall commence or perform any grading or filling or clearing of hillside areas without first obtaining a grading permit from the City Engineer.

        All land within the boundaries of a development shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface water without permanently ponding.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.202. Grading permits: Exceptions.
        A grading permit shall not be required if the project meets any of the following conditions:

(a)    The excavation does not exceed three (3′) feet in vertical depth at its deepest point, measured from the original surface, and does not exceed 200 square feet in area;

(b)    The fill does not exceed three (3′) feet in vertical height at its highest point, measured from the natural ground surface, and does not cover more than 200 square feet in area;

(c)    The clearing of vegetation does not exceed 1,000 square feet in area; or

(d)    The use of land is for gardening primarily for home consumption.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982, as amended by § 4, Ord. 624, eff. August 9, 1984)

 

Sec. 9-11.203. Grading permits: Applications.
        Applications for grading permits shall include:

(a)    A proposed work plan and supporting documentation.

(1)    A proposed site work plan, with a reasonable scale not to exceed a maximum scale of 500 feet to one (1″) inch, of the existing and finished contour intervals not greater than five (5′) feet shown for all the area to be cleared or prepared, plus a minimum of 100 feet in all directions beyond the area to be cleared or prepared;

(2)    A physical land condition report, including the soil series and type, designation of Soil Conservation Service Land Capability classification, and geologic features, such as landslides and any other critical area conditions, such as gullied areas, soil depth, erodibility, and capability for establishing vegetation;

(3)    An evaluation of the subsurface information where the stability will be lessened by the proposed grading or filling or where any of the following conditions are discovered or proposed:

(i)     The locations where a fill slope is to be placed above a cut slope;

(ii)    The proposed cuts exceeding ten (10′) feet in height, unless in competent rock as determined by an engineering geologist;

(iii)   The locations of proposed fills exceeding twenty (20′) feet in height;

(iv)   The side hill fills to be placed on existing slopes steeper than sixteen (16%) percent;

(v)    The groundwater from either the grading project or adjoining properties likely to reduce the stability;

(vi)   The zones of trapped water or high water table; or

(vii)  The areas where the topography is indicative of landslides, as determined by an engineering geologist; and

(4)    Where any of the particular conditions set forth in subsection (3) of this subsection is found, the subsurface investigations shall consist of drilling, excavations, or observations of naturally exposed soil and bedrock exposures at sufficient intervals and depths to indicate the type of material or condition to be encountered at the final grading. The person or firm making the investigation shall submit a written report of its findings and recommendations;

(b)    A grading plan containing the following information:

(1)    The elevations and dimensions, including the quantity, location, and extent of the proposed grading;

(2)    Cross-section views through the property to be graded demonstrating the relationship of the proposed cut and fill to the original surface; and

(3)    Provisions for stockpiling topsoil and using it to top-dress exposed areas to be revegetated or a statement that this provision is not applicable;

(c)    A tree and floral assessment containing the following information:

(1)    A description of the trees and vegetation to be affected by grading;

(2)    A description of the efforts to be undertaken to retain trees and vegetation within the proposed grading area; and

(3)    A description of the methods of disposal of selected trees and vegetation; and

(d)    Assessment of the site. The assessment of the site, based on the application for a grading permit, shall determine the need for an erosion and sediment control plan considering the detrimental effects of the construction of the site as it pertains to:

(1)    Erosion and loss of soil;

(2)    Slope stability;

(3)    Water quality; and

(4)    Plant communities.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982, as amended by § 5, Ord. 624, eff. August 9, 1984)

 

Article 3. Erosion and Sediment Control Plans
Sec. 9-11.301. Requirements.
        The erosion and sediment control plans shall be prepared by a person or firm qualified by training and experience to have expert knowledge of runoff, erosion, and sediment control treatments, including drainage and related land conservation techniques.

        The plans shall contain appropriate information according to this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.302. Vegetation.
        The erosion and sediment control plans shall include the following:

(a)    Native vegetation.

(1)    Descriptions of the native vegetation;

(2)    The location of native vegetation whose root zone will be affected by compaction, fills, trenches, and changes in the groundwater table;

(3)    A list of the vegetation to be removed and the criteria used to determine removal;

(4)    When the vegetation shall be removed; the method shall be one which will minimize the erosive effects from the removal;

(5)    Measures which will prevent conditions damaging to vegetation shall be specified;

(6)    In no event shall the native vegetation ground cover be destroyed, removed, or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to grading unless otherwise approved by the City. Exposure of soil to erosion by removing vegetation shall be limited to the area required for immediate construction operations; and

(7)    Native vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented wherever possible; and

(b)    Establishment of vegetation. Where the establishment of vegetation is required on slopes of cut and fill, graded areas, and watercourses, the following information shall be provided on the plan:

(1)    The location and area to be vegetated;

(2)    An indication of whether the vegetation is temporary or permanent;

(3)    The type and quantity of seeds or plants;

(4)    The ground conditions as follows:

(i)     The surface condition of the soil;

(ii)    The permeability;

(iii)   The slope angle, slope length, and aspect; and

(iv)   The nutrients in the soil;

(5)    The type and quantity of mulch;

(6)    The type and quantity of fertilizer;

(7)    The method and schedule of seeding, mulching, planting, and fertilizing; and

(8)    The method and schedule of irrigation.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.303. Drainageway protection and control measures.
        Where it is necessary to reduce the increased rate and volume of rainfall runoff due to the alteration of the runoff pattern, the following data shall be provided:

(a)    The runoff rate and volume to be expected from a ten (10) year twenty-four (24) hour frequency rainstorm for conditions existing before and after the proposed land disturbance;

(b)    The location of natural and man-made drainageways;

(c)    The size of the drainage areas above the cuts and slopes;

(d)    The methods to be used to reduce the erosion of drainageways;

(e)    The procedures used to trap sediment in order to protect drainage control facilities;

(f)    The methods used to prevent or control the rate and direction of runoff on roadways during and after land disturbances;

(g)    The methods used to control runoff across the slopes of cuts and fills and graded areas during and after land disturbances;

(h)    The schedule for the construction of drainage protection and control measures; and

(i)     The method and schedule for the construction of waterway crossings.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.304. Sediment detention measures.
        Information on the design criteria of sediment basins shall include the following:

(a)    The location and dimensions of the sediment basins;

(b)    The hydrologic and sediment transport data used to determine the proper capacity of the needed basin;

(c)    The construction schedule and procedure;

(d)    The source of borrow materials;

(e)    The type and manner of vegetating the erodible slopes; and

(f)    A maintenance schedule demonstrating firm and fixed periods for the removal of debris and sediment and repairs to structures. The schedule and the facility will be subject to annual review by the City Engineer for compliance.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.305. Control of runoff.
        The following shall apply to the control of runoff:

(a)    Provisions shall be made to control the increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after development so that there will be no increase in runoff and sediment over the pre-development condition.

(b)    To prevent excess runoff, the rate of surface water runoff shall be structurally retarded.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.306. Surface changes.
        An applicant requesting permission to make any surface change shall:

(a)    Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it at non-erosive velocities to the point of discharge into the common natural watercourse of the drainage area;

(b)    Handle existing and potential off-site runoff through the proposed development by designing the proposed development to adequately handle storm runoff from a fully developed area upstream;

(c)    Pay his proportionate share of the total cost of off-site drainage control improvements to the common natural watercourse based upon a fully developed drainage area (pursuant to Section 9-10.06 of Chapter 10 of this title);

(d)    Provide and install, at his expense, all drainage, erosion, and sediment control works (permanent and temporary);

(e)    Retain sediment being transported by runoff water on-site through the use of sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures; and

(f)    Dispose of accumulated sediment during dry seasons to maintain the basin capacity.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.307. Concentration of water runoff.
        The concentration of surface water runoff shall only be permitted in swales or watercourses.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.308. Prevention of polluting discharges.
        In order to prevent polluting discharges from occurring, approved erosion and sediment control devices shall be required for all grading and filling. Control devices and measures which may be required include, but shall not be limited to, the following:

(a)    Energy absorbing devices to reduce the velocity of runoff water;

(b)    Sedimentation controls, such as sediment debris basins and sediment traps. Any trapped sediment shall be removed to a disposal site approved by the City Engineer;

(c)    The dispersal of water runoff from developed areas over large undisturbed areas; and

(d)    Multiple discharge points to reduce the volume of runoff over localized areas.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.309. Slope design: Fill slopes.
        Where fill slopes are to be constructed, the following information shall be included:

(a)    The location of the fill area;

(b)    The slope and height of the fill;

(c)    The slope and condition of the original ground;

(d)    The number and dimensions of benches;

(e)    The source of fill material;

(f)    The ability of the fill to support vegetation;

(g)    The methods of protecting the slope surface of the fill;

(h)    The number and width of the drainage terraces to be installed;

(i)     Fills shall not encroach on natural watercourses or constructed channels; and

(j)     Fills placed against watercourses shall have suitable protection against erosion during flooding.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.310. Slope design: Cut slopes.
        Where slopes are to be formed from cuts, the following information shall be included:

(a)    The location of the cuts;

(b)    The slope and height of the cuts;

(c)    The identification of the cuts to be vegetated or not subject to erosion;

(d)    The number and width of the drainage terraces provided; and

(e)    The ability of the ground to support vegetation.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.311. Slope construction.
        The following shall apply to slope construction:

(a)    Slopes, both cut and fill, shall not be steeper than two (2) to one (2:1), unless a thorough geological and engineering analysis indicates that steeper slopes are safe and erosion control measures are specified.

(b)    Slopes shall not be constructed so as to endanger or disturb adjoining property.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.312. Slope surface stabilization.
        The following shall apply to slope surface stabilization:

(a)    Temporary mulching, seeding, or other suitable stabilization measures shall be used to protect exposed critical areas during construction or other land disturbances.

(b)    Earth or paved interceptors and diversions shall be installed at the top of cut or fill slopes where there is a potential for surface runoff.

(c)    Excavated materials shall not be deposited or stored in or alongside rivers or watercourses where the materials can be washed away by high water or storm runoff.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.313. Disposal of excavated materials.
        Excavated materials removed during grading operations shall be disposed of as follows:

(a)    By stockpiling all or some of the topsoil on the site for use on areas to be revegetated;

(b)    By locating stockpiled soil so that, if erosion occurs, it would not become a source for off-site sediment damage;

(c)    By stockpiling soil far enough from streams or drainageways that surface runoff cannot carry sediment downstream;

(d)    By stockpiling materials from trenches and pits on the up-slope side of the excavation;

(e)    By promptly backfilling and compacting stockpiled soil into trenches and pits to reduce the risk of erosion;

(f)    By applying mulch or other protective coverings on stock-piled material which will be exposed through the winter season or which faces a high risk of intensive summer rains; or

(g)    By moving excavated materials not to be used at the site to a location approved by the City Manager.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.314. Disposal of cleared vegetation.
        Vegetation removed during clearing operations shall be disposed of as follows:

(a)    By clipping all of the cleared vegetation for use as mulch or compost on the site; or

(b)    By disposing of cleared vegetation by hauling it to an approved sanitary landfill or in a manner and at a location approved by the City Engineer.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Article 4. Administration
Sec. 9-11.401. Authority.
        All land preparation shall be conducted and soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be installed in compliance with this chapter and in accordance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan. Upon the completion of the work, the permit applicant shall notify the City, in writing, that such work was done in accordance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan.

        A final inspection will be scheduled by the City for the review and approval of the completed work. The permit applicant shall furnish a completed and approved as-built plan following the final inspection.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.402. Performance bonds.
        A performance bond in the amount of the estimated full cost of the approved erosion and sediment control measures shall be posted by the grading permit applicant with the City. The bond shall not be released until the erosion and sediment control measures have performed satisfactorily as determined by the City Engineer for a period of three (3) years.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.403. Fees.
        A schedule of fees for the City staff services related to this chapter shall be adopted by resolution of the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.404. Facilities and improvements: Maintenance and restoration.
        All soil erosion and sediment control measures installed according to the approved erosion control plan shall be adequately maintained by the grading permit applicant or his successor.

        Where installed facilities are damaged through natural circumstances, the damaged facilities shall be restored to a condition equal to or surpassing the original construction by the grading permit applicant and/or the then present owner of the facilities.

        Debris basins where installed in accordance with the approved plan shall be cleared of debris and sediment when required by the City Engineer.

        Remedial measures may be required by the City Engineer if, in his determination, they are necessary to protect the completed work or to prevent damages.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.405. Failure to comply.
        Upon notification by the City Engineer that the erosion control facilities installed according to an approved plan are in need of repair, restoration, or maintenance, the grading permit applicant and/or the then present owner of the facilities, within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the notice, shall comply with the directive of the City Engineer. Failure to comply with the corrective action indicated shall be considered to constitute cause for the City to initiate abatement proceedings in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 6 of Title 5 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

 

Sec. 9-11.406. Appeals.
        Any person aggrieved by the imposition of conditions on the erosion and sediment control plan may appeal within thirty (30) days to the Council. Upon the receipt of an appeal signed by the aggrieved person, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a public hearing within sixty (60) days. At the hearing the person aggrieved shall have the burden of establishing to the satisfaction of the Council that he is entitled to the modification or deletion of conditions.

        The Council may approve the proposed modified plan if the Council finds that the approval of the plan or the modification or deletion of conditions would not be materially detrimental to the public interests, safety, health, and welfare, and would not create a substantial risk of erosion, sedimentation, debris, or mudflow to persons or property, or interference with, impairment of the use of, or damage to any erosion control or flood control facility, storm water drainage, or water conservation facility, structure, or right-of-way in a watercourse, or substantially degrade water quality.

(§ 1, Ord. 601, eff. May 13, 1982)

Chapter 12 SEISMIC SAFETY
Article 1. General
Sec. 9-12.101. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to promote public safety and welfare by reducing the risk of death or injury that may result from the effects of earthquakes on existing unreinforced masonry bearing wall buildings. The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for structural seismic resistance established primarily to reduce the risk of life loss or injury. Compliance with these standards will not necessarily prevent loss of life or injury or prevent earthquake damage to rehabilitated buildings.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.102. Scope.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all existing buildings having at least one unreinforced masonry bearing wall. Except as provided herein, all other provisions of the Uniform Building Code shall apply.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.103. Exceptions.
        This chapter shall not apply to detached one- or two-family dwellings and detached apartment houses containing less than five (5) dwelling units and used solely for residential purposes, garages and sheds, this chapter does not require alteration of existing electrical, mechanical or fire safety systems.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.104. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be used in this chapter with such meanings. (Other terms defined in the Uniform Building Code and used herein shall be used with the meanings set forth in the Uniform Building Code):

        “Board of Appeals” shall mean the City Council. The Building Official shall serve as ex officio secretary but shall not be a member of the Board.

        “Building Official” shall mean the designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement of this Code.

        “Collar joint” shall mean the vertical space between adjacent wythes and may contain mortar.

        “Cross wall” shall mean a wall that meets the requirements of Section 9-12.603(c) of this chapter. A cross wall shall not mean a shear wall.

        “Cross wall shear capacity” shall mean the length of the cross wall times the allowable shear value, voLo.

        “Diaphragm edge” shall mean the intersection of the horizontal diaphragm and a shear wall.

        “Diaphragm shear capacity” shall mean the depth of the diaphragm times the allowable shear value, vuD.

        “Flexible diaphragm” shall mean a diaphragm of wood or other construction of similar flexibility.

        “Historical building” shall mean any building designated an historical landmark by an appropriate Federal, State or City jurisdiction.

        “Normal wall” shall mean a wall perpendicular to the direction of seismic forces.

        “Open front” shall mean an exterior wall plane without vertical elements in one or more stories which resist the required lateral forces.

        “Pointing” shall mean the partial reconstruction of the bed joints of a URM wall as defined in Uniform Building Code Standard No. 24-9.

        “Unreinforced masonry bearing wall” shall mean a URM wall which provides the vertical support for a floor or roof for which the total superimposed load is over one hundred pounds per linear foot of wall.

        “Unreinforced masonry (“URM”) wall” shall mean a masonry wall in which the area of reinforcing steel is less than twenty-five (25%) percent of that required by the Uniform Building Code for reinforced masonry.

        “Yield story drift” shall mean the lateral displacement of one level relative to the level above or below at which yield stress is first developed in a frame member.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.105. Symbols and notations.
        For purposes of this chapter, the applicable symbols and definitions in the Uniform Building Code shall also apply.

        A     =      Area of URM pier, square inches.

        Ab    =      Area of the bed joints above and below the test specimen for each in-place shear test.

        Cp    =      Numerical coefficient specified in Table 12-A of this chapter.

        D     =      In-plane width dimension of pier, inches or depth of diaphragm, feet.

        DCR =      Demand-capacity ratio specified in Subsection 9-12.604 of this chapter.

        Fp     =      Wall anchor tension force, pounds.

        Fwx   =      Force applied to a wall at level x, pounds.

        H     =      Least clear height of opening on either side of pier, inches.

        h/t    =      Height/thickness ratio of URM wall. Height h is measured between wall anchorage levels.

        L      =      Span of diaphragm between shear walls or span between shear wall and open front, feet.

        Lo     =      Length of cross wall, feet.

        Li     =      Effective span for an open front building specified in Section 9-12.604(d) of this chapter, feet.

        PD    =      Superimposed dead load at the top of the pier under consideration, pounds.

        PD + L        =      Actual dead plus live load in place at the time of testing, pounds.

        PW    =      Weight of wall, pounds.

        V     =      Total lateral seismic base shear.

        Va    =      VaA, the allowable shear in any URM pier, pounds.

        Va    =      VoLo

        Vr     =      0.5PD(D/H), the rocking shear of any URM wall or wall pier, pounds.

        Vwx    =       Total shear force resisted by a shear wall at the level under consideration, pounds.

        Vp    =      Shear force assigned to a pier on the basis of its relative shear rigidity, pounds.

        Vtest  =      Load in pounds at incipient cracking for each in-place shear test per Uniform Building Code Standard 24-7.

        Va    =      Allowable shear stress for unreinforced masonry, psi.

        Vc    =      Allowable shear value for a cross wall sheathed with any of the materials given in Tables 12-C or 12-D of this chapter, pounds per foot.

        Vt     =      Mortar shear strength as specified in Section 9-12.303(c)(iv) of this chapter.

        Vto    =      Mortar shear test values as specified in Section 9-12.303(c)(iv) of this chapter.

        Vu    =      Allowable shear value for a diaphragm sheathed with any of the materials given in Tables 12-C or 12-D of this chapter, pounds per foot.

        Wd   =      Total dead load tributary to a diaphragm, pounds.

        Wp   =      Wall dead load tributary to an anchor, pounds.

        Ww   =      Total dead load of an unreinforced masonry wall above the level under consideration or above an open front of a building, pounds.

        Wwx  =      Dead load of a URM wall assigned to Level × halfway above and below the level under consideration.

        Z      =      The seismic zone factor equivalent to 0.25.

 

Article 2. General Requirements
Sec. 9-12.201. General.
        Except as modified by this chapter, all buildings shall have a seismic resisting system conforming with Section 2303(b) of the Uniform Building Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.202. Alterations and repairs.
        Unless specifically provided for in this chapter, alterations and repairs required to meet the provisions of this chapter shall comply with all other applicable requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.203. Requirements for plans.
        The licensed structural engineer or architect responsible for the seismic analysis of the building shall determine and record the information required by this Section. The following construction information shall be included in the plans required by this chapter:

(a)    Accurately dimensioned floor and roof plans showing existing walls and the size and spacing of floor and roof framing members and sheathing materials. The plans shall indicate all existing and new cross walls and their materials of construction. The location of the cross walls and their openings shall be fully dimensioned or drawn to scale on the plans.

(b)    Accurately dimensioned walls elevations showing openings, thicknesses and heights, wall shear test locations, cracks or damaged portions if and where the joints require pointing. If the exterior face is veneer, the type of veneer, its thickness and its bonding and/or ties to the structural wall masonry shall also be reported.

(c)    The type of interior wall and ceiling surfaces.

(d)    The extent and type of existing wall anchorage to floors and roof when utilized in the design.

(e)    The extent and type of parapet corrections which were previously preformed, if any.

(f)    Repair details, if any, of cracked or damaged unreinforced masonry walls required to resist forces specified in this chapter.

(g)    All other plans, sections and details necessary to delineate required retrofit construction, including those items in Article 7 hereinafter.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Article 3. Material Requirements
Sec. 9-12.301. General.
        All materials permitted by this chapter, including their appropriate allowable design values and those existing configurations of materials specified herein, may be utilized to meet the requirements of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.302. Existing materials.
        All existing materials utilized as part of the required force resisting system shall be in sound condition or shall be removed and replaced with new material.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.303. Existing URM.
(a)    General. All URM walls utilized to carry vertical loads or seismic forces parallel and perpendicular to the wall plane shall be tested as specified in this section. All masonry that does not meet or exceed the minimums standards established by this chapter shall be removed and replaced by new materials or, alternatively, shall have its structural functions replaced by new materials and anchored to supporting elements.

(b)    Lay-up of multiple wythe URM walls. The facing and backing shall be bonded so that not less than ten (10%) percent of the exposed face area is composed of solid headers extending not less than four (4″) inches into the backing, the clear distance between adjacent full-length headers shall not exceed twenty-four (24″) inches vertically or horizontally. Where the backing consists of two (2) or more wythes, the headers shall extend not less than four (4″) inches into the most distant wythe or the backing wythes shall be bonded together with separate headers whose area and spacing conform to the foregoing. Wythes of walls not bonded as described above shall be considered as veneer. The veneer wythe shall not be included in the effective thickness used in calculating the height to thickness and the shear capacity of the wall.

(c)    Mortar.

(1)    Tests. The quality of mortar in all unreinforced brick and hollow clay tile masonry walls shall be determined by performing in-place shear tests in accordance with Uniform Building Code Standard 24-7. Alternative methods of testing shall be approved by the Building Official for other types of masonry wall construction.

(2)    Location of tests. The shear tests shall be taken at locations representative of the mortar conditions throughout the entire building, taking into account variations in workmanship at different building height levels, variations in weathering of the exterior surfaces and variations in the conditions of the interior surfaces due to deterioration caused by leaks and condensation of water and/or by the deleterious effects of other substances contained within the building. The exact test location shall be determined at the building site by the engineer in responsible charge of the structural design work. An accurate record of all such tests and their location in the building shall be recorded and these results shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval as part of the structural analysis.

(3)    Number of tests. The minimum number of tests per class shall be as follows:

(i)     At each of both the first and top stories, not less than two (2) per wall or line of wall elements providing a common line of resistance to lateral forces.

(ii)    At each of all other stories, not less than one per wall or line of wall elements providing a common line of resistance to lateral forces.

(iii)   In any case, not less than one per 1,500 square feet of all surface nor less than a total of eight (8).

(4)    Minimum quality mortar.

(i)     Mortar shear test values, Vto, in psi shall be obtained for each in-place shear test in accordance with the following equation:

Vto = (Vtest - PD+L)/Ab

(ii)    Individual URM walls with Vto consistently less than thirty (30) psi shall be entirely pointed prior to retesting.

(iii)   The mortar shear strength, Vt, shall be the value in psi that is exceeded by eighty percent (80%) of all of the mortar shear test values, Vto.

(iv)   Unreinforced masonry with mortar shear strength, Vt, less than thirty (30) psi shall be removed or pointed and retested.

(5)    Collar joints. The collar joints shall be inspected at the test locations during each in-place shear test and estimates of the percentage of the surfaces of adjacent wythes which are covered with mortar shall be reported along with the results of the in-place shear tests.

(6)    Pointing. All deteriorated mortar joints in URM walls shall be pointed according to Uniform Building Code Standard No. 24-9. Nothing shall prevent pointing with mortar of all the masonry wall joints before the tests are made.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.304. Existing wall anchors.
        Existing wall anchors utilized as all or part of the required tension anchors shall be tested in pullout according to Uniform Building Code Standard 24-8. The minimum number of anchors tested shall be four (4) per floor, with two (2) tests at walls with joists framing into the wall and two (2) tests at walls with joists parallel to the wall, but not less than ten (10%) percent of the total number of existing tension anchors at each level.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Article 4. Quality Control
Sec. 9-12.401. Pointing.
        All preparation and mortar pointing shall be done with special inspection; provided, however, that, at the discretion of the Building Official, incidental pointing may be performed without special inspection.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.402. New bolts.
        One-fourth (¼) of all new shear bolts and combined tension and shear bolts in URM walls shall be tested according to Uniform Building Code Standard 24-8; provided, however, that special inspection may be provided during installation in lieu of testing.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.403. New anchors.
        All installation of grouted or chemically set tension anchors shall be performed with special inspection.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Article 5. Allowable Design Values
Sec. 9-12.501. Allowable values.
(a)    Allowable values for existing materials are given in Table 12-C and for new materials in Table 12-D. The one-third (1/3) increase in allowable values is not allowed for values in these Tables.

(b)    Allowable values not specified in this chapter shall be as specified elsewhere in the Uniform Building Code. Allowable values not specified in this chapter for dead load plus seismic load may be increased thirty-three (33%) percent. Allowable value not specified in this chapter for existing building elements with a combination of dead load plus floor live load plus seismic load may be increased seventy (70%) percent.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.502. Masonry shear.
        The allowable URM shear stress, va, shall be determined from the following equation:

va = 0.1vt + 0.15PD/A.

        The mortar shear test value, vt, shall be determined in accordance with Article 3 hereinabove and shall not exceed 100 psi for the determination of va.

        The one-third (1/3) increase in allowable values of the Uniform Building Code is not allowed for va.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.503. Masonry compression.
        Where any increase in dead plus live compression stress occurs, the allowable compression stress in URM shall not exceed 100 psi. The one-third (1/3) increase in allowable stress of the Uniform Building Code is allowed.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.504. Masonry tension.
        URM shall be assumed as having no tensile capacity.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.505. Existing tension anchors.
        The allowable resistance values of the existing anchors shall be forty (40%) percent of the average of the tension tests of existing anchors having the same wall thickness and joist orientation. The one-third (1/3) increase in allowable stress of the Uniform Building Code shall not be allowed for existing tension anchors.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.506. Foundations.
        For existing foundations new total loads may be increased over existing loads by twenty-five (25%) percent for dead load only and increased fifty (50%) percent for dead load plus seismic loads. Higher values may be justified only in conjunction with a geotechnical investigation.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Article 6. Analysis and Design
Sec. 9-12.601. General.
        Except as modified herein, the analysis and design relating to the structural alteration of existing buildings shall be in accordance with the Uniform Building Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.602. Selection of procedure.
(a)    Buildings shall be analyzed by the general procedure of Section 9-12.603 of this chapter which is based on Chapter 23 of the Uniform Building Code or, when applicable, buildings may be analyzed by the special procedure of Section 9-12.604 of this chapter.

(b)    URM buildings constructed of hollow concrete or clay tile shall be analyzed by the general procedure of Section 9-12.603 of this chapter unless it can be shown by testing that all masonry units were manufactured in compliance with Uniform Building Code Standard 24-4 or 24-8, as applicable, for bearing type units and that the capacity of the wall in bearing and shear, based on net area in contact through the bed joints, is not less than that allowed for solid bricks, in which case the special procedure of Section 9-12.604 of this chapter may be used.

(c)    Buildings with a substantially completed concrete frame capable of supporting gravity dead and live loads and that utilize URM walls as non-bearing infill between frame members shall be analyzed by a procedure approved by the Building Official.

(d)    Qualified URM historical buildings may be analyzed by either the general or special procedure of this chapter except that, as a means to preserve original architectural elements and facilitate restoration, an historical building may be analyzed in compliance with the State Historical Building Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.603. General procedure.
(a)    Minimum design lateral forces. Buildings shall be analyzed to resist minimum lateral forces assumed to act non-currently in the direction of each of the main axes of the structure in accordance with the following:

V = 0.33ZW.

(b)    Lateral forces on elements of structures. Parts or portions of structures shall be analyzed and designed for lateral loads in accordance with Section 2312(g)2 of the Uniform Building Code. Exceptions:

(1)    URM walls for which height to thickness ratios do not exceed ratios set forth in Table 12-B of this chapter need not be analyzed for out-of-plane loading. URM walls which exceed the allowable h/t ratios of Table 12-B of this chapter shall be braced according to Section 9-12.704 of this chapter.

(2)    Parapets complying with Section 9-12.705 of this chapter need not be analyzed for out-of-plane loading.

(c)    Shear walls (in-plane loading). Shear walls shall comply with Section 9-12.605

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.604. Special procedure.
(a)    Limits for the application of this section. The special procedure of this section may be applied to buildings with the following characteristics:

(1)    Flexible diaphragms at all levels above the base of structure;

(2)    The vertical elements of the lateral force resisting system shall consist predominantly of masonry or concrete shear walls or steel braced frames or special moment resisting frames (See Section 2312 of the Uniform Building Code) each with a maximum overall height-to-length ratio of 1 ½ to 1;

(3)    The lateral forces resisting systems shall be regular as defined in the Uniform Building Code. Except for a single-story building with an open front, a minimum of two (2) lines of vertical lateral force-resisting elements shall be parallel to each axis of the building.

(b)    Lateral forces on elements of structures. With the exception of the diaphragm provisions in this section, elements of structures shall comply with Section 9-12.603(b) of this chapter.

(c)    Cross walls. Cross walls shall meet the requirements of this subsection:

(1)    Cross wall definition. A cross wall shall mean a wood-framed wall sheathed with any of the materials described in Tables 12-C or 12-D of this chapter. Spacing of cross walls shall not exceed forty (40′) feet on center measured perpendicular to the direction of consideration and shall be placed in each story of the building. Cross walls shall extend the full story height between diaphragms.

(2)    Cross wall shear capacity. Within any forty (40′) feet measured along the span of the diaphragm, the sum of the cross wall shear capacities shall be at least thirty (30%) percent of the diaphragm shear capacity of the strongest diaphragm at or above the level under consideration.

(3)    Existing cross walls. Existing cross walls shall have a length to height ratio between openings of not less than 1:5. Existing cross wall connections to diaphragms need not be investigated as long as the cross wall extends to the framing of the diaphragm above and below.

(4)    New cross walls. New cross wall connections to the diaphragm shall develop the cross wall shear capacity. New cross walls shall have the capacity to resist an overturning moment equal to the cross wall shear capacity times the story height. Cross wall overturning moments need not be cumulative over more than two (2) stories.

(5)    Other cross wall systems. Other systems such as special moment resisting frames may be used as cross walls provided that the yield story drift does not exceed one (1″) inch in any story.

(d)    Wood diaphragms.

(1)    Required analysis. An analysis of the diaphragm’s capacity to control relative displacements between the shear walls need not be considered. Buildings that have an open front shall be analyzed for the relative displacement of the structure above the open front. The relative displacement may be considered to be adequately reduced by the installation of a shear wall at or closely adjacent to the open front in the level of the open front.

(2)    Demand/capacity ratios. A building with an open front on one side may have cross walls parallel to the open front and shall be designed by the following procedure:

(i)     Effective diaphragm span, Li, for use in Figure No. 12-1 shall be determined in accordance with the following formula:

Li; = 2[(Ww/Wd) × L + L].

(ii)    Diaphragm demand/capacity ratio shall be calculated as:

DCR = 0.83Z(Wd + Ww)/vu × D.

(iii)   If cross walls are used, the demand/capacity ratio shall be calculated as:

DCR = 0.83Z(Wd + Ww)/[(vu × D) + ΣVc].

(3)    Chords. An analysis for diaphragm flexure need not be made and chords need not be provided.

(4)    Collectors. An analysis of diaphragm collector forces shall be made for the transfer of diaphragm edge shears into vertical elements of the lateral force resisting system. Collector forces may be resisted by new or existing elements.

(5)    Diaphragm openings.

(i)     Diaphragm forces at corners of openings shall be investigated and shall be developed into the diaphragm by new or existing materials.

(ii)    Openings in the diaphragm of a maximum of one-half (½) of the diaphragm span in the middle half of the diaphragm span or one-quarter (¼) of the diaphragm depth in the end one-quarter (¼) of the diaphragm span need not be considered a discontinuity.

(iii)   Roof or floor diaphragms that are discontinuous shall be modified to provide a continuous load path from every part or portion of the building to the ground. A continuous load path for a discontinuous diaphragm may be provided by infilling the openings with any new materials that are equal to the existing diaphragm materials.

(iv)   Shear walls or cross walls may be provided at the discontinuous edge or the diaphragm. If cross walls are provided, the analysis procedures for open front buildings shall be used.

(6)    Diaphragm shear transfer. Diaphragms shall be connected to shear walls with connections capable of developing a minimum force calculated by the lesser of the following formulae:

(i)     V =.5Z Cp Wd using Cp values of Table 12-A; or

(ii)    V = v4D

(e)    In-plane loading—URM walls.

(1)    Wall story force. For buildings without cross walls, the wall story force distributed to a shear wall at a diaphragm level shall be the lesser value calculated as:

Fwx = 0.32Z(Wwx+Wd/2)

but need not exceed

Fwx = 0.32Z(Wwx + vuD

(2)    Wall story shear. The wall story shear shall be the sum of the wall story forces at and above the level of consideration.

Vwx = ΣFwx

(3)    Shear wall analysis. Shear walls shall comply with Section 9-12.605 of this chapter.

(4)    Moment frames. Moment frames used in place of shear walls shall be designed as required in Chapter 23 of the Uniform Building Code except that the forces shall be as specified in subsection (e)(1) of this section and the interstory drift ratio shall be limited to 0.005.

(f)    Out-of-plane loading—URM walls.

(1)    Allowable URM wall height-to-thickness ratios. The allowable h/t ratios given in Table 12-B of this chapter shall be used. URM walls which exceed the allowable h/t ratios of Table 12-B of this chapter shall be braced according to Section 9-12.704 of this chapter.

(2)    Parapets. Parapets complying with Section 9-12.705 of this chapter need not be analyzed for out-of-plane loading.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.605. Analysis of vertical elements of the lateral force-resisting system.
        The following shall be applicable to both general procedure and special procedure buildings:

(a)    Required analysis. Buildings that have an open front shall be analyzed for the in-plane shear strength of the URM shear wall(s) parallel to the open front.

(b)    Existing URM walls.

(1)    Flexural rigidity. Flexural rigidity may be neglected in determining the rigidity of a URM wall.

(2)    Shear walls with openings. For any pier, wall piers shall be analyzed according to the following procedure:

(i)     The pier shear capacity shall be calculated as:

Va = vaDt.

(ii)    The pier rocking shear capacity shall be calculated as:

Vr = 0.5PDD/H.

(iii)   The wall piers at any level are acceptable if they comply with one of the following modes of behavior:

(aa)  Rocking mode. Where all piers at a level have shear capacities capable of sustaining rocking, i.e., the pier shear capacity is greater than or equal to the pier rocking shear capacity for each pier, forces in the wall at that level, Vwx, shall be distributed to each pier, Vp, in proportion to PDD/H.

        For each pier at that level:

Va ≥ Vr

        and for the wall at that level:

Vwx ≤ ΣVr.

(ab)  Non-rocking mode. Where at least one pier at a level is incapable of sustaining a rocking mode, i.e., the pier shear capacity is less than the pier rocking shear capacity, forces in the wall at that level, Vwx, shall be distributed to each pier, Vp, in proportion to D/H, such that Vwx = ΣVp.

        For at least one pier at that level:

Va < Vr.

        For each pier at that level:

Vp ≤ Va and

Vp V≤r.

        If Vp > Vr in one or more piers, omit such piers from the analysis and repeat the procedure for the remaining piers or strengthen and re-analyze the wall.

(ac)  Masonry pier tension stress. URM wall piers need not be analyzed for tension stress.

(3)    Shear walls without openings. Shear walls without openings shall be analyzed as for walls with openings except that Vr shall be calculated as follows:

Vr = (0.50PD = 0.25Pw)D/H.

(c)    Plywood sheathed shear walls. Plywood sheathed shear walls may be used to resist lateral loads for buildings with flexible diaphragms analyzed according to provisions of Section 9-12.603 of this chapter. Plywood sheathed shear walls may not be used to share lateral loads with other materials along the same line of resistance.

(d)    Combinations of vertical elements.

(1)    Lateral force distribution. Lateral forces shall be distributed among the vertical resisting elements in proportion to their relative rigidities except that moment frames shall comply with subsection (d)(2) of this section.

(2)    Moment resisting frames. A moment resisting frame shall not be used with a URM wall in a single line of resistance unless the wall(s) have piers that are capable of sustaining rocking in accordance with subsection (b) of this section and the frames are designed to carry 100 percent of the lateral forces.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Article 7. Detailed System Design Requirements
Sec. 9-12.701. Wall anchorage.
(a)    Anchor locations. All URM walls shall be anchored at the roof and floor levels as required in subsection 9-12.603(b) of this chapter. Ceilings with substantial rigidity and abutting masonry walls shall be connected to walls with tension bolts at a maximum anchor spacing of six (6′) feet. Ceiling systems with substantial mass shall be braced at the perimeter to diaphragms.

(b)    Anchor requirements. Anchors shall be tension bolts through the wall as specified in Table 12-D of this chapter or by an equivalent approved by the Building Official at a maximum anchor spacing of six (6′) feet. All existing wall anchors shall be secured to the joists to develop the required forces.

(c)    Minimum wall anchorage. Anchorage of masonry walls to each floor or roof shall resist a minimum force determined by:

Fp = ZCpWp.

or 200 pounds per linear foot, whichever is greater, acting normal to the wall at the level of the floor or roof. Existing floor wall anchors must meet or must be upgraded to meet the requirements of this chapter if utilized in the design. Existing roof anchors shall not be utilized in the design.

(d)    Anchors at corners. At the roof and all floor levels, both shear and tension anchors shall be provided within two (2′) feet horizontally from the inside of the corners of the walls.

(e)    Anchors with limited access. When access to the exterior face of the masonry wall is prevented by proximity of an existing building, wall anchors conforming to Item 5b in Table 12-D of this chapter may be used.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.702. Collectors.
        Collector elements shall be provided which are capable of transferring the seismic forces originating in other portions of the building to the element providing the resistance to those forces.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.703. Ties and continuity.
        Ties and continuity shall conform to Section 2312(h)2E of the Uniform Building Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.704. Wall bracing.
(a)    General. Where a wall height-thickness ratio exceeds the specified limits, the wall may be laterally supported by vertical bracing members in accordance with the provisions of subsection (b) of this section or by reducing the wall height by bracing in accordance with the provisions of subsection (c) of this section.

(b)    Vertical bracing members. Vertical bracing members shall be attached to floor and roof construction for their design loads independently of required wall anchors. Horizontal spacing of vertical bracing members shall not exceed one-half (½) the unsupported height of the wall nor ten (10′) feet. Deflection of such bracing members at design loads shall not exceed one-tenth (1/10) of the wall thickness.

(c)    Wall height bracing. The wall height may be reduced by bracing elements connected to the floor or roof. Horizontal spacing of the bracing elements and wall anchors shall be as required by design but shall not exceed six (6′) feet on center. Bracing elements shall be detailed to minimize the horizontal displacement of the wall by the vertical displacement of the floor or roof.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.705. Parapets.
        Parapets and exterior wall appendages not conforming to this chapter shall be removed or stabilized or braced to ensure that the parapets and appendages remain in their original position.

        The maximum height of an unbraced URM parapet above the lower of either the level of tension anchors or roof sheathing shall not exceed two (2) times the thickness of the parapet wall. If the required parapet height exceeds this maximum height, a bracing system designed for the force factors specified in Table 23-P of the Uniform Building Code for walls shall support the top of the parapet. Parapet corrective work must be performed in conjunction with the installation of tension roof anchors.

        The minimum height of a parapet above the wall anchor shall be twelve (12″) inches; provided, however, that, if a reinforced concrete beam is provided at the top of the wall, the minimum height above the wall anchor may be six (6″) inches.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.706. Veneer.
(a)    URM walls which carry no design load other than their own weight may be considered as veneer if they are adequately anchored to new supporting elements.

(b)    Veneer shall be anchored with approved anchor ties conforming to the required design capacity specified in the Uniform Building Code and placed at a maximum spacing of twenty-four (24″) inches with a maximum supported area of two (2) square feet; provided, however, that existing veneer anchor ties may be acceptable provided the ties are in good condition and conform to the following minimum size, maximum spacing and material requirements:

(1)    Existing veneer anchor ties shall be corrugated galvanized iron strips not less than one (1″) inch in width, eight (8″) inches in length and one-sixteenth (1/16) of an inch in thickness or equal and shall be located and laid in every alternate course in the vertical height of the wall at a spacing not to exceed seventeen (17″) inches on centers horizontally.

(2)    As an alternate, such ties may be laid in every fourth course vertically at a spacing not to exceed nine (9″) inches on centers horizontally.

(c)    The location and condition of existing veneer anchor ties shall be verified as follows:

(1)    An approved testing laboratory shall verify the location and spacing of the ties and shall submit a report to the Building Official for appeal as a part of the structural analysis.

(2)    The veneer in a selected area shall be removed to expose a representative sample of ties (not less than four (4)) for inspection by the Building Official.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.707. Truss and beam supports.
        Where trusses and beams other than rafters or joists are supported on masonry, independent secondary columns shall be installed to support vertical loads of the roof or floor members. The loads shall be transmitted down to adequate support.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Article 8. Administrative Provisions
Sec. 9-12.801. Compliance requirements.
(a)    The owner of each building within the scope of this chapter shall, upon service of an order and within the time limits set forth in this chapter, cause a structural analysis to be made of the building by an engineer or architect licensed by the State to practice as such and, if the building does not comply with earthquake standards specified in this chapter, the owner shall cause it to be structurally altered to conform to such standards or shall cause the building to be demolished.

(b)    The owner of a building within the scope of this chapter shall comply with the requirements set forth above by submitting to the Building Official for review within the stated time limits:

(1)    Within 270 days after service of the order, a structural analysis which is subject to approval by the Building Official and which shall demonstrate that the building meets the minimum requirements of this chapter; or

(2)    Within 365 days after service of the order, the structural analysis and plans for structural alterations of the building to comply with this chapter; or

(3)    Within 365 days after service of the order, obtain a permit and commence and complete the required demolition; provided, however, that no historical building shall be demolished except in accordance with Chapter 8 of Title 4 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(c)    Within 180 days after plans are submitted to the Building Official, make all corrections to such plans required by the Building Official and obtain his approval thereto.

(d)    After plans are submitted and approved by the Building Official, the owner shall obtain a building permit and commence construction within two (2) years from the date of such approval and shall complete the required construction within three (3) years from such approval.

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991)

 

Sec. 9-12.802. Administration.
(a)    Order: Service. The Building Official shall issue an order as provided in this section to the owner of each building within the scope of this chapter. Orders will be issued within thirty (30) days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and thereafter as necessary.

(b)    Order: Contents. The order shall be in writing and shall be served personally or by certified or registered mail upon the owner as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and upon the person, if any, in apparent charge or control of the building. The order shall specify that the building has been determined by the Building Official to be within the scope of this chapter and, therefore, is required to meet the minimum seismic standards of this chapter. The order shall be accompanied by a copy of Section 9-12.801 of this chapter which sets forth the owner’s alternatives and time limits for compliance.

(c)    Order: Appeal from. The owner of the building or other aggrieved person may appeal the Building Official’s initial determination that the building is within the scope of this chapter to the Board of Appeals. Such appeal shall be filed with the Board of Appeals within sixty (60) days from the service date of the order described in this section. Any such appeal shall be decided by the Board of Appeals no later than ninety (90) days after written notice of such appeal has been filed with the City Clerk and the grounds therefor shall be stated clearly and concisely. Except as otherwise provided herein, or as provided in Sections 105 and 106 of the Uniform Building Code, appeals or requests for modifications from any other determination, order or action by the Building Official pursuant to this chapter shall be controlled by the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 1 of this Code.

(d)    Recordation. At the time that the Building Official serves the aforementioned order, the Building Official shall also record in the office of the County Recorder of Ventura County a certificate stating that the subject building is within the scope of this chapter and is a potentially earthquake hazardous building. The certificate shall also state that the owner thereof has been ordered to structurally analyze the building and to structurally alter or demolish it where compliance with this chapter has not been demonstrated.

        If the building is either demolished, found not to be within the scope of this chapter or is structurally capable of resisting minimum seismic forces required by this chapter as a result of structural alterations or an analysis, the Building Official shall record in the office of the County Recorder of Ventura County a form terminating the status of the subject building as being classified within the scope of this chapter.

(e)    Order: Enforcement. If the owner in charge or control of the subject building fails to comply with any order issued by the Building Official pursuant to this chapter within any of the time limits set forth in Section 9-12.801 of this chapter, the Building Official shall verify that the record owner of the building has been properly served. If the order has been served on the record owner, the Building Official shall order that the entire building be vacated and that the building remain vacated until compliance with such order. If compliance with such order has not been accomplished within ninety (90) days after the date the building has been ordered vacated or such additional time as may have been granted by the Board of Appeals, the Building Official may order its demolition in accordance with the provisions of Section 203 of the Uniform Building Code.

 

TABLE NO. 12-A

HORIZONTAL FORCE FACTOR

 

CONFIGURATION OF MATERIALS

Cp

Roofs with straight or diagonal sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing or floors with straight tongue and groove sheathing

0.6

Diaphragm with double or multiple layers of boards with edges offset and blocked plywood systems

0.83

Wall anchors

.80

 

TABLE NO. 12-B

ALLOWABLE VALUE OF HEIGHT-THICKNESS (H/T) RATIO OF

UNREINFORCED MASONRY WALLS

 

WALL TYPES

H/T

Walls of one-story buildings

21

First-story wall of multi-story building

30

Walls in top story of multi-story buildings

14

All other walls

22

 

TABLE NO. 12-C

ALLOWABLE VALUES FOR EXISTING MATERIALS

 

EXISTING MATERIALS OR CONFIGURATIONS OF MATERIALS1

ALLOWABLE VALUES4

1. Horizontal diaphragms 4

 

a. Roofs with straight sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing

100 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

b. Roofs with diagonal sheathing and roofing applied directly to the sheathing

250 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

c. Floors with straight sheathing and finished wood flooring with board edges offset or perpendicular

100 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

d. Floors with straight sheathing and finished wood flooring with board edges offset or perpendicular

500 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

e. Floors with diagonal sheathing and finished wood flooring

600 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

2. Crosswalls 2, 4

 

a. Plaster with wood or metal lath Per side:

200 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

b. Plaster on gypsum lath

175 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

c. Gypsum wall board, unblocked edges

75 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

d. Gypsum wall board, blocked edges

125 lbs. per foot for seismic shear

3. Existing footings, wood framing, structural steel and reinforced steel

 

a. Plan concrete footings

f′c = 1,500 psi unless otherwise shown by tests

b. Douglas fir wood

Allowable stress same as No. 1 D.F.3

c. Reinforcing steel

ft = 18,000 lbs. per square inch maximum3

d. Structural steel

ft = 20,000 lbs. per square inch maximum3

1        Material must be sound and in good condition.

2        Shear values of these materials may be combined except the total combined value shall not exceed 300 lbs. per foot.

3        Stresses given may be increased for combinations of loads as specified in the Uniform Building Code.

4        A one-third increase in allowable stress is not allowed.

 

TABLE NO. 12-D4

ALLOWABLE VALUES OF NEW MATERIALS USED IN CONJUNCTION

WITH EXISTING CONSTRUCTION

 

NEW MATERIALS OR CONFIGURATIONS OF MATERIALS

ALLOWABLE VALUES4

1. Horizontal diaphragms 4

 

Plywood sheathing applied directly over existing straight sheathing with ends of plywood sheets bearing on joists or rafters and edges of plywood located on center of individual sheathing boards

225 lbs. per foot

2. Crosswalls

 

a. Plywood sheathing applied directly over wood studs. No value shall be given to plywood applied over existing plaster or wood sheathing

1.33 times the value specified in Table No. 25-K-1 of the Uniform Building Code for shear walls

b. Drywall of plaster applied directly over wood studs

100 percent of the values in Table No. 47-I of the Uniform Building Code

c. Drywall or plaster applied to sheathing over existing wood studs

50 percent of the values plywood specified in Table No. 46-I of the Uniform Building Code

3. Tension bolts5

 

Bolts extending entirely through solid or hollow unreinforced masonry walls secured with bearing plates on far side of a three wythe minimum wall with at least 30 square inches of area. 2,3

1,800 lbs. per bolt for a minimum 13″-thick solid wall

 

900 lbs. per bolt for 9″-thick solid wall

 

600 lbs. for a minimum 6″-thick hollow wall

4. Shear bolts5

 

Bolts embedded a minimum of eight inches into unreinforced masonry walls. Bolts shall be centered in 2 ½ inch diameter hole with the dry-pack or non-shrink grout round circumference of bolt 1,2,3

133 percent of the values for plain masonry specified for solid masonry in Table No. 24- E of the Uniform Building Code. No values larger than those given for 3/4 inch bolts shall be used

5. Combined tension and shear bolts5,6

 

a. Through bolts—combined shear and tension

 

Bolts meeting the above requirements for tension bolts and shear bolts1,2,3

Tension: Same as for tension bolts. Shear: Same as for shear bolts

b. Embedded bolts—Combined shear and tension

 

Bolts extending to the exterior face of the wall with a 2 ½ inch round plate under the head and drilled at an angle of 22 ½ degrees to the horizontal. Installed as specified for shear bolts. Allowed for use with solid walls only1,2,3

Tension: 1,200 lbs. for a minimum 13″-thick wall. 900 lbs. for 9″-thick wall. Shear: Same as for shear bolts

6. Infilled walls

 

Reinforced masonry infilled openings in existing unreinforced masonry walls. Provide keys or dowels to match reinforcing

Same as values specified for uneinforced masonry walls

Reinforced masonry

 

7. Masonry piers and walls reinforced per Chapter 24

Same as values specified in Section 2409

Reinforced concrete

 

8. Concrete footings, walls and piers reinforced as specified in Chapter 26 of the Uniform Building Code and designed for tributary loads

Same as values specified in Chapter 26 of the Uniform Building Code

1        Bolts to be tested as specified in Article 4 of this chapter.

2        Bolts to be ½-inch minimum in diameter.

3        Drilling for bolts and dowels shall be done with an electric rotary drill. Impact tools shall not be used for drilling holes or tightening anchors and shear bolt nuts.

4        A one-third increase in allowable stress is not allowed.

5        Proprietary anchors, for concealed anchorage and anchorage of hollow masonry units, may be used with prior arrival by the Building Official.

6        Limited to use on solid walls only.

 



 

(§ 1, Ord. 678, eff. July 12, 1991, as amended by § 12, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

Chapter 13 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 9-13.101. Purpose and goals.
        The Ventura County Transportation Commission (VCTC) is responsible for the preparation of the Congestion Management Plan (CMP) for Ventura County. Among the State-mandated elements of the CMP is a Trip Reduction and Travel Demand Management Element that promotes alternative transportation methods, such as carpools, vanpools, transit, bicycles, walking and park-and-ride lots, improvement in the balance between jobs and housing, and other strategies, including flexible work hours, telecommuting and parking management programs. The goals and policies of the CMP also support the increased use of low and no emission vehicles. The VCTC must also determine annually whether the County and cities within the County are conforming to the CMP, including the requirement to adopt and implement a Travel Demand Management Ordinance (TDM Ordinance) to improve both congestion and air quality.

        This chapter is intended to promote trip reduction and travel demand measures in the City and meet the Travel Demand Management Facilities Ordinance adoption requirement as set out in the Ventura County Congestion Management Program. The requirements of Ventura County Air Pollution Control District (District) Rule 210 are separate from this chapter, and administrated by the District. This chapter sets forth the minimum requirements for meeting the CMP. Employers are encouraged to offer or provide additional inducements to use alternatives to single-occupant vehicles to their employees necessary to meet Rule 210 requirements.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.102. Definitions.
        The following words or phrases shall have the following meanings when used in this chapter:

        “Alternative transportation” means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.

        “Applicable development” means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Article 2 of this chapter.

        “Buspool” means a vehicle with more than sixteen (16) seating positions used and maintained primarily for carrying commuters to and from work.

        The “California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA),” a statute that requires all jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development.

        “Carpool” means a vehicle occupied by two (2) or more persons aged sixteen (16) years or older commuting to or from work and/or school.

        “Developer” shall mean the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner.

        “Development” means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter and which exceed the thresholds defined in Article 2 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.

        “Employee parking area” means the portion of total required parking at a development used by onsite employees. For information purposes, based upon information developed by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), broad employee parking needs could be calculated as follows:

 

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

Commercial

30%

Office/professional

85%

Industrial/manufacturing

95%

 

        “Neighborhood work center” means a location in a community where facilities are provided either by public or private means for shared employee work activities.

        “Preferential parking” means parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings, for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles.

        “Property owner” means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent.

        “Public transit” means transit services provided by public agencies for the general public on a regular basis by vehicles, such as buses or trains, usually on a fare-paying basis.

        “Tenant” means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project.

        “Transportation Demand Management (TDM)” means the alteration of travel behavior, usually on the part of commuters, through programs of incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (for example telecommuting or compressed work weeks).

        “Trip reduction” means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single occupant vehicles.

        “Vanpool” means a group of at least seven commuters traveling to work in a vehicle designed for carrying more than six (6) but less than sixteen (16) persons, including the driver, which is maintained and used primarily for work-related transportation of adults for the purpose of ridesharing.

        “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power, used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or buses used for public or private transit. Examples include, but are not limited to passenger cars, motorcycles, vans, recreational vehicles and pickup trucks.

        “Ventura County Air Pollution Control District” (APCD) is the authority created by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the Ventura County portion of the South Central Coast Air Basin.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Article 2. Transportation demand and trip reduction measures
Sec. 9-13.201. Applicability of requirements.
        Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provision for, as a minimum, all the applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures set forth in Sections 9-13.203 and 9-13.204.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.202. Exemption from requirements.
        This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed “complete” by the City pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a Notice of Preparation for a Draft Environmental Impact Report (DEIR) has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.203. Non-residential development standards.
(a)    Non-residential development serving fifty (50) employees or more shall provide, to the satisfaction of the City, a bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

(1)    Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;

(2)    Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

(3)    Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency, Dial-A-Route, and local transit operators;

(4)    Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information:

(5)    A listing of facilities and services available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.

(b)    Non-residential development serving 100 employees or more shall comply with subsection (a) of this section and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the City:

(1)    Not less than ten (10%) percent of employee parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for building permit, to the satisfaction of City. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided, that at all times at least one space for projects of 50,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet and two (2) spaces for projects over 100,000 square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.

(2)    Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven (7′) feet two (2″) inches shall be provided for those spaces and access ways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions (minimum nine (9′) feet by nineteen (19′) feet) shall also be included in vanpool parking areas.

(3)    Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided near building entrances to accommodate four (4) bicycles per the first 50,000 square feet of non-residential development and one bicycle per each additional 50,000 square feet of non-residential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle, which protects the bike from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers, or locked room) shall be to the satisfaction of the City.

(4)    Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities onsite.

(c)    Non-residential development serving 150 employees or more shall comply with subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and shall provide all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the City:

(1)    A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers. Passenger loading areas should be located as close as possible to the building entrance and should be designated in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation in the parking area.

(2)    Sidewalks or other designated pathways following, to the greatest extent feasible, direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each, and between each, building in the development.

(3)    If determined necessary by the City to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The City will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements (i.e., bus pullouts, bus pads, shelters, etc.). When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances should be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops.

(4)    Development design shall incorporate, to the extent feasible, showers, changing rooms, lockers, etc. for employees who bicycle, job or walk to work.

(5)    Development design shall incorporate lunchrooms, cafeterias, eating establishments and other facilities which will reduce the need for mid-day driving.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.204. Residential development standards.
(a)    Residential development of 100 dwelling units or more shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the City:

(1)    Safe, convenient and direct pedestrian and bicycle access from the internal circulation system to adjacent collector and/or arterial roadways;

(2)    If determined necessary by the City, bus stop improvements must be provided. The City will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements.

(b)    Residential development of 500 dwellings units or more shall comply with subsection (a) of this section, and shall provide, to the satisfaction of the City, a development design which, to the greatest extent possible and as appropriate based on adjacent land use and markets, incorporates services such as dry cleaners, eating establishments, child care facilities, grocery markets, neighborhood work centers and other facilities, which development design will reduce home-based vehicle trips and vehicle miles traveled.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.205. Maintenance of facilities and improvements.
        All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required by this chapter shall be maintained in a state of good repair.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Article 3. Review of Transit Impacts
Sec. 9-13.301. Review prior to issuance of EIR.
        Prior to approval of any development project for which an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted with to provide input.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.302. Exemption from Section 9-13.301.
        Projects for which a Notice of Preparation (NOP) for a Draft EIR has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date shall be exempted from its provisions.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.303. Notice of preparation of draft EIR to transit operators.
        Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA and as required thereby, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be sent a NOP for all contemplated EIRS and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operators referred to above shall be evaluated in the Draft Environmental Impact Report prepared for the project.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.304. Monitoring of mitigation measures.
        Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.305. Exceptions from review.
        Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefore covered by a previously certified EIR.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Article 4. Administrative Provisions
Sec. 9-13.401. Monitoring.
        Compliance with the requirements of this chapter shall be monitored by the building inspector. No certificate of occupancy or business license shall be issued in connection with a development unless the provisions of this chapter have been fulfilled. Any certificate of occupancy or business license if issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

 

Sec. 9-13.402. Penalties.
        Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor at the discretion of City authorities as provided in Title 1, Chapter 2, Section 1-2.03 of this Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided therein. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable as provided in this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 702, eff. December 24, 1993)

Chapter 14 TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION FEES FOR MAINTENANCE AND IMPROVEMENT OF CITY STREETS
Sec. 9-14.01. Intent.
(a)    The City Council of the City of Ojai finds that future development or redevelopment of property within the City will result in traffic volumes that exceed the capacity, at acceptable levels of service, of the existing City-wide circulation system.

(b)    The City Council of the City of Ojai has determined that the failure to expand the capacity of the existing circulation system will cause unacceptable levels of service and congestion on streets and intersections, traffic accidents, air pollution, noise and restrictions on access for emergency vehicles.

(c)    The City Council also finds and declares that, in the absence of this chapter imposing a fair share traffic fee upon new development and redevelopment, existing and future sources of revenue are inadequate to fund a substantial portion of the circulation system improvements necessary to avoid unacceptable levels of service and congestion and related adverse impacts.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 9-14.02. Purpose.
(a)    The City Council of the City of Ojai finds and determines that the adoption of this chapter will raise additional revenues for construction of necessary circulation system improvements to accommodate traffic that will be generated by development and redevelopment of land within the City consistent with the General Plan.

(b)    The City Council finds and declares that this chapter contains a fair and equitable method of determining the extent to which the development or redevelopment of land will generate traffic volumes impacting the roadway system and establishes a fair and equitable method for distribution of unfunded costs of circulation system improvements necessary to accommodate the traffic volumes generated by such development. The City Council further finds and declares that a fair and equitable cost distribution may take into account the complex interrelationships between different land uses, traffic impacts, the relative benefit of particular improvements to different land uses, the General Plan, local and regional social, economic and commercial needs, and the distribution of the payment of mitigation fees.

(c)    The City Council finds and declares that this chapter and the actions taken pursuant to its terms are necessary to assure that development and redevelopment take place in a manner consistent with the General Plan, and that this chapter is necessary to assist in implementing the circulation, land use and other elements of the General Plan.

(d)    The City Council finds and declares that this chapter and the actions taken pursuant to its terms are necessary to provide a fair and equitable method of mitigating the significant cumulative environmental impacts of traffic generated by development and redevelopment within the City. The City Council further finds that all projects subject to this chapter may cause potentially significant cumulative traffic impacts which can be feasibly mitigated through the imposition of traffic mitigation fees. This chapter shall not preclude the imposition of additional mitigation measures to address significant direct impacts of any development or redevelopment, or to address otherwise unfunded roadway improvements, nor shall this chapter preclude adoption of statements of overriding considerations, in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act where desirable and appropriate.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 9-14.03. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them below.

(a)    Acceptable LOS. The term “acceptable LOS” means, with respect to any given road segment or intersection within the City, the applicable “minimum acceptable Level of Service (LOS)” specified in Policy CIR-1 of the Circulation Element Policies of the General Plan.

(b)    ADT. “ADT” or “average daily trips” means the total number of motor vehicle trips that will occur over the roads on the average work day.

(c)    City road system. The term “City road system” means all public roads maintained by the City and all portions of the State highway system lying within the City.

(d)    Community Development Director. The term “Community Development Director” means the City’s Community Development Director or his or her designee.

(e)    County. The term “County” means the County of Ventura, California.

(f)    Diverted linked trips. The term “diverted linked trips” has the meaning assigned to that term by the ITE Trip General Manual.

(g)    Estimated ADT. The term “estimated ADT,” when used with reference to a particular development, means the ADT that, according to estimates made in accordance with Section 9-14.05, will be generated by that development.

(h)    General Plan. The term “General Plan” means the City’s General Plan as amended from time to time.

(i)     ITE Trip Generation Manual. The term “ITE Trip Generation Manual” means the most recent edition of the Trip Generation Manual published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers.

(j)     LOS. The term “LOS” or “level of service” has the meaning assigned to that term by the Circulation Element Policies of the General Plan.

(k)    Pass-by trips. The term “pass-by trips” has the meaning assigned to that term by the ITE Trip Generation Manual.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 9-14.04. Traffic impact mitigation fee.
        A traffic impact mitigation fee computed pursuant to Section 9-14.05 shall be paid as a condition of approval of any building permit, unless exempt pursuant to Section 9-14.09.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 9-14.05. Computation of fee.
        Except as otherwise provided in this section, the amount of the traffic impact mitigation fee to be paid pursuant to Section 9-14.04 shall be computed in accordance with the following formula:

Fee = [A × B × (1 + C) × D] + E

where:

        “A” equals the estimated ADT for the development for which the building permit is issued;

        “B” equals the estimated total cost per ADT, expressed in 2004 dollars, of the pro rata cost of all improvements to the City road system that are or will have to be made between July 1, 2003 and June 30, 2023 in order to maintain an acceptable LOS on the City road system if the development that is projected by the General Plan to occur between July 1, 2003 and June 30, 2023 within the City actually occurs;

        “C” equals five percent (5%) of value “B,” which five percent (5%) is hereby determined to be the estimated amount, expressed in 2004 dollars, of the development’s pro rata share of the cost of administering this chapter;

        “D” equals an inflation adjustment factor, based upon the Engineering News Record, to account for inflation from July 1, 2003 to the date the fee is computed; and

        “E” equals the amount of the traffic impact mitigation fee, if any, imposed by this chapter on development located within the City for purposes of reimbursing the County or other responsible agency pursuant to an agreement for the development’s pro rata share of the cost of improvements to the County’s road system that are needed to accommodate additional traffic generated by that development.

        The specific number to be assigned to “A” with respect to any development for which an adequate traffic study has been prepared shall be the estimated ADT specified in the traffic study for that development. The specific number value to be assigned to “A” with respect to any other development shall be the applicable estimated ADT determined by reference to a Traffic Generation Factor Table to be adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council based upon evidence presented to it. That table shall list appropriate land categories, appropriate measurement units within each category and the estimated ADT for each measurement unit. For example, the table might list low-density residential as one category of land use, list a dwelling unit as the appropriate measurement unit and list an estimated ADT for each dwelling unit within such housing. The estimated ADT for each measurement unit on the table shall be computed in consideration of the average trip length, pass-by trips and diverted linked trips, if any, associated with the land use category to which the measurement unit belongs. In cases where the development use does not clearly fall within one of the land use categories listed on the table, the person issuing the building permit or zoning clearance shall assign the development to the category that he or she deems most nearly applicable, subject to the appeal process specified in Section 9-14.07. In any case where the development is the modification or replacement of an existing structure or use, the value “A” for the development shall be the estimated ADT for the new or modified structure or use minus the estimated ADT for the existing structure or use.

        The specific number values to be assigned to “B,” in the foregoing formula shall be determined by resolution of the City Council from time to time on the basis of evidence submitted to it.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005, as amended by § 1, Ord. 781, eff. May 26, 2005)

 

Sec. 9-14.06. Time and mode of payment.
        Any traffic impact mitigation fee imposed as a condition of approval of a building permit shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit or, if otherwise specified in Section 66007 of the Government Code, on the earliest date payment can be required under that section.

        Payment of the traffic impact mitigation fee shall be in cash; provided that, with the prior permission of the Community Development Director, any portion of the fee (except for the portion attributable to the value “G,” if any) may be paid by dedication to the City of certain road improvements having at least an equivalent value. The dedicated road improvements shall be to a portion of the City road system. The value of the dedicated improvements shall, before payment by dedication is made, be determined by the Community Development Director based upon adequate engineering studies and cost data. If the value of the dedicated improvements is less than the portion of the fee that may be paid by dedication, the balance of the fee shall be paid in cash. If the value of the dedicated improvements is greater than the portion of the fee that may be paid by dedication, the City shall not pay for the difference and the portion of the fee attributable to the value “G,” if any, shall be paid in cash. For the purposes of this section, payment by dedication of improvements that have not been completed shall be deemed to have been paid when the City has title to the right-of-way to be improved and the improvements are to be completed pursuant to an improvement agreement secured in the manner required by this Code for improvement agreements pertaining to subdivisions.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 9-14.07. Appeals.
        Any applicant for a building permit pertaining to a development for which the estimated ADT (i.e., the value “A”) has been determined by reference to the Traffic Generation Factor Table adopted pursuant to Section 9-14.05 may, if he or she contends that the development was assigned to the wrong category listed on that table, appeal that assignment pursuant to this section. The sole issue on appeal shall be to determine which category listed on the table is the appropriate one for the development in question. The appeal shall be initiated and processed as follows:

(a)    Filing. The appeal shall be filed by the appellant with the Community Development Director prior to payment of the traffic impact mitigation fee. The appeal shall be in writing on a form to be provided by the Community Development Director, shall provide such information as the form may require and shall be accompanied by payment of an appeal fee in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the City Council to be the estimated average cost to the City of each such appeal.

(b)    Notice of hearing. Upon receipt of the completed appeal form and appeal fee, the Community Development Director shall mail to the appellant at the address indicated on the appeal form written notice of the time and place of the hearing on the appeal, which shall be within fifteen (15) calendar days after the appeal was filed.

(c)    Hearing. The Community Development Director shall conduct a hearing at the noticed time and place, provided that he or she may continue the hearing to a mutually convenient time and place at the appellant’s request.

(d)    Evidence. Testimony may be given in an informal narrative style. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule that might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in a civil action.

(e)    Record. The Community Development Director shall record the hearing on a recording device and shall maintain the recording and all documentary evidence submitted at the hearing in a file established for that purpose.

(f)    Determination. At the conclusion of the hearing, or within a reasonable time thereafter, the Community Development Director shall make a written determination as to which category listed on the table is the appropriate one. The written determination shall contain such findings as may be necessary to bridge the analytic gap between the raw evidence and the conclusion. Such findings shall be supported by the weight of the evidence presented at the hearing. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if no evidence is presented, the termination shall be to dismiss the appeal and no further findings need to be made.

(g)    Notice of determination. The Community Development Director shall promptly mail the written determination to the appellant at the address indicated on the appeal form. The written determination, once issued, shall be final and conclusive.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 9-14.08. Use of fees.
        All traffic impact mitigation fees collected pursuant to Section 9-14.02 shall be deposited in a restricted account within the City treasury in accordance with Section 66006 of the Government Code. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all moneys deposited in such account, together with any interest earned thereon, shall be used only for the purposes of administering this chapter and of maintaining or making improvements to the City road system. That portion, if any, of the fee that is collected to reimburse the County for the cost of County street improvements (the value “G” in the fee formula) shall be paid to the County in accordance with the applicable agreement or agreements between the County and the City pursuant to which that portion of the fee was imposed.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 9-14.09. Exemptions from fee.
        The following are exempt from the traffic impact mitigation fee imposed pursuant to this chapter:

(a)    Accessory structures, walls and fences;

(b)    Remodel of existing residential structures where no additional living accommodations are created.

(§ 1, Ord. 778, eff. January 11, 2005)

Chapter 15 VACANT PROPERTY MAINTENANCE, SECURITY AND REGISTRATION
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 811, § 1, effective December 9, 2010, amended Chapter 15 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Chapter 15, §§ 9-15.01—9-15.12, pertained to abandoned property registration and derived from Ord. No. 806, § 1, effective Oct. 22, 2009.

 

Sec. 9-15.01. Purpose/scope.
Vacant buildings are a major cause and source of blight in both residential and non-residential neighborhoods, especially when the owner of the building fails to actively maintain and manage the building to ensure that it does not become a liability to the neighborhood. Vacant buildings (whether or not those buildings are boarded), substandard or unkempt buildings and long-term vacancies discourage economic development and retard appreciation of property values. Vacant buildings are potential fire hazards and can jeopardize the ability of owners of neighboring property from securing or maintaining affordable fire insurance. It is the responsibility of property ownership to prevent owned property from becoming a burden to the neighborhood and community and a threat to the public health, safety or welfare. One vacant building which is not actively and well maintained and managed can be the core and cause of spreading blight.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.02. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Abatement plan” means a written plan for the remediation and abatement of vacant buildings prepared in accordance with the requirements of Section 9-15.12 of this chapter.

“Agreement” means any agreement or written instrument which provides that title to property shall be transferred or conveyed from one owner to another owner after the sale, trade, transfer or exchange.

 

“Assignment of rents” means an instrument that transfers the beneficial interest under a deed of trust from one lender/entity to another.

“Beneficiary” means a lender under a note secured by a deed of trust.

“Boarded building” means a vacant building or portion of a vacant building whose doors and windows have been covered with plywood or other material for the purpose of preventing entry into the vacant building by persons or animals.

“Building” means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the City, designed or permitted to be used for dwelling and/or business purposes and shall separately include each building or structure located on such improved real property. This includes any real property being offered for sale, trade, transfer, or exchange as “residential,” “commercial” or “village mixed use” whether or not it is legally permitted and/or zoned for such use.

“Dangerous building” means any building/structure that is in violation of any condition referenced in the International Code Council’s International Property Maintenance Code, most recent edition. A copy of the International Code Council’s International Property Management Code, most recent edition, shall be maintained for public inspection at the Department, City Hall.

“Days” means consecutive calendar days.

“Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale” means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.

“Deed of trust” means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan. Used in California instead of a mortgage. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc.

“Default” means the failure to fulfill a contractual obligation, monetary or conditional.

“Department” means the City of Ojai Community Development Department.

“Director” means the Director of Community Development or designee.

“Distressed” means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale and/or pending tax assessor’s lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

“Evidence of vacancy” means any condition that combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters.

“Foreclosure” means the process by which a property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is sold at auction to satisfy the debt if the trustor (borrower) defaults.

“Legally-occupied” means:

(1)    Occupation by the owner, or an entity controlled by the owner, or occupation by employees of the owner, or employees of an entity controlled by the owner, for the purpose of engaging in a legitimate and lawful business open to the general public on a day-to-day basis; or

(2)    Occupation by a tenant of the owner, or entity controlled by the owner’s tenant, or occupation by employees of the tenant of the owner, or employees of an entity controlled by the owner’s tenant, for the purpose of engaging in a legitimate and lawful business, open to the general public, on a day-to-day basis;

(3)    Occupation of a residential dwelling by an owner or a tenant of an owner.

“Local” means within the territorial jurisdiction of the Counties of Ventura and Santa Barbara, California.

“Notice of default” means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s sale.

“Official” means the City of Ojai Building Official.

“Out of area” means outside the territorial jurisdiction of the Counties of Ventura and Santa Barbara, California.

“Owner” means any person, co-partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having a legal or equitable title or any interest in any real property.

“Owner of record” means the person having recorded title to the property at any given point in time the record is provided by the Ventura County Recorder’s Office.

“Property” means any improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the City and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition.

“Securing” means such measures as may be directed by the Director or his or her designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including, but not limited to, the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of door, window and/or other openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current HUD securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required.

“Send” a letter means send by U.S. Postal Service certified mail with return receipt requested.

“Trustee” means the person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a property.

“Trustor” means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.

“Vacant” means:

(1)    For a single use/occupancy building/structure, where there exists no legal occupancy; and

(2)    For a multi-use/occupancy building/structure, any separate unit in a multi-unit building for which there exists no legal occupancy or other evidence of vacancy.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.03. Owner/trustee/beneficiary responsibilities.
(a)    No person, corporation or other entity shall allow a building designed for human use or occupancy that is subject to this chapter to stand vacant for more than ninety (90) days, unless the owner/trustee/beneficiary establishes by substantial evidence to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director that one of the following applies:

(1)    The building is the subject of an active building permit for repair or rehabilitation and the owner is progressing diligently to complete the repair or rehabilitation;

(2)    The building meets all applicable health and safety codes, is not a dangerous building, and is maintained to the levels required in Section 9-15.10(a); or

(3)    There is no evidence of vacancy as defined in Section 9-15.02.

(b)    The owner/trustee/beneficiary of any boarded building, whether boarded by voluntary action of the owner, or as a result of enforcement activity by the City, shall cause the boarded building to be in compliance with all applicable health and safety codes, to ensure the building is not a dangerous building, and to ensure the building is maintained to the levels required in Section 9-15.10(a).

(c)    Within fourteen (14) days of the purchase and/or transfer of a loan/deed of trust secured by property the new owner/beneficiary/trustee shall record, with the Ventura County Recorder’s office, an assignment of rents, or similar document, that lists the name of each new owner/beneficiary/trustee, as applicable, and the mailing address and contact telephone number of the new trustee responsible for receiving payments associated with the loan/deed of trust.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.04. Identification and evaluation of vacant buildings; Notifications.
(a)    The Department shall perform periodic patrols (at least every sixty (60) days) on all City streets to identify potential vacant buildings.

(b)    The Department shall solicit public input to identify potential vacant buildings, via posting on the City website and notation on the published agendas of the Ojai City Council, Ojai Planning Commission, and Ojai Building Appeals Board.

(c)    The Director shall evaluate each noted (by patrol) or reported potential vacant building and produce a written finding as to whether the building is vacant as defined in Section 9-15.02. If the building is determined to be a vacant building, the Director shall also produce a written finding as to whether the vacant building is abandoned, dangerous or substandard, as defined in Section 9-15.02. This latter finding shall be based in part on a lawful inspection by the Official to determine if violations of the California Building Code exist, including, but not limited to, fire and life safety hazards and substandard conditions.

(d)    The Director shall send a letter, within seven (7) days of the date of the written finding, to the owner/beneficiary/trustee of each designated vacant building setting forth and citing in detail (by explicit reference to the Ojai Municipal Code and the Building Code) those items and actions required by the City in order to bring the vacant building into compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited to:

(1)    Securing the vacant building against unlawful entry as defined in Section 9-15.11;

(2)    Registering the vacant building with the Department as defined in Section 9-15.05;

(3)    Monitoring the vacant building and reporting to the Department as defined in Section 9-15.05; and

(4)    Correcting any conditions that have caused the vacant building to be designated as abandoned, dangerous or substandard, as described in the Director’s abatement plan as defined in Section 9-15.12(a).

The letter shall also specify final compliance dates for:

(5)    Securing the vacant building against unlawful entry—seven (7) days from the date of mailing of the letter;

(6)    Registering the vacant building with the Department—fourteen (14) days from the date of mailing of the letter, per Section 9-15.05;

(7)    Initiating monitoring of and reporting on the vacant building—fourteen (14) days from the date of mailing of the letter, per Section 9-15.05; and

(8)    Obtaining any necessary or required building or other permits and completing any and all remediation required by the Director’s abatement plan ninety (90) days from the date of mailing of the letter, per Section 9-15.12(c).

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.05. Registration and monitoring/reporting requirements for vacant properties.
Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the City shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust, upon default by the owner or trustor, prior to recording a notice of default with the Ventura County Recorder’s office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, the beneficiary/trustee shall, within fourteen (14) days of the finding and sending of a letter by the Director detailing the finding, register the property with the Director or designee on forms provided by the City.

If the property is occupied but remains in default or is distressed, it shall be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee, or his or her designee, monthly until: (1) the owner, trustor or other party remedies the default; or (2) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within fourteen (14) days of that inspection, register the property with the Director, or designee, on forms provided by the City.

In either case the registration shall contain the name of the beneficiary/trustee (corporation or individual), the direct street/office mailing address of the beneficiary/trustee (no post office boxes), a direct contact name and telephone number for the beneficiary/trustee and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee, the local property management company responsible for the security, maintenance and marketing of the property. Registration fees will not be prorated.

An annual registration fee shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1st of each year and must be received no later than January 31st of the year due.

This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

Properties subject to this chapter shall remain under the annual registration requirement, security and maintenance standards of this section as long as they remain vacant.

Any person, firm or corporation that has registered a property under this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration within fourteen (14) days of the change.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.06. Monitoring program—Purpose.
(a)    Vacant buildings are a major cause and source of blight in residential and non-residential neighborhoods, especially when the owner/beneficiary/trustee of the building fails to maintain and manage the building to ensure that it does not become a liability to the neighborhood. Vacant buildings often attract transients and criminals, including drug users. Use of vacant buildings by transients and criminals, who may employ primitive cooking or heating methods, creates a risk of fire for the vacant buildings and adjacent properties. Vacant properties are often used as dumping grounds for junk and debris and are often overgrown with weeds and grass. Vacant and boarded buildings discourage economic development and retard appreciation of property values.

(b)    Because of the potential economic and public health, welfare and safety problems caused by vacant buildings, the City needs to monitor vacant buildings, so that they do not become attractive nuisances, are not used by trespassers, are properly maintained both inside and out and do not become a blighting influence in the neighborhood. There is a substantial cost to the City for monitoring vacant buildings (whether or not those buildings are boarded up) which should be borne by the owners/beneficiaries/trustees of the vacant buildings. The fees for a monitoring program pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be separate from and in addition to any registration fees or administrative citation fines required or otherwise assessed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.07. Monitoring program—Departmental responsibility and fees.
(a)    Authority. The Director shall be responsible for administering a program for identifying and monitoring the maintenance of all vacant buildings in the City. The program shall be documented and regularly updated. The program shall be available for public review.

(b)    Purposes. The purposes of the monitoring program shall be to:

(1)    Identify buildings which become vacant;

(2)    Order vacant buildings which are open and accessible to be secured against unlawful entry pursuant to Title 9, Chapter 1 of this Code, including the building code and the code for the abatement of dangerous buildings code and pursuant to the requirements for securing a building specified in Sections 9-15.02 and 9-15.11;

(3)    Initiate proceedings against the owner/beneficiary/trustee of any vacant or dangerous building found to be substandard as defined in Title 9, Chapter 1, Article 5 or a nuisance under Title 5, Chapter 6 of this Code;

(4)    Prepare a written abatement plan for all vacant buildings, specifying those measures required by the City in order for the owner/beneficiary/trustee to bring the vacant building into compliance with the provisions of this chapter;

(5)    Maintain surveillance over vacant buildings so that timely code enforcement proceedings are commenced in the event a building becomes substandard or a nuisance; and

(6)    Establish and enforce rules and regulations for the implementation and compliance with the provisions of Section 9-15.03.

(c)    Fee imposed. There is imposed upon every owner/beneficiary/trustee of a vacant building monitored pursuant to this chapter, a monthly vacant building monitoring fee in an initial amount as the City Council may establish by resolution, provided that the fee shall not exceed the estimated reasonable cost of monitoring the vacant building. The fee shall be payable as to any building, residential or non-residential, which:

(1)    Is boarded up by voluntary action of the owner/beneficiary/trustee or as the result of enforcement activities by the City; or

(2)    Is vacant for more than ninety (90) days for any reason.

(d)    Fee waiver. The vacant building monitoring fee shall be waived upon a showing by the owner that:

(1)    The owner/beneficiary/trustee has obtained a building permit and is processing diligently to repair the premises for occupancy; or

(2)    The building meets all applicable codes and is actively being offered for sale, lease or rent; or

(3)    Imposition of the fee would impose a substantial economic hardship on the owner/beneficiary or would hinder the rehabilitation of the building.

(e)    Procedure. The vacant building monitoring fee shall be billed to the owner or beneficiary of the property, or trustee if a notice of default has been recorded on the property, and mailed to the owner of record’s address as set forth on the last equalized assessment roll of the County Assessor. Any owner/beneficiary/trustee billed may apply for a waiver on the grounds set forth in subsection (d) of this section by submitting a written statement of the grounds for the waiver and the owner/beneficiary/trustee’s daytime telephone number to the Director within thirty (30) days after the billing is mailed to the owner. The owner/beneficiary/trustee shall provide substantial evidence in support of the owner/beneficiary/trustee’s statement of the grounds for the waiver. The Director shall review the written statement and all related evidence and may contact the owner/beneficiary/trustee to discuss the application for waiver. The Director shall prepare a written decision which shall be mailed to the owner/beneficiary/trustee and shall set forth the reasons for the decision.

(f)    Appeal. Any owner/beneficiary/trustee aggrieved by the decision of the Director relating to an application for waiver may appeal the Director’s decision to the Appeals Hearing Board in the manner provided in Title 1, Chapter 6 of this Code.

(g)    Non-payment of fee. If the fee is not paid within sixty (60) days after billing, or within sixty (60) days after the decision of the Director or the hearing officer, the City Council may thereupon order that the fee be specially assessed against the property involved. If the City Council orders that the fee be specially assessed against the property, it shall confirm the assessment and thereafter said assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary real property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of real property taxes are applicable to the special assessment.

(h)    Notice of lien. The City Council may also cause a notice of lien to be recorded. The notice shall, at a minimum, identify the record owner or possessor of the property, set forth the last known address of the owner of record or possessor, a description of the real property subject to the lien and the amount of the fee.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.08. Reserved.
 

Sec. 9-15.09. Local property management requirement.
(a)    If a property is determined to be vacant by the Director and the property is owned by a corporation and/or out-of-area beneficiary, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met.

(b)    The local property management company shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the abatement plan and other requirements of this chapter. If the property management company determines the property is not in compliance, it is the owner’s/beneficiary’s/
trustee’s responsibility to bring the property into compliance.

(c)    The duties/obligations specified in this section shall be joint and several among and between all owners, trustees, and beneficiaries and their respective agents.

(d)    If the owner/beneficiary/trustee fails to contract for a local property management company and initiate monitoring of the vacant building within fourteen (14) days of the Director’s finding and notice, the Department shall separately contract with a local property management company for the monitoring and reporting, at the expense of the owner/beneficiary/trustee.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.10. Maintenance requirements.
(a)    Maintenance requirements. Properties subject to this chapter:

(1)    Shall be in comparison to the standard of those properties within the same zoning designation, kept free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by Federal, State or local law, discarded personal items, including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material or any other items that give the appearance that the property is vacant.

(2)    Shall be maintained so that the exterior of the building, including, but not limited to, paint and finishes, are in good condition.

(3)    Shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.

(4)    Shall be landscaped and maintained (visible front and side yards) in good condition and no less than the standard of those properties within the same zoning designation at the time registration was required.

(b)    Landscape.

(1)    Landscape includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark, decomposed granite or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation.

(2)    Landscape does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, plastic sheeting, mulch, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material.

(c)    Maintenance defined.

(1)    Maintenance includes, but is not limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings.

(2)    Maintenance of the building in continuing compliance with all applicable health and safety codes, maintenance to ensure the building is not a dangerous building, and maintenance to the levels required in subsection (a).

(3)    Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. In either case properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the State of California.

(4)    Windows screened, but not boarded, with opaque material that prevents interior space of the building from being visible from public rights-of-way or public property.

(5)    Prevention of criminal activity on the property.

(d)    Adherence to this section does not relieve the beneficiary/trustee or property owner of any obligations set forth in any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowners’ association rules and regulations which may apply to the property.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.11. Security requirements.
(a)    Properties subject to this chapter shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.

(b)    Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walkthrough, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure. In the case of broken windows securing means the re-glazing of the window.

(c)    Fencing shall be permitted, but only with the consent of, and under the direction of, the Director. No chain link or plastic fencing shall be permitted.

(d)    If the property is owned by a corporation and/or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property management company shall be contracted to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this section, and any other applicable laws, are being met.

(e)    The parking of automobiles on the property, while vacant, for purposes of sale to the public shall not be permitted.

(f)    The property shall be posted with name and twenty-four (24) hour contact telephone number of the local property management company. The posting shall be no less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of forty-five (45) feet and shall contain along with the name and twenty-four (24) hour contact number the words “THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY” and “TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL.” The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with weather resistant materials. The sign must be posted in a prominent location in compliance with these standards and as approved by the Official. A sign permit, pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 2, Article 16 of this Code, need not be obtained prior to the posting of the sign required by this subsection.

(g)    If the owner/beneficiary/trustee fails to secure a vacant building within seven (7) days of the finding by the Director, the Department shall separately contract with a local property management company for the securing of the vacant building, at the expense of the owner/beneficiary/trustee.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.12. Abatement plan.
(a)    The Director shall prepare a written abatement plan for all vacant buildings within the City. The abatement plan shall set forth, in detail, those items and actions required by the City in order to bring the vacant building into compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(b)    A copy of the abatement plan shall be served on the owner/beneficiary/trustee of each vacant building. Service shall be effectuated by personal delivery or by depositing the abatement plan in the United States Postal Service certified mail, return receipt requested. Service is deemed to have occurred within five (5) days from the date of mailing.

(c)    In addition to service of the abatement plan, each owner/beneficiary/trustee shall be notified that he, she or it has ninety (90) days in which to obtain any necessary or required building or other permits and complete any and all remediation required by the abatement plan. The Director, upon a showing by the owner/beneficiary/trustee of good cause, may extend the remediation period for up to an additional ninety (90) days.

(d)    An owner/beneficiary/trustee may appeal any or all requirements for abatement and/or remediation set forth within the Director’s abatement plan to the Building Appeals Board within twenty-one (21) days from receipt or deemed receipt thereof, pursuant to Title 10, Chapter 2, Article 30 of this Code.

(e)    Failure of the owner/beneficiary/trustee to obtain all necessary permits and complete the remediation requirements of the abatement plan within the time required by this section, shall be deemed in violation thereof and subject to the provisions of Section 9-15.17 of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015; § 3, Ord. 880, eff. January 11, 2018)

 

Sec. 9-15.13. Additional authority.
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in this Code and by law, the Director or designee shall have the authority to require the owner/beneficiary/trustee and/or owner of record of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures, including, but not limited to, securing any/all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting which may be required, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.14. Fees.
The fees for registering and maintaining a vacant property and the fines for maintaining a vacant property in a manner not in compliance with this Code shall be set by resolution of the City Council. The amount of any fee shall not exceed the reasonable estimated cost of administering the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.15. Enforcement.
Violations of this chapter may be enforced in any combination of remedies allowed by this Code or by law.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.16. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any of the requirements of this chapter may appeal insofar as such appeal is allowed under Title 1, Chapter 6 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.17. Violation/penalty.
Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any portion of this section shall be subject to prosecution and/or administrative enforcement under Title 1, Chapter 6 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

 

Sec. 9-15.18. Severability.
Should any provision, section, paragraph, sentence or word of this chapter be determined or declared invalid by any final court action in a court of competent jurisdiction or by reason of any preemptive legislation, the remaining provisions, sections, paragraphs, sentences or words of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect.

(§ 1, Ord. 811, eff. December 9, 2010, as amended by § 2, Ord. 859, eff. November 14, 2015)

Chapter 16 ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Sec. 9-16.01. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by adopting an ordinance in compliance with Assembly Bill 1236 (Chapter 598, Statutes 2015, California Government Code Section 65850.7) that expedites and streamlines the permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific, adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations.

(§ 2, Ord. 877, eff. December 14, 2017)

 

Sec. 9-16.02. Definitions.
(a)    “Building Official” means the City of Ojai Building Official.

(b)    “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

(c)    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

(1)    Electronic mail or email;

(2)    The Internet;

(3)    Facsimile.

(d)    “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

(§ 2, Ord. 877, eff. December 14, 2017)

 

Sec. 9-16.03. Administrative permitting process.
(a)    Checklist. The Building Official shall implement an expedited and streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited and streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook,” as published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The City’s adopted checklist shall be published on the City’s website. Applicants shall pay a permit fee as required by the City Council by resolution.

(b)    Specific, adverse impact verification. Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have any specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes, but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; and areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.

(c)    Permit application processing. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and supporting documentation satisfies the requirements in the City’s adopted checklist, the Building Official shall deem the permit application complete and it will be promptly processed in accord with all applicable laws and health and safety standards. The Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the City. If the Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

(d)    Electronic submittal and signature. Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications and shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant.

(§ 2, Ord. 877, eff. December 14, 2017)

 

Sec. 9-16.04. Discretionary permitting process.
(a)    Use permit required. It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the Building Official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the Building Official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact on local, State, or Federal public health or safety requirements, the City may require the applicant to apply for a use permit.

(b)    User permit conditions. If the Building Official issues an electric vehicle charging station use permit, the permit may include conditions designed to mitigate any specific, adverse impact upon public health and safety at the lowest possible cost. A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the City on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit.

(c)    Denial of use permit. If an electric vehicle charging station use permit is required, the Building Official may only deny an application for the electric vehicle charging station use permit if the Building Official makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. The findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact.

(d)    Appeal. The Building Official’s decision may be appealed to the Building Appeals Board in accordance with Section 9-1.215 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(e)    Prohibition. In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7(h), the Building Official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080.

(§ 2, Ord. 877, eff. December 14, 2017)

 

Sec. 9-16.05. Electric vehicle charging station installation requirements.
(a)    Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a Municipal Electric Utility Company regarding safety and reliability.

(b)    Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

(c)    Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

(d)    Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements.

(§ 2, Ord. 877, eff. December 14, 2017)

Title 10 PLANNING AND ZONING
Chapter 1 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2 ZONING REGULATIONS
Chapter 3 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Chapter 4 RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (RPD) ZONE
Chapter 5 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Chapter 6 RESIDENTIAL GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
Chapter 7 TIMESHARE FACILITY REGULATIONS
Chapter 8 SCHOOL FACILITIES FEES AND DEDICATIONS
Chapter 9 IMPACT FEES
Chapter 10 SPECIFIC PLAN FEES
Chapter 11 COMMERCIAL GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
Chapter 12 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUS
Chapter 13 IN LIEU PARKING FACILITIES FEE
Chapter 14 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Chapter 15 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Chapter 16 REPORT OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING RECORDS

Chapter 1 PLANNING COMMISSION
Note
*       Editor’s note: Sections 10-1.01 through 10-1.06, added by Ord. No. 124, amended by Ord. Nos. 124A, 168, 242, 377, 479, 532 and 579, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 584, effective June 26, 1980.

 

Sec. 10-1.01. Planning Commission created.
        There is hereby established in the City a Planning Commission consisting of five (5) members. Each Councilmember shall appoint one Commissioner, ratified by the approval of a majority of the full Council. Three (3) members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and no quorum shall consist of a majority of nonresidents of the City. At least two (2) members shall be chosen from persons having distinctly separate training and experience from the fields of in architecture, art, building construction, civil engineering, land use planning, land use law, urban planning, or landscape design. While it is preferred that all members of the Commission have primary residence and be domiciled within the City, a minimum of three (3) members of the Commission must have primary residence and be domiciled within the City. All members must live within the Ojai Area of Interest, as defined by the Ventura County Local Agency Formation Commission.

(§ 1, Ord. 584, eff. June 26, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 785, eff. November 25, 2005, and § 1, Ord. 894, eff. April 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 10-1.02. Terms.
        Except as otherwise provided in this section, the members of the Planning Commission shall be appointed for terms of four (4) years, expiring at the first regular City Council meeting in May, as provided below. Members shall hold office until their successors have been appointed and qualified. A person who has been appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the remainder of the unexpired term. Any member of the Commission may be removed by the Mayor, subject to the approval of the Council or by a majority vote of the Council. The first Planning Commission seat to become vacant after passage of Ordinance No. 894 amending this section shall not be filled. The second seat to become vacant shall be filled by the Mayor, and the third shall be filled by the Councilmember representing City Council District 4. Subsequent appointments shall be made in the following order: City Council District 1, City Council District 2, City Council District 3, City Council District 4, and the Mayor, repeating as terms expire such that the five Planning Commission members correspond to the Mayor and four City Council Districts. If a Planning Commission member resigns before the end of their term, the City Councilmember for the Voting District that appointed that member shall appoint their replacement.

(§ 1, Ord. 584, eff. June 26, 1980, as amended by § 1, Ord. 619, eff. April 26, 1984, § 2, Ord. 785, eff. November 25, 2005, § 3, Ord. 843, eff. August 22, 2014, and § 2, Ord. 894, eff. April 25, 2019)

 

Sec. 10-1.03. Officers: Meetings: Compensation.
        The Planning Commission shall elect its chair and vice-chair from among its members and shall appoint a secretary who need not be a member of the Commission. Such officers shall be chosen for a period of one year. In the absence or disability of either the chair, vice-chair, or secretary, the Commission may designate a chair or secretary pro tempore. Meetings of the Commission shall be held at least once a month at such times and places as the Commission may fix by resolution. The Commission may hold special meetings in the manner provided by law. Minutes shall be kept of all meetings and copies thereof shall be delivered by the secretary of the Commission to the City Clerk for inclusion in the Council agenda and packet within ten (10) days after the approval thereof. No member of the Commission shall receive compensation for his or her services as a member, but the Council shall fix the amount of compensation, if any, to be paid to the secretary.

(§ 1, Ord. 584, eff. June 26, 1980, as amended by § 3, Ord. 785, eff. November 25, 2005)

 

Sec. 10-1.04. Powers and duties.
        The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:

(a)    To act in an advisory capacity in all matters pertaining to the development and modification of streets, parks, and public or private structures and buildings, housing, schools, grounds, vacant lots, and all other matters pertaining to the General and Redevelopment Plans of the City, including redevelopment projects and activities, and to recommend to the Council or the Redevelopment Agency, as appropriate, plans for future growth, development, and beautification of the City and/or the redevelopment project area;

(b)    To advise and recommend to the Council plans for securing to the City and its inhabitants proper service of all public utilities, proper sanitation, and transportation facilities;

(c)    To recommend to the Council approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of tentative maps of proposed subdivisions of land. The Council designates the Planning Commission as its advisory agency with respect to the design and improvement of proposed subdivisions. Every such map or plat shall, prior to its final approval or disapproval by the Council, be submitted to the Commission for action thereon;

(d)    To act as an advisory body to the Redevelopment Agency regarding redevelopment laws, requirements, projects, and programs, as appropriate;

(e)    To do all things necessary, by majority vote, to carry out the provisions of this title, other applicable provisions of this Code, and the provisions of the Conservation and Planning Act of the State, as amended from time to time;

(f)    To perform such other duties and functions as may be delegated by the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 584, eff. June 26, 1980, as amended by § 4, Ord. 785, eff. November 25, 2005)

 

Sec. 10-1.05. Incurring of indebtedness is prohibited.
        The Planning Commission shall not incur any expense for the preparation of maps and/or plats or for any other purpose, but shall file its recommendations and requests in such matters with the Council and/or the Redevelopment Agency, which shall incur in the name of the City and/or the Redevelopment Agency in the manner provided by law such indebtedness as the Council and/or the Redevelopment Agency shall deem proper in the premises and as authorized in the annual budget.

(§ 1, Ord. 584, eff. June 26, 1980, as amended by § 5, Ord. 785, eff. November 25, 2005)

Chapter 2 ZONING REGULATIONS
Note
*       Editor’s note: Sections 10-2.101 through 10-2.2921, added by Ord. No. 231, amended by Ord. Nos. 271, 283, 288, 326, 327, 339, 343, 344, 351, 355, 362, 363, 385, 388, 396, 404, 453, 465, 471, 473, 480, 483, 485, 487, 490, 499, 508, 512, 525, 537, and 539, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 584, effective June 26, 1980.

         Sections 10-2.101 through 10-2.2111, codified from Ord. No. 584, amended by Ord. Nos. 593, 612, 614, 618, 624, 625, 628, 631, 639, 640, 641, 681, 683, 685, 691, 694, 700, 708, 710, 714, 721, 733, 758, and 766, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 771, effective February 13, 2004.

 

PURPOSE AND EFFECT OF ZONING REGULATIONS
Article 1. Administrative Provisions
Sec. 10-2.101. Title.
        This chapter shall be known as the “City of Ojai Zoning Regulations” (these “Zoning Regulations”).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.102. Purpose of chapter.
        The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety, general welfare, and to preserve and enhance the aesthetic quality of the City by providing regulations to ensure an appropriate mix of land uses and orderly land development. In addition, the City desires to achieve a balance through a pattern and distribution of land uses which generally:

(a)    Maintain Ojai as a quiet, peaceful community whose picturesque valley setting, architectural character, and protected natural environment combine to provide a refuge from urban life;

(b)    Retain and enhance established residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial districts, mixed-uses, recreational areas, and amenities;

(c)    Maintain a balanced distribution of land uses and provide for land use compatibility, and safe, efficient pedestrian and vehicular circulation throughout the City;

(d)    Allow for the infill and recycling of areas at their designated scale of density/intensity, heights, and character;

(e)    Allow for the appropriate intensification of commercial and residential uses in the City’s downtown consistent with the City’s General Plan;

(f)    Preserve and enhance significant environmental resources;

(g)    Provide open space resources for passive and active recreational activities, and protect the public from natural safety hazards;

(h)    Provide a diversity of areas characterized by differing land use activity, scale and intensity, while maintaining community identity and quality development;

(i)     Encourage pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly development;

(j)     Require that the architecture of new or remodeled structures respect the City’s heritage,

 

expectations of superior quality, and principles of urban design as expressed in the City’s design guidelines;

(k)    Provide for mixed-use development which supports live-work arrangements and fosters the use of alternatives to automobile transportation; and

(l)     Maintain Ojai as a unique/distinctive and secure environment for the City’s residents, businesses, and visitors.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.103. Authority and General Plan consistency.
(a)    Authority. This chapter is the primary tool for implementing the policies of the Ojai General Plan, in compliance with the mandated provisions of State law and other applicable local, regional, State, and Federal requirements as they may be amended/replaced from time to time.

(b)    General Plan consistency.

(1)    All development within the City shall be consistent with the General Plan.

(2)    All development within the unincorporated area of the City’s sphere of influence should be consistent with the General Plan.

(c)    Density and intensity. The density/intensity limitations established in the Land Use Element of the General Plan apply to all parcels.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.104. Review authority.
These zoning regulations shall be administered by the Ojai City Council (the “Council”), the Ojai Planning Commission (the “Commission”), the Community Development Director (the “Director”), the Historic Preservation Commission, and the Community Development Department (the “Department”). The participation of these groups and individuals in the development review process is as follows:

(a)    Commission. The Commission shall:

(1)    Consist of five (5) members who are appointed and serve according to the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 10 of the Municipal Code;

(2)    Adopt rules for the transaction of business and keep a public record of its actions in compliance with Section 10-1.03 of the Municipal Code. Three (3) commissioners shall constitute a quorum of the Commission, and no quorum shall consist of a majority of nonresidents of the City. All meetings shall be open and public;

(3)    Perform the duties and functions prescribed in these zoning regulations, and in compliance with Section 10-1.04 of the Municipal Code. The Commission shall recommend adoption, implement, and periodically review and recommend revisions to the General Plan and these zoning regulations for the desired physical development of the City, and any land within its sphere of influence;

(4)    Have the following authority:

(A)   The Commission has the authority to grant final approval for the following:

(i)     Design review permits;

(ii)    Conditional use permits;

(iii)   Planned development;

(iv)   Sign programs;

(v)    Variances; and

(vi)   Certification and approval of appropriate environmental documentation in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”).

(B)   All of the above-listed determinations are subject to appeal to the Council in compliance with Article 30 of this chapter.

(C)   The Commission shall also make recommendations to the Council for final determinations regarding the following:

(i)     Development agreements;

(ii)    General Plan amendments;

(iii)   Specific plans;

(iv)   Tentative Tract Maps;

(v)    Zoning Map amendments;

(vi)   Zoning Ordinance amendments; and

(vii)  Other applicable ordinances or regulations which are zoning in nature.

(b)    Director. The Director shall:

(1)    Be appointed by the City Manager;

(2)    Perform the duties and functions prescribed in these zoning regulations, in addition to the day-to-day and long range management of the Department;

(3)    Have the following authority:

(A)   The Director has the authority to grant final approval for the following:

(i)     Minor architectural review exemptions,

(ii)    Home occupation permits,

(iii)   Interpretation/definition of “allowed uses” in compliance with Article 33 of this chapter,

(iv)   Lot line/boundary adjustments, where no increase in density would result,

(v)    Minor conditional use permits,

(vi)   Minor variances and modifications,

(vii)  Sign permits, except signs for arcade storefronts,

(viii) Temporary use permits,

(ix)   Tree permits, except where more than five (5) oak, sycamore or heritage trees, or a combination thereof, are to be cut down, removed, or relocated upon a single parcel. Unusual cases where less than five (5) trees are involved may be referred to the Commission by the Director,

(x)    Zoning clearances,

(xi)   Administrative exemption from exterior lighting standards in compliance with Article 16.5 of this chapter;

(B)   All of the above-listed “powers” are subject to referral/appeal to the Commission in compliance with Article 30 of this chapter.

(c)    Historic Preservation Commission. The Historic Preservation Commission shall:

(1)    Be appointed by the Council;

(2)    Perform the duties and functions specified in Municipal Code Title 4, Chapter 8; and

(3)    Review and approve any alteration, rehabilitation, or restoration; construction or reconstruction; demolition; relocation affecting a landmark and all signs for arcade storefronts.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 3, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013, and § 3, Ord. 894, eff. April 25, 2019)

 

 

Sec. 10-2.105. Applicability of Zoning Regulations.
(a)    Compliance with these Zoning Regulations required. All land and structures shall be used and constructed in compliance with the regulations and requirements of these Zoning Regulations, including obtaining all land use entitlements before construction/use inauguration, as applicable.

 

 

(b)    Entitlements and licenses. All land use entitlements or licenses shall be issued in compliance with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. Any land use entitlement or license issued in conflict with these Zoning Regulations is deemed void.

(c)    Minimum requirements. The regulations and provisions of these Zoning Regulations are the minimum requirements, unless otherwise stated.

(d)    Conflict with other regulations.

(1)    Nothing in these Zoning Regulations shall be deemed to repeal or amend the Building Code, other ordinances or regulations or any specific provisions requiring a land use entitlement or license or both of the City except as otherwise provided for in these Zoning Regulations. If any conflict occurs between the provisions of these Zoning Regulations and the Building Code or other regulations of the City, the more restrictive provisions shall apply.

(2)    It is not intended that these Zoning Regulations shall interfere with, repeal, abrogate, or annul any private easement, covenant, or other agreement in effect at the time of adoption. Where these Zoning Regulations impose a greater restriction upon the use of land or structures, the provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall apply.

(e)    Effect of Zoning Regulations—Changes on projects in progress. The enactment of these Zoning Regulations or amendments to their requirements may impose different standards on new land uses than those that applied to existing development (e.g., these Zoning Regulations or a future amendment could require more off-street parking spaces for a particular land use than former Zoning Ordinance provisions). The following provisions determine how the requirements of these Zoning Regulations apply to projects in progress at the time requirements are changed.

(1)    Projects with pending applications. All land use permit and subdivision applications that have been determined by the Department to be complete before the effective date of these Zoning Regulations or any amendment will be processed according to the requirements in effect when the application was accepted as complete. Applications for land use permit or tentative map extensions of time (see Article 32 and Title 10, Chapter 3 of the Municipal Code), respectively, shall be consistent with the requirements of these Zoning Regulations that are in effect when the time extension application is accepted as complete.

(2)    Approved projects not yet under construction. Any approved development for which construction has not begun as of the effective date of these Zoning Regulations or any amendment may still be constructed as approved, as long as required building permits have been obtained before the expiration of any applicable land use permit (Article 32, Time Limits and Extensions) or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Article 32 of this chapter.

(3)    Approved projects not requiring construction. Any approved land use not requiring construction that has not been established as of the effective date of these Zoning Regulations or any amendment may still be established in compliance with its approved permit, as long as establishment occurs before the expiration of the permit (Article 32, Time Limits and Extensions) or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Article 32 of this chapter.

(4)    Approved subdivisions not yet recorded. Any approved subdivision for which a parcel or final map has not been recorded as of the effective date of these Zoning Regulations or amendment, may still have a parcel or final map recorded in compliance with the approved tentative map, as long as recordation occurs before the expiration of the tentative map in compliance with Title 10, Chapter 3 of the Municipal Code, or, where applicable, before the expiration of any approved time extension granted under Title 10, Chapter 3 of the Municipal Code.

(5)    Projects under construction. A structure that is under construction on the effective date of these Zoning Regulations or any amendment need not be changed to satisfy any new or different requirements of these Zoning Regulations.

(f)    Other requirements may still apply. Nothing in these Zoning Regulations eliminates the need for obtaining any other permits required by the City, or any permit, approval, or entitlement required by other provisions of the Municipal Code or the regulations of any City department, or any County, regional, State, or Federal agency.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.106. Interpretation of Zoning Regulations.
        Rules and procedures for the interpretation of the provisions of these Zoning Regulations are in Article 33 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.107. Partial invalidity.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of these Zoning Regulations is for any reason, held to be invalid or unconstitutional, the decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of these Zoning Regulations. The Council hereby declares that it would have adopted these Zoning Regulations and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more portions of these Zoning Regulations might be declared invalid.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

ZONING DISTRICTS, ALLOWABLE LAND USES AND ZONE SPECIFIC STANDARDS
Article 2. Zoning Map and Zoning Districts
Sec. 10-2.201. Purpose of article.
        This article establishes the zoning districts applied to property within the City consistent with the General Plan, and determines how the zoning districts are shown on the Zoning Map.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.202. Zoning Map.
        The Council hereby adopts the City of Ojai Revised Zoning Map (the “Zoning Map”), which is on file with the Department. The Zoning Map is hereby incorporated into these Zoning Regulations by reference as though it were fully included here.

(a)    Zoning districts established. The City of Ojai is divided into zoning districts which consistently implement the General Plan. The zoning districts shown in Table 2-1 are hereby established, and are shown on the Zoning Map.

(b)    Interpretation of Zoning Map boundaries. Any uncertainty about the location of a zoning boundary shown on the Zoning Map shall be resolved as follows:

(1)    Where a boundary follows a public street or alley, the centerline of the street shall be the boundary. Where a boundary follows a parcel line, the parcel line shall be the boundary;

(2)    Where a district boundary divides a parcel, the location of the boundary, unless indicated by dimension, shall be determined by referencing the adopted Zoning Map and/or legal description of the approved Zoning Map amendment case for the exact dimensions; and

(3)    In case of an uncertainty, the Director shall determine the precise location of the zoning district boundary.

(c)    Zoning of new annexations. All property in the City, or hereafter annexed, not previously classified by the City is designated in the “A” Zoning District.

 

Table 2-1

ZONING DISTRICTS

 

Zoning District Symbol

Zoning District Name

General Plan Land Use Designation Implemented by Zoning District

Residential Districts

 

 

R-O-4

Single-Family Residential, Very Low Density

Very Low Density Residential

R-O-2

Single-Family Residential, Moderate Very Low Density

Very Low Density Residential

R-O-1

Single-Family Residential, Low Density

Low Density Residential

R-O-½

Single-Family Residential, Low Density

Low Density Residential

R-O

Single-Family Residential, Medium Low Density

Medium Density Residential

R-1

Single-Family Residential, Medium Density

Medium Density Residential

R-2

Multi-Family Residential, Medium Density

Medium High Density Residential

R-3

Multi-Family Residential, High Density

High Density Residential

R-S

Residential, Special

High Density Residential

Commercial and Manufacturing Districts

 

C-1

General Commercial

General Commercial

B-P

Business/Professional Commercial

General Commercial

VMU

Village Mixed Use

Village Mixed-Use

M-1

Industrial Light Manufacturing

Commercial Manufacturing

MPD

Manufacturing Planned Development

Manufacturing Planned Development

Special Purpose Districts

 

 

A

Agricultural

Agricultural

I-R-1

Institutional, Recreational

Institutional, Recreational

I-R-2

Institutional, Recreational

Institutional, Recreational

I-R-3

Institutional, Recreational

Institutional, Recreational

OS

Open Space

Open Space/Resource

P-L

Public

Public/Quasi-Public

SP

Specific Plan

All

Overlay Districts

 

 

T-C-O

Thoroughfare Corridor Overlay

All

SPL

Special Housing Overlay

All

 

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 1, Ord. 787, eff. February 10, 2006, § 2, Ord. No. 827, eff. June 28, 2013)

 

Article 3. Development and Land Use Approval Requirements
Sec. 10-2.301. Purpose of article.
        This article describes the City’s requirements for the approval of proposed development and new land uses. The permit requirements established by these Zoning Regulations for specific land uses are in Articles 4 through 7, and in Articles 8 through 17.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.302. General requirements for development and new land uses.
        All uses of land and/or structures shall be established, constructed, maintained, reconstructed, altered, or replaced in compliance with the following requirements.

(a)    Allowable use. The use of land shall be identified by Articles 4 through 7 of this chapter as being allowable in the zoning district applied to the site. The Director may determine whether a particular land use is allowable.

(b)    Permit/approval requirements. Any land use permit or other approval required by Section 10-2.303 shall be obtained before a proposed use and/or structure is constructed, otherwise established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is listed in Section 10-2.304

(c)    Development standards. The use of land and/or structure shall comply with all applicable requirements of these Zoning Regulations, including the zoning district standards of this article, and the provisions of Articles 8 through 17.

(d)    Conditions of approval. The use of land and/or structures shall comply with any applicable conditions of approval imposed by any previously granted land use or other approval.

(e)    Legal parcel. The use of land and/or structures shall only be established on a parcel of land which has been legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and Title 10, Chapter 3 of the Municipal Code, as applicable at the time the parcel was created.

(f)    Development agreements. The use and/or structures shall comply with any applicable Development agreement approved by the City in compliance with Article 28 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.303. Allowable land uses and permit requirements.
        The uses of land allowed by these Zoning Regulations in each zoning district are identified in Articles 4 through 7, together with the type of land use permit required for each use.

(a)    Allowable land uses by conditional use permit. If a proposed land use is not specifically listed in Tables 2-2, 2-4, 2-6, and 2-8 (see Articles 4 through 7), the use shall only be allowed if the Commission can first find the use not more objectionable or detrimental to the general welfare or, in a specific case, not more objectionable or detrimental to a particular area of the zoning district than the uses enumerated in the tables, through the granting of a conditional use permit, in compliance with Article 24, or as provided in subsections (b) and (c) below.

(b)    Similar uses allowed—Director determination.

(1)    When a proposed land use is not specifically listed in Tables 2-2, 2-4, 2-6, and 2-8 (see Articles 4 through 7), it shall be understood that the use is not allowed unless it is first determined by the Director to be similar to other uses listed, or is approved in compliance with subsections (a) above or (c) below.

(2)    It is further recognized that every conceivable use cannot be identified in these Zoning Regulations, and anticipating that new uses will evolve over time, this subsection establishes the Director’s authority to compare a proposed use and measure it against those listed in these Zoning Regulations.

(3)    In determining “similarity,” the Director shall first make all of the following findings:

(A)   The proposed use shall meet the intent of and be consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan;

(B)   The proposed use shall meet the stated purpose and intent of the zoning district in which the use is proposed;

(C)   The proposed use shall not adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare of the City’s residents; and

(D)   The proposed use shall share characteristics common with, and not be of greater density/intensity, or generate more adverse environmental effects than those uses listed in the zoning district in which the use is proposed.

(4)    The proposed use shall be processed under the same entitlement (e.g., design review permit or conditional use permit) as the similar use(s) listed in the zoning district.

(c)    Similar uses allowed—Commission determination. Where clarification is required or special conditions exist, a desired use may be submitted for Commission determination (Article 33).

(d)    Permit requirements. Tables 2-2, 2-4, 2-6 and 2-8 provide for land uses that are:

(1)    Permitted subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, subject to first obtaining a zoning clearance (Article 19) and any building permit or other permit required by the Municipal Code. Any permitted use in a commercial zone and any two-story structure in any zone require design review (Article 20). These are shown as “P” uses in the tables;

(2)    Allowed subject to the approval of a design review permit (Article 20) and shown as “DRP” uses in the table; or

(3)    Allowed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit (Article 24), and shown as “CUP” uses in the tables.

(e)    Multiple uses on a single site. Where a proposed project includes multiple land uses, and Tables 2-2, 2-4, 2-6, and 2-8 require different land use permits for some of the uses, land use permit application filing and processing shall comply with Section 10-2.1802

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.304. Exemptions from land use permit requirements.
        The land use permit requirements of these Zoning Regulations do not apply to the activities, uses of land and/or structures identified by this section. However, nothing in this section shall eliminate the requirements of the Municipal Code for obtaining grading, building, and/or other construction permits prior to starting any work.

(a)    Governmental facilities. Facilities of the City and facilities of the State or Federal Government on land owned or leased by a governmental agency, for governmental operations, to the extent that exemption is required by State or Federal law and facilities of the Ojai Unified School District to the extent such facilities are directly related to educational purposes.

(b)    Interior remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the number of rooms or the gross floor area within the structure, or change the approved use of the structure or parking requirements.

(c)    Reconstruction of destroyed uses and structures. A use of land and/or structure destroyed by fire or natural disaster may be re-established as it existed, provided that it:

(1)    Was legally established and in compliance with these Zoning Regulations before destruction;

(2)    Reconstruction occurs in compliance with all applicable building, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing code requirements;

(3)    The use is compatible with other uses allowed in the zoning district and/or neighborhood; and

(4)    It receives an approved design review permit (unless exempt) in order to ensure effective implementation of the General Plan policies relating to design.

        See Section 10-2.1315 regarding repairs to nonconforming structures.

(d)    Repairs and maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance, if:

(1)    The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure, addition to, or enlargement/expansion of the land use and/or structure; and

(2)    The exterior repairs employ use of the same materials and design as the original construction and are approved by the Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.305. Requirements for sites divided by zoning boundary.
        Where a site is divided by one (1) or more zoning district boundaries, the site shall be developed in compliance with the requirements of each district, as applicable. For example, if a site is zoned both commercial and residential, the portion of the site zoned commercial shall be developed in compliance with the commercial zoning regulations, and the portion zoned residential shall be developed in compliance with the requirements of the applicable residential district.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

 

Sec. 10-2.306. Temporary uses.
        Requirements for establishing a temporary use (e.g., construction yards, seasonal sales lots, special events, temporary office trailers, etc.) are in Article 22 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.307. Additional permits and approvals may be required.
        An allowed land use that has been granted a land use permit, or is exempt from land use permit requirements, may still be required to obtain other City permits or approvals before construction is commenced, and/or the land use is otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in this article shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits or approvals required by:

(a)    Other Municipal Code provisions, including Building and Grading, or other construction permits if they are required by Title 9 or a business license if required by Title 6; or

(b)    Any applicable County, or any regional, State or Federal agency regulations.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 4. Residential Zoning Districts
Sec. 10-2.401. Purpose of article.
        This article lists the uses of land that may be allowed within the residential zoning districts established by Articles 2 through 7, determines the type of land use permit/approval required for each use, and provides basic standards for site planning and development.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.402. Purposes of residential zoning districts.
        Different residential zoning districts are provided to promote a mix of urban and rural residential neighborhoods which encompass a range of housing types that are visually attractive and compatible in intensity, dwelling unit size, and structural design with the need to protect the community’s small town character (General Plan, Land Use Element). The purposes of the individual residential zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows.

(a)    R-O-4 (Single-Family Residential, Very Low Density) District. The R-O-4 Zoning District is intended to provide a quasi-rural atmosphere for individuals and families who desire a high degree of freedom and independence from their neighbors and yet maintain the benefits associated with City services. The maximum allowable density is one (1) dwelling unit per four (4) acres. The R-O-4 Zoning District is consistent with the very low density residential land use designation of the General Plan.

(b)    R-O-2 (Single-Family Residential, Moderate Very Low Density) District. The R-O-2 Zoning District is intended to provide a quasi-rural atmosphere for individuals and families who desire a high degree of freedom and independence from their neighbors and yet maintain the benefits associated with City services. The maximum allowable density is one (1) dwelling unit per two (2) acres. The R-O-2 Zoning District is consistent with the very low density residential land use designation of the General Plan.

(c)    R-O-1 (Single-Family Residential, Low Density) District. The R-O-1 Zoning District is intended to provide a transition from very low density, quasi-rural areas to medium density urban areas. The maximum allowable density is one (1) dwelling unit per acre. The R-O-1 Zoning District is consistent with the low density residential land use designation of the General Plan.

(d)    R-O-1/2 (Single-Family Residential, Low Density) District. The R-O-1/2 Zoning District is intended to provide a transition from very low density, quasi-rural areas to medium density urban areas. The maximum allowable density is two (2) dwelling units per acre. The R-O-1/2 Zoning District is consistent with the low density residential land use designation of the General Plan.

(e)    R-O (Single-Family Residential, Medium Low Density) District. The R-O Zoning District is intended for single-family residential development within a neighborhood context, and a natural transition from low density to progressively higher density zones near the City center. The maximum allowable density is three (3) dwelling units per acre. The R-O Zoning District is consistent with the medium density residential land use designation of the General Plan.

(f)    R-1 (Single-Family Residential, Medium Density) District. The R-1 Zoning District is intended for residential neighborhood areas appropriate for custom or tract-style homes, and to provide a transition to multi-family residential zones. The maximum allowable density is four (4) dwelling units per acre. The R-1 Zoning District is consistent with the medium density residential land use designation of the General Plan.

(g)    R-2 (Multi-Family Residential, Medium High Density) District. The R-2 Zoning District is intended for areas appropriate for single-family housing and provides a transition area to the Village Commercial district. The maximum allowable density is eight (8) dwelling units per acre. The R-2 Zoning District is consistent with the medium high density residential land use designation of the General Plan.

(h)    R-3 (Multi-Family Residential, High Density) District. The R-3 Zoning District is intended for areas appropriate for high-density, multi-family housing. The maximum allowable density is fifteen (15) dwelling units per acre. The R-3 Zoning District is consistent with the high density residential land use designation of the General Plan.

(i)     R-S (Residential, Special) District. Special residential zoning is provided to meet unusual housing requirements which might arise. It is intended that this zoning district be used for areas suitable for special projects. In general, the same criteria, uses, requirements and limitations that apply to the R-3 Zoning District will also apply in the R-S zone.

 

TABLE 2-2
Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zoning Districts

P

Permitted Use

MUP

Minor Conditional Use Permit required

CUP

Conditional Use Permit required

—

Use not allowed

PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT

Specific Use Regulations

LAND USE (1)

RO4

RO2

RO1

RO1/2

R-O

R-1

R-2

R-3

R-S

AGRICULTURE, RESOURCE & OPEN SPACE USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Animal keeping

P

P

P

P

P

P

—

—

—

 

Crop production, horticulture

P

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

—

 

RECREATION, EDUCATION & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Community center

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

—

—

—

 

Equestrian facility

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

—

—

—

 

Golf course and country club

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

—

—

—

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Guest house

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

 

Home occupation

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

Art. 21

Mobile home outside of a park

—

—

—

—

—

P

—

—

—

 

Mobile home park

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Multi-family dwellings

—

—

—

—

—

—

P

P

P

 

Residential accessory uses and structures

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Second residential unit

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

—

10-2.1709

Single-family dwelling

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Child day care—Small family day care home

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

 

Child day care—Large family day care home

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

10-2.1704

TRANSPORTATION & COMMUNICATIONS USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Telecommunications facilities

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

10-2.1712

Notes:

(1)    Some permitted uses in Special Purpose Districts may require a Design Review Permit (Art. 20).

(2)    Unless otherwise exempted, new residential uses may require a growth allocation pursuant to City’s Residential Growth Management Plan (Chapter 6 of Title 10).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.403. Residential zoning district land uses and permit requirements.
        Table 2-2 identifies the uses of land allowed by these Zoning Regulations in each residential zoning district, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 10-2.303.

        Note: where the last column in the tables (“Specific Use Regulations”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of these Zoning Regulations may also apply.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.404. Residential zoning district general development standards.
        Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-3, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading) in Articles 8 through 17.

 

Table 2-3

RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

R-O-4

R-O-2

R-O-1

R-O-½

Minimum lot size (1)

Minimum area and dimensions for new parcels

 

Area

4 acres

2 acres

1 acre

20,000 sf

Width

200 ft

125 ft

100 ft

100 ft

Depth

200 ft

125 ft

100 ft

N/A

Maximum density (2)

1 du/4 acres

1 du/2 acres

1 du/acre

2 du/acre

Setbacks

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 10-2.804 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to setback requirements.

Front (3)

40 ft

25 ft (8)

Sides (each) (4)

25 ft

12 ft

12 ft (9)

Rear

25 ft

25 ft (5)

Site coverage (maximum %) (6)

N/A

35%

Height limit (7)

25 ft, 2 stories (10)(11)

25 ft, 2 stories (10)(11)

Landscaping

As required by Article 12 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

As required by Article 14 (Parking and Loading Standards)

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

R-O

R-1

R-2

R-3, R-S

Minimum lot size (1)

Minimum area and dimensions for new parcels

Area

12,000 sf

10,000 sf

10,000 sf

9,600 sf

Width

100 ft

80 ft

Depth

N/A

120 ft

Maximum density (2)

3 du/acre

4 du/acre

5,000 sf/du

3,000 sf/du

Setbacks

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 10-2.804 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to setback requirements.

Front (3)

25 ft (8)

20 ft (8)

15 ft

Sides (each) (4)

12 ft for access, 5 ft. other side (10)

10 ft; 15 ft on reverse corner lot street side

Rear

25 ft (5)

25 ft

15 ft

Site coverage (6)

35%

60%

Height limit (7)

25 ft, 2 stories (10)(11)

Landscaping

As required by Article 12 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking

As required by Article 14 (Parking and Loading Standards)

Notes:

(1)    These limitations do not apply to lots that were of record as of the date the first zoning regulations became effective as to the lot.

(2)    Maximum number of dwellings allowed per gross acre in a single-family subdivision or multi-family project.

(3)    Measured from the inside edge of the sidewalk adjacent to the front lot line or from the front lot line, whichever is greater.

(4)    One of the required side yard setbacks shall be graded to provide access to the rear yard.

(5)    On corner lots and reverse corner lots, structures may encroach into the rear yard setback if an equivalent rear yard setback is provided, but the structures shall be a minimum of twelve (12′) feet from the rear lot line of either type of lot, and shall be a minimum of twenty (20′) feet from the side lot line of a reverse corner lot. In no case shall the required rear yard area be diminished.

(6)    Maximum percentage of site area that may be covered by structures.

(7)    Maximum allowed height of structures. See also Section 10-2.803 (Height measurement and exceptions).

(8)    Where forty (40%) percent or more of the lots on the same street frontage and block are developed with structures having an average front yard setback with a variation of no more than six (6′) feet, no structure shall project beyond that average front yard setback, provided that no structure shall have a front yard setback less than twenty-five (25′) feet within the R-O zone, and twenty (20′) feet within the R-1 zone.

(9)    For reverse corner lots, the street side yard setback shall be not less than fifty (50%) percent of the front yard setback required on the key lot immediately adjacent to the corner lot; provided that in no case shall the buildable width of a reverse corner lot be reduced to less than twenty-five (25′) feet after providing the required side yard setback for interior lots.

(10)  Additional height up to thirty (30′) feet may be approved in accordance with Article 20 of Chapter 2 (Design Review Permits).

(11)  No building in these zones shall exceed the height limitations imposed for the protection and enhancement of solar access by Sec. 10-2.405.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 840, eff. June 13, 2014)

 

Sec. 10-2.405. Protection and enhancement of solar access.
(a)    Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning indicated, unless the context or usage clearly requires a different meaning:

(1)    Base elevation. The elevation of the highest point of contact of a structure with the adjacent ground. For the purposes of this determination, all fences, covered and uncovered walkways, driveways, patio covers and other similar elements shall be considered separate structures.

(2)    Northerly lot line. Any lot line, of which there may be more than one per lot, that forms a generally north facing boundary of a lot and has a bearing greater than or equal to forty (40°) degrees from either true north or true south. For curved lot lines, the bearing of the lot line at any point shall be the bearing of the tangent to the curve at that point.

(3)    Plan view. A plot plan of the parcel which shows the horizontal dimensions of a parcel and each structure on the parcel.

(4)    Residential zone. The zones described in Section 10-2.402.

(5)    Shadow plan. A plot plan which shows the extent of shading caused by a proposed structure and is in compliance with the rules and regulations approved pursuant to subsection (d).

(b)    Height limitation. The maximum elevation of each point on a structure in a residential zone as measured from the base elevation shall not exceed the sum of: (1) eighteen (18′) feet in an R-3 and R-S zone or twelve (12′) feet in all other residential zones; and (2) the additional height allowed above the base height by a line starting at the top of the base height allowance and drawn thirty (30°) degrees from horizontal toward the structure at a point directly over the nearest northerly lot line as measured horizontally on the plan view of the structure. Any height limitation imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other height limitation imposed in Section 10-2.404, such that the more restrictive height limitation shall apply except as provided in subsection (c), Exemptions.

(c)    Exemptions. The following shall be exempt from the height limitations of subsection (b):

(1)    Any portion of a structure in existence, for which a valid building permit was issued prior to January 1, 2015.

(2)    Any portion of a structure which received planning approval prior to January 1, 2015.

(3)    Any flagpole, antenna, ornamental spire, chimney, or other building element less than four (4′) feet long each horizontal dimension.

(4)    Any utility pole and line.

(5)    Any portion of a structure for which a shadow plan is prepared and submitted by the applicant demonstrating that shadows cast by the portion of the structure at 9:00 a.m., noon, and 3:00 p.m. Pacific Standard Time on December 21st will:

i.      Not exceed the boundaries of a simultaneous shadow cast by a legally existing structure, or by an hill or other topographical feature other than trees of other vegetation; or

ii.     Not shade that portion of any adjacent residentially-zoned lot which is occupied by a dwelling or covered parking area or which could legally and without modification of the required setbacks be occupied in the future by a dwelling or covered parking area.

(6)    Any single-story residential building whose base elevation is less than fifteen (15′) feet.

(7)    Any residential building in a neighborhood for which a neighborhood plan or specific plan has been approved, if that neighborhood plan or specific plan includes solar access provisions specific to that neighborhood.

(8)    Any residential building on a lot exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for which the Planning Commission has granted a CUP granting greater heights after making the following findings:

i.      The building will not shade that portion of any adjacent residentially-zoned lot which is occupied by a dwelling; and

ii.     The characteristics of the adjacent residentially zoned lot or lots to the north are such that solar access for future dwellings is not unreasonably limited.

(d)    Rules and regulations.

(1)    The City Council may, by resolution, promulgate rules and regulations for the administration and interpretation of this section.

(2)    The City Council may, by resolution, promulgate rules and regulations for modification of the solar access height limitations where the modification is necessary to prevent unreasonable restriction.

(§ 3, Ord. 840, eff. June 13, 2014, as amended by § 2, Ord. 900, eff. August 12, 2019)

 

 

Article 5. Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts
Sec. 10-2.501. Purpose of article.
        This article lists the uses of land that may be allowed within the commercial and manufacturing zoning districts established by Articles 2 through 7, determines the type of land use permit/approval required for each use, and provides basic standards for site development.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.502. Purposes of commercial and manufacturing zoning districts.
        The commercial and manufacturing zoning districts are intended to “Maintain an adequate inventory of commercial lands for the provision of goods and services to the community that...contribute to a sound local economic base.” (General Plan, Land Use Element). The purposes of the individual commercial and manufacturing zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows.

(a)    C-1 (General Commercial) District. The C-1 Zoning District is applied to areas appropriate for a range of community and tourist serving retail and service land uses. Typical land uses include general retail and personal services, hotels and motels, etc. The maximum floor area ratio is 0.50. The C-1 Zoning District is consistent with the General Commercial land use designation of the General Plan.

(b)    B-P (Business Professional Commercial) District. The B-P Zoning District is intended to provide attractive areas within the small town, historical context of the downtown Arcade area. This zoning district includes diverse, compatible land uses including offices, specialty retail, restaurants, cultural facilities and bed and breakfasts. The maximum floor area ratio is 1.50. The B-P Zoning District is consistent with the General Commercial land use designation of the General Plan.

(c)    VMU (Village Mixed-Use) District. The VMU Zoning District is applied to areas suitable for the development of mixed-use residential and commercial land uses that support pedestrian or bicycle transportation modes and community interaction. The basic allowable lot coverage shall be fifty (50%) percent while the basic allowable floor area ratio shall be determined through Design Review pursuant to Article 20. Lot coverage beyond fifty (50%) percent or floor area ratio above 0.50 may be permitted by issuance of a Planned Development Permit under Article 23 and shall require City Council approval pursuant to Section 10-2.2303(a)(8)(C). The basic allowable residential density is eight (8) dwelling units per acre. Densities above this basic standard may be permitted by the granting of a density bonus pursuant to Article 9. The VMU Zoning District is consistent with the Village Mixed-Use land use designation of the General Plan.

(d)    M-1 (Light Manufacturing Industrial) District. The M-1 Zoning District is applied to areas appropriate for complimentary commercial and light manufacturing land uses. The maximum floor area ratio is 0.45. The M-1 Zoning District is consistent with the Commercial Manufacturing land use designation of the General Plan.

(e)    MPD (Manufacturing Planned Development) District. The MPD Zoning District is applied to areas suitable for campus-like planned industrial and business parks. The district is intended to accommodate projects with compatible manufacturing, research and development, office headquarters, and other land uses that will be compatible with the surrounding community, and not create excessive impacts, including noise, dust, odors, vibration, glare, air pollution, and traffic. The maximum floor area ratio is 0.45. The MPD Zoning District is consistent with the manufacturing planned development land use designation of the General Plan.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 7, Ord. 826, eff. June 28, 2013)

 

 

Sec. 10-2.503. Commercial and manufacturing district land uses and permit requirements.
        Table 2-4 identifies the uses of land allowed by these Zoning Regulations in the commercial and manufacturing zoning districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 10-2.303.

        Note: Where the last column in the tables (“Specific Use Regulations”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of these Zoning Regulations may also apply.

 

ABLE 2-4

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial and Manufacturing Zoning Districts

P

Permitted Use

 

MUP

Minor Conditional Use Permit Required

 

CUP

Conditional Use Permit Required

 

—

Use Not Allowed

 

PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT

Specific Use Regulations

 

LAND USE (1), (5)

C-1

B-P

VMU

M-1

MPD

 

MANUFACTURING & PROCESSING USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agricultural processing, vegetable packing/shipping

—

—

—

P

—

 

 

Clothing and fabric products

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Cosmetics and pharmaceuticals

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Electronics, equipment, instruments, & appliances

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Food and beverage products

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Furniture/fixtures manufacturing, cabinet shop

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Glass products

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Handcraft industries, small-scale manufacturing

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Laundry, dry cleaning plant

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Metal products, fabrication, machine/welding shop

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Printing and publishing

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Recycling facilities - Large collection facility

—

—

—

CUP

—

Art. 15

 

Recycling facilities - Reverse vending machine

—

—

—

MUP

—

Art. 15

 

Recycling facilities - Small collection facility

—

—

—

CUP

CUP

Art. 15

 

Research and development

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Sign painting and manufacturing

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Stone and cut stone products

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Storage or disposal of hazardous materials

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Structural clay and pottery products

—

—

—

P(3)

P

 

 

Textiles and leather products

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Upholstery shop

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Warehouses, wholesaling and distribution

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

RECREATION, EDUCATION, & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

 

 

 

Art gallery

P

P

P

—

—

 

 

Club, lodge, private meeting hall

P

P

CUP

P

P

 

 

Community center

—

P

CUP

—

—

 

 

Health/fitness facility

P

P

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

Indoor amusement/entertainment facility

P

—

CUP

P

—

 

 

Library, museum

P

P

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

School - Specialized education and training

P

P

CUP

—

—

 

 

Studio - Art, dance, martial arts, etc.

P

P

P

CUP

CUP

 

 

Theater, auditorium

—

P

CUP

—

—

 

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Caretaker or employee quarters

P

—

—

CUP

—

 

 

Guest house

—

—

CUP

—

—

§10-2.1705

 

Home occupation

—

—

P

—

—

Art. 21

 

Emergency shelter

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

Live/work unit

—

—

P

—

—

 

 

Multi-family dwelling

—

—

P

—

—

 

 

Multi-family dwelling, in a mixed use project

—

—

P

—

—

 

 

Second residential unit

—

—

P

—

—

§10-2.1709

 

Single-family dwelling

—

—

P

—

—

 

 

Residential care home

—

—

CUP

—

—

 

 

RETAIL TRADE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory retail uses

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

Agricultural equipment and supplies sales

P

—

—

P

—

 

 

Alcoholic beverage sales, on-site

P

CUP

CUP

CUP(7)

—

 

 

Art, antique, collectable, and gift sales

P

P

P

—

—

 

 

Auto parts sales

P

—

—

P

—

 

 

Auto sales and rental - New vehicles

CUP

—

—

—

—

§10-2.1706

 

Bakery, retail

P

—

CUP

P

—

 

 

Bookstore

P

P

P

—

—

 

 

Building material and hardware store

P

—

—

P

P

 

 

Camera/photographic shop

P

P

P

—

—

 

 

Candy/confectionary shop

P

P

CUP

—

—

 

 

Construction equipment sales

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Convenience and liquor stores

P

—

—

P

—

 

 

Delicatessen

P

P

CUP

P

P

 

 

Department store

P

—

—

—

—

 

 

Drive-in and drive-through sales

—

—

—

P

—

 

 

Drug store/pharmacy

P

P

—

—

—

 

 

Electronic equipment sales and service

P

—

CUP

—

—

 

 

Equipment sales and rentals

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Farmers’ market

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

 

 

Florist

P

P

P

—

—

 

 

Furniture, furnishings, & appliance store

P

—

—

P

—

 

 

General retail

P

—

P

—

—

 

 

Grocery store

P

—

—

—

—

 

 

Gun shops

P

—

—

P

—

 

 

Meat market

P

—

—

P

—

 

 

Mobile home and RV sales

—

—

—

P

—

 

 

Oil drilling equipment and supplies

—

—

—

P

—

 

 

Pet store

P

—

—

—

—

 

 

Plant nurseries and garden supply stores

P

—

—

—

—

 

 

Pottery shops and sales

P

—

P

P

P

 

 

Restaurant, café

P

P

P

P

P

 

 

Restaurant, café - Outdoor dining

CUP

—

CUP

—

—

§10-2.1708

 

Service station

CUP

—

—

CUP

—

§10-2.1710

§10-2.1711

 

Stationery store

P

P

CUP

—

—

 

 

Tobacco shop

P

P

—

—

—

 

 

Vending machines, outdoor

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

 

SERVICES

 

Ambulance services

P

P

—

P

—

 

 

Auto repair and maintenance - Major

—

—

—

CUP

—

§10-2.1707

 

Auto repair and maintenance - Minor

CUP

—

—

CUP

—

§10-2.1707

 

Automated teller machine (ATM)

P

P

P(4)

—

—

 

 

Banks and financial services

P

P

—

—

—

 

 

Bed and breakfast inn

CUP

P

CUP

—

—

§10-2.1703

 

Business support services

P

P

—

P

P

 

 

Car wash

—

—

—

P

—

 

 

Child day care center

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

§10-2.1704

 

Contractor storage yard

—

—

—

P

—

 

 

Hotel, motel, lodge, timeshare facility

P

P

P

—

—

 

 

Maintenance and repair - Client site services

—

—

—

P

P

 

 

Medical services - Clinic, laboratory

P

P

P

CUP

P

 

Medical services - Hospital

CUP

CUP

—

CUP

—

 

Offices - Processing and development

P

P

—

P

P

 

Offices - Business, administrative and professional

P

P

P

P

P

 

Offices - Real estate

P

P

—

P

P

 

Personal services

P

P

P

P

P

 

Repair services - Consumer products

P

—

—

P

P

 

Security services, burglar alarms

—

—

—

P

P

 

Storage - Accessory

P

P

P

P

P

 

Storage - Outdoor

—

—

—

P

—

 

Storage - Personal self-service (mini-storage)

—

—

—

P

P

 

Veterinarians, animal hospitals, kennels, boarding

—

CUP

—

P

—

 

TRANSPORTATION AND COMMUNICATIONS USES

Broadcast studios

P

P

—

P

—

 

Parking facilities, private and public

P

P

P

P

P

 

Telecommunications facilities

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

§10-2.1712

Truck and freight terminals

—

—

—

P

—

 

Notes:

(1)    See Article 38 for land use definitions. See Section 10-2.303 regarding land uses not listed here.

(2)    Permitted uses in commercial zoning districts may require a Design Review Permit (Art. 20).

(3)    Use not allowed within 500 feet of a residential zoning district.

(4)    Allowed in conjunction with another commercial use.

(5)    All uses shall be conducted within an enclosed structure unless granted a conditional use permit.

(6)    Unless otherwise excepted, new commercial uses may require a growth allocation pursuant to City’s Commercial Growth Management Plan (Chapter 6 of Title 10).

(7)    Limited to conditionally permitted on-site sales of beer and wine to guests of legally existing transient occupancy and lodging uses.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 1, Ord. 774, eff. August 13, 2004, § 2, Ord. 856, eff. June 12, 2015, § 2, Ord. 871, eff. June 9, 2017, and §§ 2, 3, Ord. 897, eff. June 15, 2019)

 

Sec. 10-2.504. Commercial and manufacturing district general development standards.
(a)    Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-5, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article 8 of this chapter.

(b)    The following standards shall also apply to the VMU Zoning District:

(1)    Subject to the limitations of subsection (b)(2), properties within the VMU Zoning District may be occupied by any combination of uses allowed by Section 10-2.503 (Table 2-4) and need not, as a requirement, be devoted to commercial or mixed-uses, in whole or in part.

(2)    Properties may only be devoted exclusively to commercial use when such properties: (i) adjoin one or more parcels similarly used for exclusive commercial purposes; or (ii) are used exclusively for offices (professional, administrative and real estate) or personal services as listed in Table 2-4. Properties may only be devoted to mixed-use when: (i) such properties adjoin one or more parcels similarly used for mixed-use or exclusive commercial purposes; or (ii) the commercial portion of the property is limited to offices (professional, administrative and real estate) or personal services as listed in Table 2-4. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by Conditional Use Permit subject to, and contingent upon, making the requisite findings set forth in Section 10-2.2406, including, without limitation, the requirement that: (i) the proposed use, at the location planned, is consistent with the action, goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan for the VMU Zoning District; (ii) the proposed use would be compatible with the character of existing uses in the surrounding neighborhood; and (iii) the site of the proposed use is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of use being proposed. As used throughout this section, the term “mixed-use” means a property occupied by a minimum of one residential dwelling and not less than twenty-five (25) percent or greater than seventy-five (75) percent of total building area is devoted exclusively to commercial use.

(3)    Parking requirements within the VMU Zoning District shall be governed by the provisions of Article 14 except as follows: (i) for mixed-use properties where residential uses occupy up to but not in excess of fifty (50) percent of total building area, a reduction in the number of required parking spaces may be granted subject to and contingent upon site-specific parking studies that account for shared uses conducted on the property; (ii) modification of design standards for mixed-use properties (e.g., covered and tandem parking) may be granted where such deviations are consistent with the pattern of development in the vicinity and are consistent with the use and operational characteristics of the mixed-uses; and (iii) all reductions and modifications in parking requirements within the VMU Zoning District, including the shared-use parking alternative for non-residential properties stipulated in Section 10-2.1406, shall be subject to Design Review and approval pursuant to Article 20.

(4)    As set forth in Article 20, all property within the VMU Zoning District is subject to design review. Unless or except otherwise governed by Design Guidelines expressly adopted for the VMU Zoning District pursuant to Section 10-2.2005, all projects shall be evaluated for adherence to the following design principles: (i) Context - new structures should employ materials, colors, textures, styles, building mass, and scale that are compatible with the architectural character and form of surrounding buildings, as appropriate; (ii) Continuity - buildings should be set back from the street consistent with the pattern of existing

development located in the vicinity of the property; (iii) Scale - building forms should maintain a human scale at the street and an appropriate height transition to adjacent properties; and (iv) Architectural Design - high quality architectural design should be employed to avoid monotonous building elevations and create architectural interest. In specific regard to Building Mass, all projects shall be encouraged to stair-step elevations such that each floor above the first is setback from the floor below as depicted in Figure 1-1. Uncovered decks and balconies may occupy the setback area for each floor above the first and all openings on floors above the first that face a side yard should be designed so as to allow illumination while protecting privacy. As an alternative to stair-stepping elevations, projects may incorporate distinctive architectural features such as towers, turrets and colonnades that effectively compensate for monoplane building surfaces.

        (Note: Overall Design Principles are depicted in Figures 1-1 and 1-2)

 



 



(5)    Each project subject to design review shall be evaluated for compliance with the General Plan policies that promote pedestrian or bicycle transportation modes and community interaction within the VMU Zoning District. Compliance shall be determined on a case-by-case basis by the decision-making body, taking into account the circumstances particular to each project, and may be achieved through any combination of land dedication, on and off-site improvements, adherence to Master Pedestrian Circulation Plans or payment of in-lieu fees established by resolution of the City Council.

(6)    The Basic Allowance set forth in Table 2-5 defines maximum limits and may, at the discretion of the decision making body, be further reduced as part of the Design Review process in order to make necessary findings in support of project approval. Increases in the maximum limits appearing in Table 2-5 or other exceptions to requirements specified elsewhere in this section may be granted under the density bonus or planned development permit provisions of Articles 9 and 23, respectively. Issuance of a Planned Development Permit is expressly subject to, and contingent upon, making the requisite findings set forth in Section 10-2.2307 including, without limitation, the requirement that: (i) the proposed development is consistent with the action, goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan for the VMU Zoning District; (ii) the proposed development would be compatible with the character of existing development in the surrounding neighborhood; and (iii) the site is physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed.

(7)    Existing nonconforming buildings and uses within the VMU Zoning District may be continued subject to provisions of Article 13, provided, at a minimum, that subsequent changes in use must comply with the location and parking requirements of Sections 10-2.504(b)(2) and 2.504(b)(3), respectively.

 

 

Table 2-5

COMMERCIAL AND MANUFACTURING DISTRICT GENERAL

DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

 

Development Feature

Requirement by Zoning District

C-1

B-P

VMU

M-1

MPD

 

 

Basic Allowance

Planned Development Permit

 

 

Min. Lot Size

Min. area and dimensions for new parcels

Min. area and dimensions for new parcels (5)

 

 

Area

9,600 sq. ft.

20,000 sq. ft.

8,500 sq. ft.

Standards to be determined by the decision making body through the planned development permit process pursuant to Article 23 (7)

10,000 sq. ft.

1 acre

Width

80 ft.

 

50

75 ft.

To be determined through development review process

Depth

120 ft.

100 ft.

120

To be determined through development review process

Max. Density

 

 

5,445 sf/du

 

 

Setbacks (3)

Min. setbacks required. See Section 10-2.804 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to setback requirements

Front

10 ft.

20 ft.

Median Setback; 20 ft Max. Required (8)

Standards to be determined by the decision making body through the planned development permit process pursuant to Article 23 (7)

10 ft.

To be determined through development review process

Sides (each)

10 ft. if adjacent to residential district; none required otherwise

10% of Lot Width; 10 ft Max. Required (6)

10 ft. adjacent to a residential district; none required otherwise

Rear

15 ft.

20 ft.

25% of Lot Depth; 25 ft Max. Required

Site Coverage (1)

50%; 35% for development within the Bryant Industrial Specific Plan Area

70%

50%

45%; 35% for development within the Bryant Industrial Specific Plan Area

Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

0.50; 0.35 for development within the Bryant Industrial Specific Plan Area

1.50

Standard to be determined by the decision making body through the design review process (Article 20) taking into account the provisions of Section 2.504(b)(3). FAR above 0.50 requires planning commission approval pursuant to Section 10-2.2303(a)(8)(C).

0.35

Height Limit (2)

35 ft.

30 ft., 2 stories

35 ft.

35 ft.

To be determined through development review process

Landscaping

As required by Article 12

(Landscaping Standards)

Standard to be determined, by the decision making body through the design review process (Article 20) subject to the requirements of Article 12 (Landscaping Standards) and adopted landscape guidelines. Oak trees shall be emphasized along street frontages and within setback areas visible to the public.

As required by Article 12

(Landscaping Standards)

Parking

As required by Article 14

(Parking and Loading Standards)

As required by Section 10-2.504(b)(2) and Article 14 (Parking and Loading Standards)

As required by Article 14

(Parking and Loading Standards)

Notes:

(1)    Maximum percentage of site area that may be covered by structures.

(2)    Maximum allowed height of structures. See also Section 10-2.803 (Height Measurement and Exceptions).

(3)    Please see Table 3-1 (Allowed Projections into Setbacks) and Table 3-2 (Minimum Distance Between Structures).

(4)    See Section 10-2.504(b)(1).

(5)    Existing legal nonconforming parcels of record that do not conform to specific lot standards may still be developed under the provisions of Article 5. See Section 10-2.1321

(6)    For reverse corner lots, the street side yard setback shall be not less than fifty (50%) percent of the front yard setback required on the key lot immediately adjacent to the corner lot; provided that in no case shall the buildable width of a reverse corner lot be reduced to less than sixty (60%) percent after providing the required side yard setback for interior lots; provided, however, that in no event shall the street side yard setback be reduced to less than ten (10) feet.

(7)    The parcel limitation of five (5) net acres prescribed in Section 10-2.2303(a)(7) shall not apply to parcels within the VMU Zoning District.

(8)    “Median Setback” includes all developed lots on the same street frontage and block and constitutes the mid-point of the front yard setback for all such developed lots.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 1, Ord. 782, eff. August 26, 2005, §§ 8, 9, Ord. No. 826, eff. 6-28-2013)

 

Article 6. Special Purpose Zoning Districts
Sec. 10-2.601. Purpose of article.
        This article regulates development and new land uses in the special purpose zoning districts established by Articles 2 through 7.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.602. Purposes of special purpose zoning districts.
        The purposes of the individual special purpose zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows:

(a)    A (Agricultural) District. The A Zoning District is intended to preserve lands suitable for commercial agricultural activities, and to protect local agriculture as an economic and environmental resource. The maximum allowable density is one (1) dwelling unit per ten (10) acres. The A Zoning District is consistent with the agricultural land use designation of the General Plan.

(b)    OS (Open Space) District. The OS Zoning District is applied to areas with important environmental, historical, and cultural resources. It is also intended to provide areas of open space to protect the public from hazardous conditions. The maximum allowable density is from one (1) dwelling unit per ten (10) acres to one (1) dwelling unit per eighty (80) acres, as indicated on the Zoning Map. The OS Zoning District is consistent with the open space/resource land use designation of the General Plan.

(c)    I-R-1 (Institutional, Recreational) District. The I-R-1 Zoning District is applied to areas intended for institutional or recreational land uses that will not result in commercial impacts to public facilities and services. Parcels may range from 20,000 square feet to 9.99 acres. The I-R-1 Zoning District is consistent with the institutional, recreational land use designation of the General Plan.

(d)    I-R-2 (Institutional, Recreational) District. The I-R-2 Zoning District is applied to areas intended for institutional or recreational land uses that will not result in commercial impacts to public facilities and services. Parcels may range from ten (10) acres to 39.99 acres. The I-R-2 Zoning District is consistent with the institutional, recreational land use designation of the General Plan.

(e)    I-R-3 (Institutional, Recreational) District. The I-R-3 Zoning District is applied to areas intended for institutional or recreational land uses that will not result in commercial impacts to public facilities and services. The minimum lot size is forty (40) acres. The I-R-3 Zoning District is consistent with the institutional, recreational land use designation of the General Plan.

(f)    P-L (Public, Quasi-Public) District. The P-L Zoning District is applied to areas appropriate for public facilities, government offices, and cultural facilities. The maximum building intensity varies, and shall be determined through the development review process, on a case-by-case basis. The P-L Zoning District is consistent with the public/quasi-public land use designation of the General Plan.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.603. Special purpose district land uses and permit requirements.
        Table 2-6 identifies the uses of land allowed by these Zoning Regulations in each special purpose zoning district, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 10-2.303.

        Note: where the last column in the tables (“Specific Use Regulations”) includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of these Zoning Regulations may also apply.

 

TABLE 2-6

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Special Purpose Districts

P

Permitted Use

MUP

Minor Conditional Use Permit Required

CUP

Conditional Use Permit Required

—

Use not allowed

LAND USE (1)

Permit Required by District

Specific Use Regulations

A

OS

P-L

AGRICULTURE & OPEN SPACE USES

 

 

 

 

Animal keeping

P

CUP

—

 

Beekeeping

P

P

—

 

Crop production and horticulture

P

P

—

 

Grazing

P

P

—

 

Mining or excavation, small scale

—

CUP

—

 

Nature and open space preserves

—

P

—

 

RECREATION, EDUCATION, & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

 

 

Campground

—

CUP

—

 

Cemetery

—

CUP

—

 

Community center

—

—

P

 

Golf course, public

—

CUP

P

 

Hiking trail

—

P

—

 

Library, museum

—

—

P

 

Schools, public and private

—

—

P

 

Schools, colleges and universities

—

—

P

 

Park, playground, recreation center

—

CUP

P

 

Religious facility

—

—

P

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

 

 

 

 

Caretaker or employee quarters

CUP

—

P

 

Farm worker housing

CUP

CUP

—

 

Guest house

CUP

—

—

 

Home occupation

P

P

—

Art. 21

Residential accessory uses and structures

P

P

—

 

Second residential unit

CUP

—

—

Sec. 10-2.1710

SERVICES

 

 

 

 

Medical services - Hospital

—

—

CUP

 

Offices, government

—

—

P

 

Public safety facility

—

—

P

 

Public utility facility

—

—

CUP

 

Restaurant

—

—

CUP

 

Veterinary hospitals, large animal

—

CUP

—

 

TRANSPORTATION & COMMUNICATIONS USES

 

 

 

Broadcast studio

P

—

—

 

Parking facility, public

—

—

P

 

Telecommunications facility

—

CUP

CUP

Sec. 10-2.1713

 

LAND USE (1)

Permit Required by District

Specific Use Regulations

I-R-1

I-R-2

I-R-3

AGRICULTURE & OPEN SPACE USES

 

 

 

 

Apiary

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Crop production and horticulture

P

P

P

 

Hiking trail

P

P

P

 

Livestock raising

P

P

P

 

Mining and excavation

—

—

—

 

Nature preserve

P

P

P

 

RECREATION, EDUCATION, & PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES

 

 

Art gallery, studio, accessory

P

P

—

 

Civic center

P

P

P

 

Community center

P

P

P

 

Golf course, accessory

P

P

P

 

Golf driving range

P

P

P

 

Health/fitness facility, accessory

P

P

P

 

Indoor amusement/entertainment facility

—

CUP

CUP

 

Library, museum

P

P

P

 

Schools, public and private

P

P

P

 

Schools, colleges and universities

P

P

P

 

Studios (i.e., dance, martial arts, etc.), accessory

P

P

—

 

Outdoor recreational facility, accessory

P

P

P

 

Park, playground

P

P

P

 

Religious facility

P

P

P

 

RESIDENTIAL USES

 

 

 

 

Caretaker and employee quarters

P

P

P

 

Home occupations

—

P

P

Art. 21

Single-family dwelling

—

CUP

CUP

 

Student/faculty housing

—

CUP

CUP

 

RETAIL TRADE

 

 

 

 

General retail, accessory

P

P

P

 

SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

Bar, accessory

P

P

P

—

 

Child day care center

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

10-2.1704

Hotel, motel

—

—

P

—

 

Medical services - Clinic, laboratory

—

—

—

P

 

Medical services - Hospital

P

P

P

—

 

Offices, government

—

—

—

P

 

Personal services, accessory

P

P

—

—

 

Public safety services

P

P

P

—

 

Public utility facility

CUP

CUP

CUP

—

 

Restaurant

—

CUP

CUP

—

 

Restaurant accessory

P

P

P

—

 

Social service center

P

P

P

—

 

TRANSPORTATION & COMMUNICATIONS USES

 

 

 

 

Broadcast studio

—

—

—

P

 

Parking facility, private

—

—

—

P

 

 

 

Notes:

(1)    See Article 36 for land use definitions. See Section 10-2.303 regarding land uses not listed here.

(2)    Some permitted uses in special purpose districts may require a design review permit (Art. 20).

(3)    Unless otherwise exempted, new residential uses may require a growth allocation pursuant to the City’s residential growth management plan (Chapter 6 of Title 10).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.604. Special purpose district general development standards.
        Except as otherwise provided by subsections (a) through (c), subdivisions, new land uses and structures and alterations to existing land uses and structures shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-7, in addition to any other applicable requirements of this article and the development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading) in Articles 8 through 17 of this chapter.

(a)    I-R Zoning Districts. Proposed development and new land uses within the I-R-1, I-R-2, and I-R-3 Zoning Districts shall be designed, established, and maintained in compliance with Section 10-2.605.

(b)    OS Zoning District. See Section 10-2.606 in addition to the requirements of Table 2-7.

(c)    SP Zoning District. Proposed development and new land uses within the SP Zoning District shall be designed, established, and maintained in compliance with the standards provided in the applicable adopted specific plan.

 

Table 2-7

SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

A, OS AND P-L ZONES

 

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

A

OS

P-L

Minimum Lot Size

Minimum area and dimensions for new parcels

Area

10 acres

10 to 80 acres (1) (6)

Standards to be determined by the Commission through the development review process

Width

200 ft

N/A

Maximum Density (2)

1 du/10 ac

1 du/parcel

Site Coverage (3)

N/A

Setbacks Required

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 10-2.804 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to setback requirements.

Front

50 ft (4)

See Section 10-2.606

Standards to be determined by the Commission through the development review process

Side

N/A (4)

Rear

Height Limit (5)

30 ft, 2 stories

Landscaping

As required by Article 12 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking and Loading

As required by Article 14 (Parking and Loading Standards)

Notes:

(1)    The minimum lot area allowed within the OS Zoning District from ten (10) to eighty (80) acres is indicated on the Zoning Map.

(2)    Maximum density allowed per gross acre in a single-family subdivision or multi-family project.

(3)    Maximum percentage of site area that may be covered by structures.

(4)    In the A Zoning District, all livestock structures (including corrals, barns, pens, etc.) shall be set back a minimum of 400 ft from any dwelling on an adjacent property, and at least 100 ft from a dwelling on the same property.

(5)    Maximum allowed height of structures. See also Section 10-2.803 (Height Measurement and Exceptions).

(6)    See Section 10-2.606 (OS Zoning District Development Standards).

 

 

Table 2-7

SPECIAL PURPOSE DISTRICT GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS

I-R-1, I-R-2 AND I-R-3 ZONES

 

 

Requirement by Zoning District

Development Feature

I-R-1

I-R-2

I-R-3

Minimum Lot Size (1)

Minimum area and dimensions for new parcels

Area

20,000 sf

10 acres

40 acres

Width

80 ft

200 ft

400 ft

Depth

120 ft

300 ft

600 ft

Maximum Density (2)

1 unit

1 du/2 acres (3)

1 du/4 acres (3)

Max. Developable Area and Max. Floor Area

Maximum developable area and maximum floor area shall be determined in compliance with Section 10-2.605 (I-R Zoning District Development Standards).

Setbacks Required

Minimum setbacks required. See Section 10-2.804 for setback measurement, allowed projections into setbacks, and exceptions to setback requirements.

Front

25 ft

30 ft

35 ft

Side

12 ft

25 ft

25 ft

Rear

25 ft

30 ft

35 ft

From arterial

35 ft

50 ft

65 ft

From collector

25 ft

30 ft

35 ft

Open Space Buffer

Landscaped, and/or restricted lands maintained as open space between proposed development and parcels in the identified adjoining zoning districts.

From P-L, A, R-O-4, or R-O-2 zones

25 ft

30 ft

35 ft

From R-O-1, R-O, R-1

25 ft

35 ft

50 ft

From R-2, R-3, B-P, C-1, M-1

35 ft

50 ft

65 ft

Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

0.25

0.20

0.18

Height Limit (4)

 

35 ft

 

Open Space Ratio (5)

50 %

60 %

75 %

Landscaping

As required by Article 12 (Landscaping Standards)

Parking and Loading

As required by Article 14 (Parking and Loading Standards)

Notes:

(1)    These limitations shall not apply to lots of record as of the date the first zoning regulations became effective as to the lot.

(2)    Maximum density allowed per gross acre in a single-family subdivision or multi-family project.

(3)    Clustering required.

(4)    Maximum allowed height of structures. See also Section 10-2.803 (Height Measurement and Exceptions).

(5)    The percentage of gross site area that must remain as open space.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 855, eff. May 28, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-2.605. I-R Zoning District development standards.
        Subdivisions, other proposed development, and new land uses proposed within the I-R-1, I-R-2, and I-R-3 Zoning Districts shall comply with the requirements of this section.

(a)    Maximum developable area. To determine the maximum developable area, calculate the following:

Gross site area _____ sf - minimum required open space (____% OSR × _____ sf of gross site area) = gross developable area __________ sf (-) restricted lands (if any) exceeding the open space ratio = maximum developable area.

 

 

Maximum area available for development equals:

 

Maximum developable area ________ sf (-) existing development _________ sf = maximum area available for development. If there is no existing development, the available developable area will be the same as the maximum developable area.

 

Table 2-8

MAXIMUM DEVELOPABLE AREA

 

 

Requirement by District

Development Feature

I-R-1

I-R-2

I-R-3

Maximum Developable Area (MDA) (1)

50% of gross site area

40% of gross site area

25% of gross site area

Note:

(1)    MDA equals the gross site area less the square footage of existing development and/or any restricted land.

 

 

(b)    Maximum building floor area. To determine the maximum building floor area, calculate the following:

(1)    Maximum building floor area. Maximum developable area ____________ sf × maximum FAR (+) restricted lands. Additional square feet per subsection (b)(2) below, if any = maximum building floor area ____________sf.

        The maximum building floor area available for development equals the above calculation less any existing area (in square feet) of development. If there is no existing building floor area, the available building floor area will be the same as the maximum building floor area.

(2)    Restricted lands. If restricted lands exceed the minimum required open space ratio, the excess land area may be used to increase the maximum building floor area, as calculated below:

(A)   Total Unusable Land ____________ sf ×.05 = ____________ sf

(B)   Reserved Land ____________ sf ×.10 = ____________ sf

(C)   Partially Unusable Lands ____________ sf ×.15 = ____________ sf

(c)    Prohibition of development in restricted areas. No development shall be allowed on the restricted land area except for open uses, driveways, landscaping, buffers and similar uses. If restricted land areas exceed the applicable open space ratio, the excess lands may be used to calculate additional building floor area pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of this section.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.606. OS Zoning District development standards.
        Proposed development and new land uses within the OS Zoning District shall comply with the requirements of this section.

(a)    Site design clustering option. Parcel size may be reduced to a minimum of 10,000 square feet to accommodate the clustering of residential dwelling units, if the Commission determines that sensitive environmental and/or visual resources would benefit from residences being clustered together away from sensitive resources, and the units are clustered as a common lot development. Overall density shall remain as allowed by Section 10-2.605(a), above.

(b)    Setbacks. Structures, including accessory structures, and vehicle parking area(s) shall not be located within 100 feet of any lot line. Appropriate setbacks from natural resources (e.g., oak trees and oak groves, riparian habitat, rivers, streams, and other sensitive biological resources) shall be determined through a biological study, prepared by a qualified professional.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 7. Overlay Zoning Districts
Sec. 10-2.701. Purpose of article.
        This article provides land use and development regulations for the overlay zoning districts established by Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter. Except as otherwise stipulated, the requirements of this article apply in addition to the standards and regulations of the primary zoning districts, where important site, environmental, safety, compatibility, or design issues require particular attention in project planning.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 3, Ord. No. 827, eff. June 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.702. Applicability of overlay zoning districts.
        The provisions of this article apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other applicable requirements of these Zoning Regulations. Any perceived conflict between the provisions of this article and any other provision of these Zoning Regulations shall be resolved in compliance with Article 33 of this chapter.

(a)    Mapping of overlay districts. The applicability of any overlay zoning district to a specific site is shown by the overlay Zoning Map symbol established by Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter being appended as a suffix to the symbol for the primary zoning district on the Zoning Map (for example, BP-T-C-O). The overlay districts are applied to property through the rezoning process (see Article 27 of this chapter).

(b)    Allowed land uses, permit requirements, development standards. Except as may be otherwise provided by this article for a specific overlay district:

(1)    Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district by this article may be allowed within an overlay district, subject to any additional requirements of the overlay district;

(2)    Development and new land uses within an overlay district shall obtain the land use permits required by this article for the primary zoning district; and

(3)    Development and new land uses within an overlay district shall comply with all applicable development standards and other requirements of the primary zoning district.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.703. Thoroughfare corridor overlay (T-C-O) district.
(a)    Purpose. The T-C-O overlay district is intended to: maintain the open character of significant views from important thoroughfares; to ensure traffic movement is not impaired by new development; and that property access is properly located.

(b)    Applicability. The T-C-O overlay district applies to major transportation corridors through the City as identified on the Zoning Map with the TC suffix, including Highways 33 and 150.

(c)    Allowed land uses. All land uses allowed in the primary zoning district are allowed in the T-C-O overlay district.

(d)    Permit requirements. Development in the T-C-O overlay district shall require approval of the appropriate permit for land uses in the primary zoning district. A supplemental traffic analysis shall also be required. See Articles 8 through 17 of this chapter.

(e)    Development standards. In addition to development standards identified in the primary zoning districts, land uses shall also conform with the following performance standards.

(1)    Limitation on site access points. A maximum of one ingress/egress shall be allowed for each site in the T-C-O overlay district, except that:

(A)   A site with 300 feet or more of frontage shall be allowed an additional ingress/egress;

(B)   The Commission may approve two (2) additional ingresses/egresses on a site with 600 feet or more of frontage, if the Commission first finds that traffic flow will not significantly increase due to the additional ingress/egresses; and

(C)   Two (2) one-way driveways may be allowed for each 250 feet of site frontage, or one (1) per site.

(2)    Driveway and on-site circulation design. Driveways and on-site vehicle circulation areas shall be designed as follows.

(A)   Driveway design shall accommodate an entering vehicle turning speed of fifteen (15) m.p.h.

(B)   Driveway design and placement shall be compatible with internal circulation and parking lot design, and be able to absorb the maximum rate of inbound traffic during peak traffic periods.

(C)   On-site parking areas shall be designed to accommodate at least three (3) queued vehicles waiting to park or exit without using any portion of the transportation corridor right-of-way or otherwise interfere with corridor traffic movement.

(D)   Provisions for circulation between adjacent parcels should be provided through coordinated or joint parking plans and agreements, or other methods determined appropriate.

(E)   Ingress/egress entrances shall be able to accommodate all vehicle types including delivery vehicles.

(F)    Loading and unloading locations should not interfere with ingress/egress or corridor traffic flow.

(G)   Exit sight distance visibility shall be as follows in Table 2-8.

(H)   Ingress shall be designed so that vehicles entering a site will not encroach the exit of a two-way driveway.

 

Table 2-8

EXIT SIGHT DISTANCE VISIBILITY

 

Posted Speed Limit

Minimum Required Sight Distance

30 mph

200 ft

35 mph

225 ft

40 mph

275 ft

45 mph

325 ft

50 mph

350 ft

 

(3)    Right-turn lanes and tapers. Right-turn lanes and tapers shall be required as follows:

(A)   Expected right-turn ingress movements will be twenty-five (25) m.p.h. or more during peak traffic periods; and

(B)   Driveway volumes are expected to accommodate 100 or more vehicles per day.

(4)    Driveway profile.

(A)   The grade of a two-way or divided commercial driveway on a downgrade toward the highway shall not exceed one and one-half (1.5%) percent for a minimum distance of twenty-five (25′) feet from the edge of pavement.

(B)   The grade of two-way, one-way, or divided commercial driveway on an upgrade toward the highway shall not exceed a one and one-half (1.5%) percent minimum distance of 100 feet from the edge of pavement.

(C)   If the highway is curbed and if the sidewalk is ten (10′) feet or less from the edge of pavement, the grade of a driveway shall be the grade required to meet the sidewalk elevation, except if the grade would exceed the maximums specified in subsection (3)(4)(A) above, the sidewalk shall be either tilted or inclined.

(D)   If the highway is not curbed, the grade of the driveway between the highway edge of pavement and the edge of the shoulder shall conform to the slope of the shoulder to the edge of the driveway approach.

(E)   If the sidewalk elevation will need to be adjusted to meet the driveway, the sidewalk shall be included at a rate not to exceed one (1′) foot vertical for every twenty-four (24′) feet horizontal distance.

(5)    Driveway separation. The minimum required distance between driveways along a roadway subject to the provisions of this section shall be determined as a function of corridor design, safety, and operating speeds. The minimum required distance between driveways shall be as shown in Table 2-9.

 

Table 2-9

REQUIRED DRIVEWAY SPACING

 

Posted Speed Limit

Minimum Driveway Separation

25 mph

105 ft

30 mph

125 ft

35 mph

150 ft

40 mph

185 ft

45 mph

230 ft

50 mph

275 ft

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.704. Special housing overlay (SPL) district.
(a)    Purpose. The SPL overlay district is to implement policies of the Land Use and Housing Elements of the Ojai General Plan that promote the development of Affordable Housing.

(b)    Applicability. The SPL overlay district applies to all property identified on the Zoning Map with the SPL suffix subject to the standards set forth in Table 2-10 below.

(c)    Definitions. As used in this Section, the following terms and phrases shall have the meanings as set forth below unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

(1)    Affordable housing. Dwelling units that are expressly reserved for persons and families of low and moderate income at a housing cost that is made available at an affordable rent or affordable purchase price. Unless a different meaning is apparent from the context or is specified elsewhere in this article, the following words and terms shall have the same meaning given or attributed to them in the California Health and Safety Code and in Title 25 of the California Code of Administrative Regulations: (a) adjusted income; (b) annual income; (c) housing cost; (d) family; (e) household; (f) persons and families of low and moderate income; (g) household size adjustments; (h) monthly adjusted income; (i) monthly income; (j) operating expenses; (k) affordable rent; and (l) affordable owner-occupied housing cost.

(2)    Affordable housing agreement. A legally binding agreement between an applicant and the City, recorded as a covenant on the SPL site, to ensure that the requirements of this article are satisfied. The agreement, among other things, establishes the number, type, location and demographic distribution of affordable housing on the SPL site, along with reporting, monitoring and management responsibilities. The agreement and associated obligations shall be for a minimum duration of fifty-five (55) years.

(3)    Senior housing. Affordable Housing consistent with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900 et. seq., including 12955.9 in particular), which has been “designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens,” and which otherwise qualifies as “housing for older persons” as that phrase is used in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-430) and implementing regulations (24 CFR, part 100, subpart E), and as that phrase is used in California Civil Code Section 51.2 and 51.3.

(4)    Housing element. The continuum of housing needs, goals, policies, quantified objectives, financial resources and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement and development of housing adopted as part of the Ojai General Plan pursuant to Section 65580 et. seq. of the California Government Code.

(5)    Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, social, and technological factors.

(d)    Permitted land uses. As an alternative to the uses permitted pursuant to the underlying Zoning District of the properties with the SPL suffix on the Zoning Map, each such property may be developed with Affordable Housing, notwithstanding the underlying zoning subject instead to the provisions of Sections 10-2.704(e), 10-2.704(f) and 10-2.704(g) and Tables 2-10 and 2-11.

(e)    Permit requirements. Development of property with an SPL designation for other than Affordable Housing shall require approval of the appropriate permit for the land uses in the underlying Zoning District. Approval of Affordable Housing on any property with the SPL suffix shall be exempt from the applicable approval process for the underlying zoning and instead shall be governed by the following permit requirements:

(1)    Overlay density. SPL sites may be developed with Affordable Housing up to a maximum of twenty (20) units per acre pursuant to a zoning clearance issued in accordance with Article 19 of this chapter.

(2)    Lot consolidation incentive. If requested by the applicant for an Affordable Housing development, a density increase of 5 percent shall be granted in addition to any density bonus allowed pursuant to Section 10-2.907 when two or more contiguous parcels within the SPL overlay are consolidated to create a single building site of at least 1.0 acre.

 

Table 2-10

SPL Site Designations

 

SPL Sites

Allowed SPL Uses

Design Parameters

Map

APN

6

0220140010

Affordable Housing and Senior Housing

Building mass and scale must be integrated with surrounding predominately one- and two-story construction

7

0220140480

Affordable Housing and Senior Housing

Frontage of Ojai Avenue must be commercial or vertical mixed use with commercial at street level; balance of site may be mixed use or stand-alone residential

9

0230072010, 0230072070

Affordable Housing and Senior Housing

Building mass and scale must be integrated with surrounding predominately one- and two-story construction

10

0230090010

Affordable Housing and Senior Housing

Clustered development, taking into account site constraints and environmental setting; building mass and scale must be integrated with surrounding predominately one- and two-story construction; access shall be provided to Santa Ana Street and Ventura Street

11

0230120020

Affordable Housing and Senior Housing

Clustered development, taking into account site constraints and environmental setting; building mass and scale must be integrated with surrounding predominately one and two story construction; access shall be provided to South Signal Street, South Montgomery Street, and South Ventura Street

17

0230172065

Affordable Housing and Senior Housing

Primary access should be provided from Whispering Oaks with emergency exiting at Bryant Street

21

0280073010

Affordable Housing and Senior Housing

Frontage of Ojai Avenue must be commercial or vertical mixed use with commercial at street level; balance of site may be mixed use or stand-alone residential

23

0210092010

Affordable Housing and Senior Housing

Building mass and scale must be integrated with surrounding predominately one- and two-story construction

 

Table 2-11: SPL Development Standards

 

Development Feature

Sites #6, 9, 10 & 11

Sites #7 & 21

Site #17

Site #23

Underlying Zoning District P-L

Overriding SPL Development Standards

Underlying Zoning District C-1

Overriding SPL Development Standards

Underlying Zoning District M-1

Overriding SPL Development Standards

Underlying Zoning District R-2

Overriding SPL Development Standards

Maximum Density

Determined through design review process

20+ du/acre (2)

Not Applicable

20+ du/acre (2)

Not Applicable

20+ du/acre (2)

5,000 sf/du (1)

20+ du/acre (2)

Setbacks

Determined through design review process

Determined through design review process

Front - 10′ Sides - 10′  Rear - 15′

Front - 10′  Sides - 10′  Rear - 15′

Front - 10′  Sides - 0′-10′  Rear - 0′-10′

Front - 10′  Sides - 0′-10′  Rear - 0′-10′

Front - 20′  Sides 5′-12′  Rear - 25′

Front - 10′ Sides - 5′   Rear - 15′

Site Coverage (Max. %)

None (1)

None

50%

None

35%—45%

None

None

None

Floor Area Ratio (FAR)

None (1)

None

0.50

None

0.35

None

None

None

Height Limit

30 ft, 2 stories (1)

30 ft, 2 stories maximum

35 ft

30 ft, 2 stories maximum

35 ft

30 ft, 2 stories maximum

30 ft, 2 stories

30 ft, 2 stories maximum

Parking

As required by Article 14 (1)

Variable (4)

As required by Article 14

Variable (4)

As required by Article 14

Variable (4)

As required by Article 14

Variable (4)

Notes:

(1)    See Table 2-3 for additional footnotes.

(2)    See Section 10-2.701 on permit requirements linked to density.

(3)    Open space for the purposes of this section include parks, recreational facilities, common gardens, greenbelts at least ten (10) feet wide, bikeways, pedestrian paths not associated with individual dwelling access and street frontage landscaping. The following areas may not be used to fulfill the common open space requirement: (i) streets and street rights-of-way; (ii) parking areas and driveways, and parking area landscaping; (iii) drainage or retention facilities that are not specifically designed for common recreational uses; or (iv) private outdoor open space (e.g., balconies, patios, etc.).

(4)    A reduction in underlying parking requirements may be allowed commensurate with projects that include off-setting considerations such as restrictions on the number of vehicles that occupants may own, senior projects with alternative transportation options, etc.

 

(f)    Development standards. When Affordable Housing is developed pursuant to SPL designation, such development and its associated approval shall conform to the following standards as a prerequisite of issuance of a zoning clearance.

(1)    Design review. All Affordable Housing projects shall subject to Design Review as specified in Article 20 of this chapter. In addition to the overarching guidelines set forth in Section 10-2.2004, Affordable Housing project shall also be reviewed for compliance with site-specific design parameters set forth in Table 2-10.

(2)    Environmental compliance. All Affordable Housing projects shall be subject to and conditioned upon adherence to mitigation measures prescribed in the Ojai Housing Element and companion Environmental Impact Report as set forth in City Council Resolution No. 12-53. Furthermore, as a mandatory component of the application process specified in Section 10-2.701(e), the following matters shall be addressed to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director:

(A)   Water and sewer availability. The applicant must demonstrate that there is sufficient water supply and sewer treatment capacity to serve the proposed Affordable Housing project consisting of: (i) “will serve” letters from the municipal water and sewer purveyors; and (ii) an “acknowledgement letter” from each entity that supplies or manages water used by the municipal purveyor that the project will not have an adverse impact on the source from which water is purchased or drawn. In the absence of will serve letters, the Affordable Housing shall not be granted a zoning clearance. In the event that an acknowledgement letter cannot be obtained or indicates that adverse impacts may result, the Director shall make a determination on whether to issue a zoning clearance based on substantial evidence of record including, but not limited to, information and sources documented in the Housing Element and Final Environmental Impact Report certified in connection therewith.

(B)   Acoustic attenuation. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed Affordable Housing project is (or can be) designed to ensure that outdoor noise levels in outdoor living and recreation areas do not exceed a CNEL of 60 dB or an Leq (1h) of 65 dBA during any hour.

(C)   Stormwater control. The applicant must demonstrate that that the proposed Affordable Housing project is (or can be) designed in conformance with all applicable regulations and performance criteria set forth in NPDES Permit No. CAS004002, Order No. 09-0057.

(D)   Biological resource protection. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed Affordable Housing project will not adversely impact (or can be made to mitigate) significant biological resources including, but not limited to, submittal of a Biological Resources Assessment. The Biological Resources Assessment shall consist of an on-site survey, literature review and written report prepared by a qualified individual that identifies all significant biological features of the development site along with mitigation measures, as appropriate. Significant biological features include endangered, threatened or rare plant and animal species and their habitats, wetland habitats, wildlife migration corridors and locally important species/communities.

(E)   Archeological resource protection. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed Affordable Housing project will not adversely impact (or can be made to mitigate) significant archeological resources including, but not limited to, submittal of an Archeological Resources Assessment. The Archeological Resources Assessment shall consist of an on-site survey, literature review and written report prepared by a qualified individual that identifies all significant archeological features of the development site along with mitigation measures, as appropriate. Significant archeological features include prehistoric districts, sites, structures, artifacts and other evidence of human use considered to be of importance to a culture, subculture, or a community for traditional, religious, scientific or other reasons.

(F)    Historic resource protection. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed Affordable Housing project: (i) is (or can be) designed in conformance with all applicable provisions of Title 4, Chapter 8 of this Code; and (ii) will not adversely impact (or can be made to mitigate) significant historic resources. Significant historical features include any object, building, structure, site, area, place, record, or manuscript which is historically or archaeologically significant, or is significant in the architectural, engineering, scientific, economic, agricultural, educational, social, political, military, or cultural annals of California.

(G)   Traffic control measures. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed Affordable Housing project will not adversely impact (or can be made to mitigate) significant traffic impacts on local streets within the vicinity of the site including, but not limited to, submittal of a Traffic Impact Study. The requirement to mitigate impacts shall be limited to the direct consequences of the proposed project and not as to cumulative impacts which, by operation of General Plan policies and Zoning Ordinance regulations, do not apply to Affordable Housing projects. The Traffic Impact Study shall assess current traffic conditions on affected streets (measured in terms of average daily and peak hour vehicle trips), the capacity of affected streets to maintain minimum roadway and intersection standards set forth in the Ojai General Plan, roadway geometrics that affect the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians, and mitigation measures necessary to protect public health and safety.

(H)   Viewshed protection and community context. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed Affordable Housing project conforms (or can be made to comply) with the design standards and policies set forth in Article 20 of this Code. The applicant shall provide, if determined as necessary by the Director, a Visual Simulation that assesses potential impacts on important vistas as viewed from public areas.

(I)    Sustainable building construction. The applicant must demonstrate that the proposed Affordable Housing project conforms (or can be made to comply) with sustainable building design guidelines now or hereinafter adopted pursuant to Article 20 of this Code. In the absence of locally-adopted guidelines, the principles outlined in the State HCD publication entitled “A Guide to the California Green Building Standards Code Low-Rise Residential” dated June 2012, Third Edition effective July 1, 2012, or subsequent editions, shall govern the determination of compliance.

(3)    Regulatory compliance. All Affordable Housing projects shall be subject to and conditioned upon adherence to all applicable land use policies and implementing regulations of the City. A policy and ordinance consistency analysis shall be performed by the Director in conjunction with design review pursuant to Section 10-2.701(f)(1). Furthermore, as a mandatory component of the application process specified in Section 10-2.701(e), the following matters shall be addressed to the reasonable satisfaction of the Director:

(A)   General Plan policies. The applicant must demonstrate that the Affordable Housing project complies (or can be made to comply) with all applicable policies of the Ojai General Plan as set forth in the Final Environmental Impact Report adopted in conjunction with City Council Resolution No. 12-53.

(B)   Zoning Ordinance requirements. The applicant must demonstrate that the Affordable Housing project is (or can be) designed to ensure consistency with all applicable regulations of this Title including, without limitation, standards pertaining to lighting, signs, parking, trees and landscaping.

(C)   SPL design-development standards. The applicant must demonstrate that the Affordable Housing project is (or can be) designed to ensure consistency with the design parameters and development standards set forth in Tables 2-10 and 2-11, respectively, along with the design review standards set forth in Article 20 of this Code.

(D)   Standard development conditions. The applicant must demonstrate that the Affordable Housing project is (or can be made to comply) with standard development conditions of approval that may be adopted or amended from time to time by resolution of the Planning Commission.

(g)    Affordable housing standards. All development undertaken pursuant to this section shall include Affordable Housing subject to the requirements, exceptions and regulatory parameters set forth below.

(1)    Occupancy standards. The number and distribution of Affordable Housing (as a percentage of the total residential dwellings developed on each SPL site) shall comply with the following occupancy and income standards:

As at a minimum: (i) 15% of the total number of dwellings shall be developed as Affordable Housing for very low income households; (ii) 15% of the total number of dwellings shall be developed as Affordable Housing for low income households; and (iii) 5% of the total number of dwellings shall be developed as Affordable Housing for moderate income households. Exceptions may be granted at the sole discretion of the City Council.

(2)    Affordable housing production. The Affordable Housing required under this section: (i) may either be rental or for-sale dwellings; (ii) shall be comparable in number of bedrooms, exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to non-restricted units developed on the same SPL site; and (iii) need not have the same square footage or interior features of non-restricted units developed on the same SPL site so long as they are of good quality and are consistent with contemporary standards for new housing.

(3)    Affordable housing agreement. All Affordable Housing projects approved under this article shall be subject to and contingent upon execution and recordation of an Affordable Housing Agreement as a condition of the zoning clearance which, at a minimum, shall encompass the following elements:

(A)   Occupancy preferences. Occupancy preferences shall be given to: (1) persons who have full time gainful employment in the City but currently reside elsewhere; and (2) target income households who currently reside in the City but whose housing costs exceed those deemed affordable. The project developer shall maintain a waiting list of all persons who apply to become tenants, with information sufficient to rank such persons.

(B)   Property maintenance. Property maintenance standards shall ensure that the project developer (for itself, its successors, its assigns, and every successor in interest to the Affordable Housing or any part thereof or any interest therein) shall maintain, repair and operate the site and all other improvements constructed or to be constructed thereon (including landscaping, lighting and signage) in a first-quality condition, free of debris, waste and graffiti.

(C)   Project management. Project management standards shall ensure that the project developer (for itself, its successors, its assigns, and every successor in interest to the Affordable Housing or any part thereof or any interest therein) shall manage and operate the site in accordance with a management plan prepared by project developer and submitted to and approved in writing by the Director.

(h)    Exceptions. The standards and thresholds set forth in Tables 2-10 and 2-11 define minimum requirements and may, at the discretion of the decision making body, be modified under the density bonus provisions of Article 9 subject to approval of an Affordable Housing Agreement pursuant to Section 10-2.704(g)(3).

(i)     Standards of review. All Affordable Projects proposed on property with an SPL designation (as listed in Table 2-10) shall be processed and approved by means of a zoning clearance as provided Article 19 of this chapter. As part of this process, a Design Review Permit must first be obtained by operation of Section 10-2.704(f)(1).

(1)    By right requirement. A zoning clearance shall be issued for all Affordable Projects unless the project developer: (i) fails to provide the requisite information necessary to determine compliance under this Section; (ii) is unable to evidence that the Affordable Project complies (or can be made to comply) with the requirements of Sections 10-2.704(f)(2), 10-2.704(f)(3) and 10-2.704(g); or (iii) fails to obtain a Design Review Permit in compliance with Section 10-2.704(f)(1).

(2)    Authority to deny. The authority to deny issuance of a zoning clearance or Design Review Permit, or the imposition of conditions which would have the same effect, shall be governed by the provisions of California Government Code Section 65589.5. Both the Director and Planning Commission may defer their respective determination to the next highest decision making body. Decisions of both the Director and Planning Commission are appealable to the City Council pursuant to Section 10-2.3002

(3)    Findings. Approval, conditional approval or denial of a zoning clearance (including appeals filed pursuant to Section 10-2.3002) shall be accompanied with findings, supported by substantial evidence, that the action: (i) is justified on the basis of the standards, policies and conditions embodied in Sections 10-2.704(f) and 10-2.704(g); and (ii) is consistent with the provisions of California Government Code Section 65589.5.

(j)     Effectiveness. The provisions of this Section shall apply to all Affordable Housing projects on SPL sites for which application is filed with the City on or after the effective date of the Ordinance by which this Section is adopted and shall continue thereafter until the sooner of: (i) approval of Affordable Housing on SPL sites reaches a total of 177 total dwellings inclusive of density bonuses; or (ii) subsequent amendment of this section by the City Council.

(k)    No net loss of capacity. No Affordable Housing development within the SPL overlay shall be approved at a lower density than is assumed for that site in the Updated Housing Element unless the City Council makes the findings set forth in Government Code Section 65863(b).

(§ 4, Ord. 827, eff. June 28, 2013, §§ 2—6, Ord. 838, eff. April 11, 2014)

 

 

DEVELOPMENTAL AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS
Article 8. Property Development Standards
Sec. 10-2.801. Purpose of article.
        This article expands upon the requirements of Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter by addressing additional details of site planning, project design, and operation to ensure that all development:

(a)    Produces an environmentally desirable character;

(b)    Is compatible with existing and future development; and

(c)    Protects the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties, consistent with the General Plan, and any applicable specific plan.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.802. Applicability.
(a)    These requirements apply to all proposed development and new land uses, and shall be considered in combination with the standards for each zoning district in Article 2 of this chapter. If there is a conflict, the standards specific to the zoning district shall override these general standards.

(b)    All new or modified structures and uses (including changes in use) shall conform with all of the following standards before construction, change in use, or during normal operations, unless specifically ex-

empted. All existing uses shall comply with the operational standards (e.g., dust and dirt, fumes, glare) as determined applicable by the Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.803. Height measurement and exceptions.
(a)    This section describes the required methods for measuring the height of structures in compliance with the height limits established by these Zoning Regulations and exceptions to the height limits.

(b)    The height of structures shall not exceed the standard for the applicable zoning district, except as otherwise provided by this article.

(c)    The maximum allowable height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the existing grade of the site to the allowed number of feet above grade. See Figure 3-1.



Figure 3-1

HEIGHT MEASUREMENT

 

(d)    The review authority may approve exceptions to the height limits of these Zoning Regulations as follows:

(1)    Architectural features, including antenna supports (not over three (3″) inches in diameter), chimneys, clock towers, cupolas, masts, poles, steeples, and similar structures, but not including freestanding lights, poles, masts, or antennas, may exceed the height limit by up to ten (10′) feet.

(2)    These features shall not exceed a width of twenty-five (25′) feet or one-third (1/3) of the length of the structure’s facade, whichever is less. Signs shall not be included within the additional height allowed. Height exceptions may not be granted for structural features designed or intended to provide floor space.

(e)    Development proposed adjacent to any public or private street or alley intersection shall be designed to provide a corner visibility area for pedestrian and traffic safety. See Figure 3-2.

(f)    A corner cutoff-intersection visibility area is a triangle measured as follows, and may include private property and/or public right-of-way:

(1)    At corner parcels, the visibility area shall be defined by measuring twenty-five (25′) feet from the intersection of the extension of the front and street side property lines and connecting the lines across the property.

 

(2)    At alleys, the visibility area shall be defined by measuring ten (10′) feet from the intersection of the extension of the front and side property lines and connecting the lines across the property.

(g)    Structures or landscape elements shall not exceed thirty-six (36″) inches in height within the corner visibility area, unless approved by the Director, except for trees with their canopy trimmed to a minimum of eight (8′) feet above grade.



Figure 3-2

INTERSECTION VISIBILITY AREA

 

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 3, Ord. 855, eff. May 28, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-2.804. Setback measurement and exceptions.
(a)    This section provides standards for the size of setbacks. These standards provide open areas around structures for: visibility and traffic safety; access to and around structures; access to natural light, ventilation, and direct sunlight; separation of incompatible land uses; and space for privacy, landscaping, and recreation.

(b)    All structures shall comply with the setback requirements of each zoning district, and with any setbacks established for specific uses by this article, except as otherwise provided by this section. Portions of any structure, including eaves or roof overhangs, shall not extend beyond a property line or into an access easement or street right-of-way, without first securing an encroachment permit.

(1)    Where setbacks have been established for individual vacant parcels by a specific plan, an approved subdivision map, or other entitlement, those setbacks shall apply to continuing development within the approved project instead of the setbacks required by these Zoning Regulations.

(2)    The Commission may authorize uniform setbacks for a specific project that are different from those required by Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter, through the approval of a planned development permit (Article 23 of this chapter).

(c)    Setbacks shall be measured as follows:

(1)    The front setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front property line of the parcel (or edge of access easement on a private street) to the nearest point of the wall of the structure, except as follows:

i.      For flag lots, with a fee ownership strip extending from a street or right-of-way to the building area of the parcel, the area of the required front setback shall be determined by the Director, but shall not be less than the required side setback.

ii.     For corner parcels, the measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the structure to the nearest point of the property line adjoining the street which provides the street address, or provides access to the site, as determined by the Director.

iii.    The front setback for fences, walls, hedges, and screening shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front property line of the parcel (or edge of access easement on a private street) to the nearest point of the wall of the primary structure.

(2)    The side setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property line of the parcel to the nearest line of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the side property line, which extends between the front and rear yards.

(3)    The side setback on the street side of a corner parcel shall be measured from the nearest point of the side property line adjoining the street, or the easement for a private road.

(4)    The rear setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the rear property line to the nearest line of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line. The Director shall determine the location of the required rear setback on a double-frontage parcel.

 



Figure 3-3

LOCATION AND MEASUREMENT OF SETBACKS

 

(d)    The minimum setback requirements of these Zoning Regulations apply to all development and new land uses, except for the following:

(1)    Fences or walls six (6′) feet or less in height above the finish grade of the site, when located outside of the front setback, or not more than three (3′) feet in height within a front setback;

(2)    Decks, earthworks, free-standing solar devices, steps, terraces, and other site design elements that are placed directly upon finish grade and do not exceed a height of eighteen (18″) inches above the surrounding grade at any point; and

(3)    Retaining walls less than thirty-six (36″) inches in height above finish grade. Embankments to be retained that are over forty-eight (48″) inches in height shall be benched so that no individual retaining wall exceeds a height of thirty-six (36″) inches.

(e)    Limitations on uses of setbacks.

(1)    Required setback areas shall not be occupied by structures other than:

i.      The fences, walls, and hedges allowed by Section 10-2.805; and

ii.     The projections into setbacks allowed by subsection (f), below.

(2)    Front or street side setbacks, or any other portion of a parcel visible from a public street, shall not be used for the storage of boats, garbage, habitable trailers, junk, scrap, trash, utility trailers, and similar equipment, items, or vehicles. This restriction includes the storage of operable or inoperable vehicles in other than improved parking areas.

(3)    Required residential parking spaces shall not be located within required setback areas. Temporary (overnight) parking is allowable within required setback areas only on paved driveways, in compliance with Section 10-2.1408

(4)    Within a residential zoning district, pavement within a front yard shall be limited to:

i.      A driveway no wider than the garage doors it accesses; and

ii.     A pedestrian walkway not more than five (5′) feet wide, unless more pavement is approved through design review (Article 20 of this chapter).

(f)    Attached architectural features and certain detached structures may project beyond the wall of the structure and into the front, side, and rear setbacks, in compliance with the following requirements:

(1)    Architectural features attached to the main structure may extend beyond the wall of the structure and into the front, side, and rear setbacks, in compliance with Table 3-1. See also Figure 3-4.

(2)    Air conditioning, heating, and similar equipment may extend up to thirty (30″) inches into side and rear setbacks, but no closer than thirty-six (36″) inches to any property line. (Swimming pool, hot tub, and spa equipment are subject to the requirements in subsection (g) below.)

(3)    A structure designed with irregular or articulated wall elements may project into the required front and rear setback areas provided that the average distance of the walls from the property lines complies with the setback requirements.

Table 3-1

ALLOWED PROJECTIONS INTO SETBACKS

 

 

Allowed Projection into Specified Setback

Projecting Feature

Front Setback

Side Setback

Rear Setback

Bay windows, and similar projecting windows

20% of setback

20% of interior setback (2); 40% of street side setback (2)

20% of setback

Chimney/fireplace, 6 ft. or less in breadth

24 in. (1)

24 in. (1)

24 in. (1)

Cornice, eave, awning, roof overhang

30 in.

30 in. (2)

30 in. (2)

A roof structure without walls that covers a porch, deck, balcony, or patio.

25% of setback to a maximum of 6 ft.

20% of side setback; 40% of street side setback

12 ft. in single-family districts; 5 ft. in multi-family districts

Deck, balcony, porch, stairway - uncovered, and less than 30 in. above grade

May project to 15 ft. in front setback and to property line in other setback areas

 

 

Notes:

(1)    Feature may project no closer than thirty-six (36″) inches to any side property line.

(2)    Feature may project no closer than twenty-four (24″) inches to any property line.

 



Figure 3-4

EXAMPLES OF ALLOWED PROJECTIONS INTO SIDE SETBACKS

 

(g)    Setback requirements for specific structures.

(1)    For fences, see Section 10-2.805

(2)    Detached decks, earthworks, freestanding solar devices, steps, terraces, and other site design elements which are placed directly upon finish grade, and which exceed a height of eighteen (18″) inches above the surrounding grade at any point, shall conform to the setback requirements of these Zoning Regulations for detached accessory structures. (Note: Site design elements less than eighteen (18″) inches above finish grade are exempt.)

(3)    Swimming pools, hot tubs, and spas shall be set back a minimum of five (5′) feet from the side and rear property lines. The associated equipment for the above listed facilities shall be set back a minimum of five (5′) feet from the side and rear property lines.

(h)    The minimum distance between residential structures on the same parcel shall comply with Table 3-2.

 

Table 3-2

MINIMUM DISTANCE BETWEEN STRUCTURES

 

Characteristics of Residential Structures

Minimum Distance Between Structures (1)

1-story structures

10 ft.

2-story structures

15 ft.

Where one (1) or both walls contain windows (2)

Add 5 ft.

Notes:

(1)    The height of the taller of two adjoining structures shall dictate the minimum distance requirements of Table 3-2.

(2)    Landscaping shall be incorporated into multi-family residential projects to effectively screen views and provide privacy for adjoining units.

 

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 901, eff. July 22, 2019)

 

Sec. 10-2.805. Fences, walls, hedges, and screening.
(a)    The requirements for fences, walls, hedges, and screening are to ensure that they:

(1)    Maximize scenic views and sunlight;

(2)    Provide adequate buffering between different land uses;

(3)    Screen outdoor uses and equipment; and

(4)    Are attractively designed.

(b)    The provisions of this section apply to all fences, walls, hedges, and screening, except as provided by this section.

(c)    The following fences and walls are exempt from the requirements of this section:

(1)    Fences or walls required by the City for reasons of public safety, or by the regulations of a State or Federal agency; or

(2)    Retaining walls that are regulated by Section 10-2.804

(d)    The requirements of this section may be waived or modified by the Director through a minor variance (Article 25 of this chapter).

(e)    Fences, walls, and hedges shall comply with the following requirements:

(1)    Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed the maximum heights shown in Table 3-3 and in Section 10-2.803(d).

 

Table 3-3

MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES

 

Location

Maximum Height

Front setbacks

3 ft.

Rear and side setbacks

6 ft.

At intersections of alleys, streets, and driveways within traffic safety sight areas

3 ft.

 

(2)    Fence height shall be measured from finish grade at the base of the fence to the uppermost part of the fence; except when there is a difference in the ground level between two (2) adjoining parcels of two (2′) feet or more. In order to build a fence higher than this allotted height, a minor variance (Article 25 of this chapter) or variance (Article 26 of this chapter) would first be required.

(f)    Fence and wall design standards.

(1)    To ensure the most direct and safe access routes for pedestrians walking between a neighborhood-serving commercial development and the neighboring dwelling units, an appropriate number of openings in the fences or walls shall be provided, subject to the approval of the Director.

(2)    Fences and walls shall be constructed of attractive, long-lasting materials (e.g., masonry, wood, or stone). Masonry walls should not consist exclusively of smooth-surfaced concrete masonry units (CMUs); the use of textured or split-face CMUs is strongly encouraged. Walls shall be of a solid masonry construction and be of a decorative design when visible from public rights-of-way. The use of chain link fencing is discouraged.

(3)    Fences and walls shall be set back a minimum of five (5′) feet from public rights-of-way, and shall be suitably landscaped, subject to the approval of the Director.

(g)    Walls required between different zoning districts. Walls shall be provided and maintained between different zoning districts in the following manner:

(1)    Nonresidential or multi-family.

(A)   Where a nonresidential or multi-family zoning district adjoins property in a residential zoning district (other than a public right-of-way or the village mixed-use district), a six (6′) foot high solid masonry wall shall be constructed on the zone boundary line, subject to the approval of the Director.

(B)   The Commission may waive or modify the requirement for a zone boundary line wall in compliance with subsection (i) below and the height requirement that would allow the wall(s) to be constructed higher than six (6′) feet if the viewshed would not be impacted.

(2)    Where property in an industrial zoning district adjoins property in a non-industrial zoning district, a solid masonry wall, a minimum of six (6′) to seven (7′) feet in height, shall be constructed on the zone boundary line, subject to the approval of the Director.

(h)    Swimming pools/spas and other similar water features shall be fenced in compliance with the City’s adopted Uniform Building Code.

(i)     This subsection establishes standards for the screening, separating, and buffering of adjoining residential and non-residential land uses, equipment and outdoor storage areas, and surface parking areas.

(1)    General guidelines.

(A)   Project design should ensure the highest level of compatibility between adjoining land uses and zoning districts, to minimize the need for screening and buffering.

(B)   The use of appropriately enhanced setbacks, fencing, landscape plantings, and other techniques can assist in softening building forms and minimizing the need for screening and buffering as required by this subsection.

(2)    Mechanical equipment, loading docks, and refuse areas.

(A)   Roof or ground-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating, ventilation, and exhaust ducts, transformers), loading docks, refuse storage areas, and utility services shall be adequately screened from the view from adjoining public streets and rights-of-way, and surrounding areas zoned for residential or open space uses, by fences, landscaping, walls, or other methods approved by the Director.

(B)   The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development in terms of colors, materials, and architectural style.

(C)   Landscaping shall be installed adjacent to the walls, at the discretion of the Director, in compliance with Article 12 of this chapter.

(j)     Outdoor building and garden supply areas shall be screened with fencing, landscaping, meshing, walls, or similar material to minimize visibility of the storage area.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.806. General performance standards.
        All land uses shall be operated and maintained so as to not be injurious to public health, safety, or welfare, and to comply with the following standards.

(a)    Uses, activities, or processes shall not generate or emit any visible dust, gasses, or smoke, except as necessary for the heating or cooling of structures, and the operation of motor vehicles on the site.

(b)    All lighting of landscaping, parking areas, structures, or similar facilities shall be in compliance with Article 16.5 of this chapter (Section 10-2.16.501 et seq.). In addition, for all such lighting, lights shall not blink or flash.

(c)    Tivoli lights (e.g., small accent string lights) may be installed on structures and within the landscaped areas, subject to the approval of the Director or Commission through the design review process (Article 20 of this chapter).

(d)    Uses shall not generate ground vibration perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property lines of the site, except those associated with motor vehicles in “regular working order.”

(e)    Uses shall not generate or emit any obnoxious odor or fumes that are perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property lines of the site.

(f)    The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the Uniform Fire Code.

(g)    Uses, activities, or processes shall not emit dangerous radioactivity, or electrical disturbance or electromagnetic interference with normal radio or television reception or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the property lines of the site.

(h)    All storage of appliances, furniture, and other similar equipment or materials shall be within a permanent structure and completely screened from public view.

(i)     Liquids shall not be discharged into a public or private body of water, sewage system, watercourse, or into the ground, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board and the City adopted National Pollution Discharge Elimination Standards.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004; § 4, as amended by Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.807. Solid waste/recyclable materials storage.
(a)    This section provides standards which recognize the City’s support for and compliance with the California Solid Waste Reuse and Recycling Access Act of 1999 (Public Resources Code Sections 42900 through 42911).

(b)    The requirements of this section apply to new multi-family and non-residential development, or modifications to existing development that increase gross floor area by twenty-five (25%) percent or more.

(c)    Solid waste and recyclables storage areas shall be provided in the number, dimensions, and types required by the local waste hauler. Additional storage areas may be required, subject to the approval of the Director.

(d)    Storage areas shall be fully enclosed by a six (6′) foot high masonry wall or other solid enclosure that is architecturally compatible with adjacent structures. Gates are required to be solid and in continual working order. Landscaping shall be provided to soften and screen the enclosure in compliance with Article 12 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.808. Undergrounding of utilities.
(a)    All existing and proposed on-site utility facilities (including cable television, electric, and telecommunication lines) intended to serve a new structure shall be installed underground from the utility company distribution line to the structure, except for equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.

(b)    The applicant is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for facility installation. The review authority may waive the requirements of this section if topographical, soil, or any other conditions make underground installation unreasonable or impractical.

(c)    Underground utility lines may be installed within street rights-of-way or along any lot line. When installed within street rights-of-way, their location and method of installation shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.809. Applicable regulations.
        All uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 24, Conditional Use Permits; Article 14, Parking and Loading Standards; Article 20, Design Review Permits; Article 16, Sign Standards; Article 12, Landscaping Standards; Article 22, Temporary Use Permits; Article 25, Minor Variances; Article 26, Variances.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 9. Affordable Housing Requirements and Incentives
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 828, § 2, effective July 11, 2013, amended Article 9 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Article 9, §§ 10-2.901—10-2.908, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 771, effective February 13, 2004.

 

Sec. 10-2.901. Purpose of article.
        The provisions of this article are intended to establish requirements and incentives for the development and preservation of housing that is affordable to families of low and moderate income, as well for population segments with special housing needs, in furtherance of the Housing Element of the General Plan. This article is also intended to implement statutory requirements governing affordable housing including, but not limited to, inclusionary zoning (California Health and Safety Code Section 33413(b)), replacement housing (California Health and Safety Code Section 33413(a)), density bonuses (California Government Code 65915), and housing accommodations for special needs and homeless populations (California Government Code Section 65583(a)(6).

(§ 2, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.902. Definitions.
        Except where otherwise noted, the definitions appearing in this section apply throughout this article. Capitalization is used to identify defined terms used throughout this article and shall have the meanings as set forth below unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

        “Additional incentives.” Regulatory concessions as specified in California Government Code Section 65915(d) and (h) to include, but not be limited to, the reduction of site development standards or zoning code requirements, direct financial assistance, approval of mixed-use zoning in conjunction with a Residential Project, or any other regulatory incentive which would result in identifiable cost avoidance or reductions that are offered in addition to a density bonus.

        “Affordable housing agreement.” A legally binding agreement between a developer and the City to ensure that the requirements of this article are satisfied. The agreement, among other things, establishes the number and location of affordable units, target households, production schedule, retention period and development standards.

        “Affordable rent.” The maximum monthly housing cost of an affordable unit that is reserved for occupancy by a target household not exceeding the calculations set forth in Table 4-1.

 

Table 4-1: Affordable Rent Calculation

 

Income Category

Housing Cost Formula

Extremely Low

30 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

Very Low

50 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

Lower

60 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

Moderate

110 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

 

        “Affordable sales price.” A sales price at which a Target Household may purchase an Affordable Unit and results in a maximum Housing Cost not exceeding the calculations set forth in Table 4-2.

 

Table 4-2: Affordable Sales Price Calculation

 

Income Category

Housing Cost Formula

Extremely Low

30 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

Very Low

50 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

Lower

70 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 30 percent and divided by 12

Moderate

110 percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for Household size, multiplied by 35 percent and divided by 12

 

        “Affordable unit.” Those dwelling units that are required to be rented at an Affordable Rent or sold at an Affordable Sales Price to a Target Household.

        “Agency.” The Ojai Redevelopment Agency established pursuant to Community Redevelopment Law (California Health and Safety Code Section 33000 et seq.) and codified in Title 5, Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code of the City of Ojai, and Successor Agencies as such term is defined in Section 34173 of the California Health and Safety Code.

        “Agricultural employee housing.” Housing occupied by employees of a farm with a maximum of thirty-six (36) beds in a group quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces.

        “Area median income.” The annual median income for the County of Ventura, adjusted for family size, amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and published in Title 25, Section 6932, of the California Code of Regulations.

        “Certificate of occupancy.” Issuance by the City’s Building and Safety Department signifying completion and approval for initial occupancy of a residential project.

        “Conversion.” A change of a residential dwelling to a: (i) condominium, cooperative, or similar form of ownership; or (ii) nonresidential use.

        “Demolition.” The removal of a residential dwelling or termination of occupancy by destruction, reconstruction, consolidation or rehabilitation.

        “Developer.” Every person, firm, or corporation (and their successor’s and assigns) that undertakes a residential project, directly or through the services of any employee, agent, independent contractor or otherwise subject to the provisions of this article, and each and every subsequent owner of property on which a Residential Project is developed to which the obligations of the developer shall become applicable. A developer may also be the fee owner of the property on which the residential project is proposed.

        “Disabled persons.” Persons with a disability consisting of: (i) a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more of a person’s major life activities; or (ii) a record of having or being perceived as having, a physical or mental impairment. It does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance (as defined by Section 102 of the Federal Controlled Substance Act. 21 U.S.C. Sec. 802).

        “Downtown redevelopment project.” The Amended and Restated Redevelopment Plan for commercial revitalization, residential rehabilitation, affordable housing and infrastructure improvements for an area encompassing approximately one hundred thirty-five (135) acres and lawfully established by the City Council pursuant to Ordinance No. 455 adopted on May 30, 1972 (the “Original Project Area”) and subsequently amended by Ordinance No. 719 adopted on June 10, 1997, to add seventy-six (76) acres (the “Fourth Amendment Area”).

        “Emergency shelters.” Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

        “Entitlements.” All permits, licenses and approvals required under the Municipal Code of the City of Ojai allowing the permitted use, subdivision or improvement of real property, including, but not limited to land use permits, tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps.

        “Equivalent action.” Alternative methods of satisfying inclusionary and replacement housing requirements prescribed in this article including, but not limited to: (i) dedication of vacant land; (ii) construction of Affordable Units on another site; (iii) acquisition and enforcement of rental/sales price restrictions on existing standard dwelling units; or (iv) Substantial Rehabilitation of existing substandard dwellings.

        “Equivalent financial incentive.” A monetary contribution, based upon a land cost per dwelling unit value, equal to one of the following: (i) a density bonus and an Additional Incentive(s); or (ii) a density bonus, where an Additional Incentive(s) is not requested or is determined to be unnecessary.

        “General plan.” The continuum of goals, objectives, policies and programs for the long-term physical development of the City adopted pursuant to Section 65300 et. seq. of the California Government Code.

        “Gross income.” The anticipated income of a person or family for the twelve-month period following the date of determination of income, established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and published in Title 25, Section 6914, of the California Code of Regulations. The elements of Gross Income include: (i) wages, salaries, tips, commissions, etc.; (ii) self-employment income from owned non-farm business, including proprietorships and partnerships; (iii) farm self-employment income; (iv) interest, dividends, net rental income, or income from estates or trusts; (v) Social Security or railroad retirement; (vi) Supplemental Security Income, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, or other public assistance or public welfare programs; (vii) retirement, survivor, or disability pensions; and (viii) other sources of income received regularly, including Veterans’ (VA) payments, unemployment compensation, and alimony.

        “Household.” An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, or two (2) or more unrelated persons, excluding employed servants or paid live-in companions, residing together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling. Within this context: (i) the term “family” means two (2) or more individuals, whether or not they are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, who live together in a dwelling as a single housekeeping unit; and (ii) the term “person” means any individual, family, partnership, corporation, or association.

        “Household size adjustments.” The maximum Household size on which to determine Household Income and compute Affordable Rent and Sales Price, adjusted for the number of bedrooms in a dwelling. Unless the Residential Project is subject to different assumptions imposed by other governmental regulations, the Household Size Adjustments set forth in Table 4-3 shall be used for purposes of this article. As an example, and for illustrative purposes only, if an Affordable Unit contains two bedrooms, the computation of Affordable Rent and Sales Price shall be based on the Gross Income of a three-person Household.

 

Table 4-3: Housing Size Adjustments

 

Number of Bedrooms

Maximum Number of Persons

0 (Studio)

1

1

2

2

3

3

4

4

5

 

        “Housing costs.” The sum of all of the costs associated with the rental, purchase and maintenance of a dwelling unit as defined in Title 25, Section 6920 of the California Code of Regulations. For renter-occupied dwellings, Housing Costs means the total of monthly payments encompassing rent, fees or service charges assessed by the lessor which are required of all tenants (other than security deposits), a reasonable allowance for utilities, and possessory interest, taxes, or other fees or charges assessed for use of the land and facilities by a public or private entity other than the lessor. For owner-occupied dwellings, Housing Costs means the total of monthly payments encompassing principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees, property taxes and assessments, fire and casualty insurance, property maintenance and repairs, homeowner association fees, and a reasonable allowance for utilities.

        “Housing trust fund.” The City of Ojai Affordable Housing Trust Fund established pursuant to Section 10-2.908.

        “Housing in-lieu fee.” A fee paid to the City to defray the cost of producing and preserving Affordable Units as an alternative to constructing such housing as part of a Residential Project. The amount and calculation of the Housing In-Lieu Fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council. In the absence of a resolution establishing the Housing In-Lieu Fee, the amount shall be determined by the City Council: (i) on a case-by-case basis in connection with each Residential Project; and (ii) be for an amount not more than the sum necessary to create an Affordable Unit.

        “Housing element.” The continuum of housing needs, goals, policies, quantified objectives, financial resources and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement and development of housing adopted as part of the City’s General Plan pursuant to Section 65580 et seq. of the California Government Code.

        “Inhabited.” A dwelling unit that serves as a place of permanent or customary and usual abode of a person or household who, at the time application is filed with the City for a land use permit subject to the provisions of this article, lawfully occupied the premises. A person or household is considered to be in unlawful occupancy if such person or household has been ordered to move by a court of competent jurisdiction or if the occupant’s tenancy has been lawfully terminated by the owner for cause, the tenant has vacated the premises, and the termination was not undertaken for the purpose of evading the requirements of this article.

        “Lower income.” Households whose Gross Incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for low-income families, established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and published in Title 25, Section 6932, of the California Code of Regulations. The qualifying limits for Lower Income is computed as eighty (80%) percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for family size.

        “Maximum residential density.” The maximum number of residential units permitted on the basis of the General Plan and the maximum density of the underlying zone district.

        “Moderate income.” Households whose Gross Incomes do not exceed one hundred twenty (120%) percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for family size, and published in Title 25, Section 6932, of the California Code of Regulations.

        “Non-restricted unit” All units within a Residential Project excluding the Affordable Units.

        “Residential project.” One (1) or more groups of projects which entail: (i) constructing or placing any new dwelling unit in a permanent location; (ii) converting a non-residential building to a residential use; (iii) Substantial Rehabilitation of an existing dwelling where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units; (iv) subdivision of land which is planned, designed, or used for residential purposes; or (v) converting or demolishing an existing residential dwelling.

        “Retention period.” The duration of time that the Affordable Housing Agreement remains in effect for Affordable Units under this article.

        “Senior citizen housing.” A Residential Project consistent with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900 et seq., including 12955.9 in particular), which has been “designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens,” and which otherwise qualifies as “housing for older persons” as that phrase is used in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (P.L. 100-430) and implementing regulations (24 CFR, part 100, subpart E), and as that phrase is used in California Civil Code Section 51.2 and 51.3.

        “Special needs housing.” Emergency shelters, transitional housing, single room occupancy units, farmworker housing, congregate care facilities and similar types of special living arrangements for persons and families who possess extraordinary housing needs by reason of economic, social, mental or physical disability.

        “Substantial rehabilitation.” Rehabilitation, the value of which constitutes twenty-five (25%) percent of the after rehabilitation value of a dwelling, inclusive of land value.

        “Supportive housing.” Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.

        “Target household.” A person or family meeting the income and occupancy criteria set forth in this article.

        “Title.” Title 10 of the Municipal Code of the City of Ojai (commonly known as the “Zoning Ordinance”).

        “Transitional housing.” Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six (6) months.

        “Unit type.” The size and amenities of a particular dwelling relative to number of bedrooms, quantity of baths, total square footage and similar distinguishing factors.

        “Very low income.” Households whose Gross Incomes do not exceed the qualifying limits for very-low income families, established and amended from time to time pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937, and published in Title 25, Section 6932, of the California Code of Regulations. The qualifying limits for Very Low Income is computed as fifty (50%) percent of the Area Median Income, adjusted for family size.

(Ord. 828, § 2, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.903. [Reserved].
        Table 4-4: [Reserved]

(§ 2, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.904. Replacement housing.
(a)    Basic provisions. Except as provided below, the conversion or demolition of existing residential dwelling units inhabited by persons and families of very low, lower or moderate income shall not be authorized unless provisions have been made for the replacement of those dwelling units with affordable units under the terms and conditions summarized in Table 4-5. The replacement housing requirements of this section may be satisfied through one or a combination of the following means: (1) on-site construction as part of the residential project; (2) payment of a housing in-lieu fee; or (3) equivalent action, subject to City Council review and approval, which will affirmatively further affordable housing opportunities to an equal or greater extent than on-site construction or payment of in-lieu fees. The following residential projects are expressly exempt from the requirements of this section:

(1)    The conversion or demolition of a single-family home located on a single parcel of record; and is not destroyed or removed as part of a redevelopment project that is subject to a written agreement with the Agency or where financial assistance has been provided by the Agency.

(2)    The demolition of any residential structure which: (i) has been declared to be a public nuisance under the provisions of Division 13 (commencing with Section 17000) of the Health and Safety Code, or any local ordinance enacted pursuant to those provisions; (ii) results from an order to abate or correct substandard conditions issued by a government agency having jurisdiction; and (iii) is not destroyed or removed as part of a redevelopment project that is subject to a written agreement with the Agency or where financial assistance has been provided by the Agency.

(3)    The demolition of any residential structure which: (i) constitutes a nonconforming use under the provisions of this title; or (ii) results from fire, flood, earthquake, or other event beyond the control of the developer.

(b)    Affordable occupancy. The replacement housing obligations under this section and shall correspond to the same or a lower income category (very low, lower, or moderate), as the persons and families displaced from those destroyed or removed units. The developer shall bear the burden of proving the status of occupancy at the time application is filed with the City for a land use permit (as defined in Section 10-2.3602) allowing such conversion or demolition. Data shall be obtained and verified by such methods as may be necessary and reasonable to ensure full, true and complete information from which to base determinations in accordance with the definitions set forth in Section 10-2.902. In the absence of such data, or where occupancy cannot be established at the time of conversion or demolition: (1) all displaced dwellings shall be deemed inhabited by target households; and (2) all replacement affordable units shall be in proportion to the needs identified in the City’s Housing Element for very low, lower and moderate income.

(c)    [Reserved].

(d)    Agency involvement. Where the conversion or demolition of a residential structure is part of a redevelopment project that is subject to a written agreement with the Agency or where financial assistance has been provided by the Agency, replacement housing requirements shall be governed by Section 33413(a) of the California Health and Safety Code.

(e)    Condition compliance. Every entitlement for a residential project that is subject to the provisions of this section shall contain a condition detailing the method of compliance with this section, as applicable. Every final and parcel map shall bear a note indicating whether compliance with the requirements of this section must be met prior to issuance of a building permit for each lot created by such map. In addition, an affordable housing agreement (consistent with the provisions of Section 10-2.704(g)(3)) shall be made a condition of zoning clearance and building permit issuance for all residential projects pursuant to this section. The affordable housing agreement shall: (1) be prepared and submitted by the developer of each residential project; (2) be subject to review and approval by the City Council prior to execution; and (3) be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the affordable units will be constructed.

 

Table 4-5

Replacement Housing Basic Provisions

 

 

Developer

Agency

Project Exemptions

Single-Family Units; Public Nuisances; Nonconforming Uses; Natural Disasters

None

Target Households

Occupancy Known: Same as Displaced Households; Occupancy Unknown: Proportionate to Housing Elements Needs*

 

Retention Period (For On-Site Construction)

Renter-Occupied Dwellings: 55 Years; Owner-Occupied Dwellings: 45 Years

 

*       The distribution between the lower and moderate income categories shall be based on the percentage which these categories represent of total housing needs as identified in the Housing Element as follows:

         Lower Income Percentage = Lower Income Needs/(Lower Income Needs + Moderate Income Needs)

         Moderate Income Percentage = Moderate Income Needs/(Lower Income Needs + Moderate Income Needs)

         Housing needs, for the purpose of computing the distribution of units between income categories, consists of the numeric housing production goals assigned to each income group as determined through the Regional Housing Needs Assessment process embodied in the Housing Element.

 

(§ 2, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.906. Residential development capacity.
(a)    Basic provisions. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no residentially designated property shall be rezoned which results in a reduction of residential development capacity (i.e., a re-designation of land use from residential to a non-residential, or a decrease in residential density) unless the developer compensates for the difference between the number of affordable units computed prior to the change compared to the number of affordable units computed after the change based on maximum allowable densities (hereinafter referred to as the “inclusionary differential”). The provisions of this section do not apply to zone changes and ordinance amendments that are initiated by the City Council.

(b)    [Reserved].

(c)    Production alternatives. The inclusionary differential requirements of this section may be satisfied through one or a combination of the following means: (1) on-site construction of affordable units on the site which is rezoned or otherwise reduced in density; (2) payment of a housing in-lieu fee; or (3) equivalent action, subject to City Council review and approval, which will affirmatively further affordable housing opportunities to an equal or greater extent than on-site construction of payment of in-lieu fees. For fractions of affordable units resulting from the application of inclusionary percentages set forth in Table 4-4, the developer may elect, at his or her option, to construct the next higher whole number of affordable units or pay a housing in-lieu fee for the fractional amount.

(§ 2, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.907. Density bonus.
(a)    Basic provisions. Residential or mixed-use development projects proposing a development of five (5) or more multifamily residential dwelling units located in the R-2, R-3, R-S, VMU and SPL overlay district zones shall be eligible for a density bonus in accordance with this section. The City shall grant a density bonus to a developer of a residential or mixed-use project who agrees to provide at least one of the following: (1) ten (10%) percent of the total units of a residential project as affordable units for lower income households; (2) five (5%) percent of the total units of a residential or mixed-use project as affordable units for very low income households; (3) one hundred (100%) percent of the total dwelling units of a residential or mixed-use project as affordable units for qualifying residents; (4) ten (10%) percent of the total units of a common interest residential project, as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, in which the affordable units are offered for sale to moderate income households; (5) ten (10%) of the total units of a residential or mixed-use project for transitional foster youth, as defined in Section 66025.9 of the Education Code, disabled veterans, as defined in Section 18541 of the Government Code, or homeless persons, as defined in the Federal McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act (42 U.S.C. Section 11301 et seq.), in which the affordable units are subject to a recorded affordability restriction of fifty-five (55) years for very low income households; or (6) one acre of donated land meeting the requirements, criteria and limitations of Government Code Section 65915(g). For purposes of this section, a mixed-use project is a residential project meeting the definition of mixed-use in Section 10-2.3602(m) and consists of at least five (5) multifamily dwelling units together with nonresidential, commercial uses that are compatible with the residential units and the existing development in the area where the proposed mixed-use project will be located.

(b)    Density bonus calculation. The density bonus for which a developer is entitled shall be determined according to the percentage that affordable units constitute of the total residential or mixed-use project with adjustments according to target household as set forth in Table 4-6. When calculating the number of permitted density bonus units: (1) any fraction of units shall be rounded up to the next whole integer; and (2) the total number of units in the residential or mixed-use project on which the required percentage of affordable units is determined shall not include the density bonus units. Except at the sole discretion of the developer, density bonus units shall be non-restricted units.

(c)    Incentives or concessions. Upon the written request of a developer, the City shall provide incentives or concessions in accordance with Table 4-6 and Government Code Section 65915.5 unless the City makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, that the incentives or concessions: (1) would not result identifiable and actual cost reductions to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set at the applicable affordability levels; (2) would have an specific adverse impact upon public health and safety, the physical environment or historical resources that cannot otherwise be mitigated without rendering the residential or mixed-use project unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households; or (3) would be contrary to state or federal law. The granting of incentives or concessions will vary for different residential or mixed-use projects and shall be determined on a case-by-case basis as provided in subsection (m) by the project’s review authority. The incentives or concessions may include, but are not limited to, any of the following: (1) a reduction of site development standards including, but not limited to, lot sizes and/or dimensions, setbacks, the ratio of vehicular parking spaces, open space, lot coverage, building height, structural separation, street widths and architectural design; (2) a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission as provided in Part 2.5 (commencing with Section 18901) of Division 13 of the California Health and Safety Code; (3) allowing the residential project to include nonresidential land uses and/or allowing the residential project within one of the following nonresidential zones, C-1 or B-P, if the mix of land uses are deemed compatible with and reduce the costs of the residential project; (4) other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City which result in identifiable cost reductions or avoidance; (5) waived, reduced, or deferred planning, plan check, construction permit, and/or development impact fees (e.g., capital facilities, park, or traffic fees); and/or (6) direct financial assistance in the form of a loan or a grant to subsidize or provide low interest financing for on or off site improvements, land or construction costs. In the case of waiver or modification of zoning standards, the written request submitted by a developer shall be accompanied with supporting evidence showing that: (1) such waivers or modifications would result in identifiable and actual costs and are necessary to provide for affordable housing costs, as defined in Section 50052.5 of the Health and Safety Code, or for rents for the targeted units to be set at the applicable affordability levels; and (2) application of the development standard will have the effect of precluding construction of the residential or mixed-use project with the density bonus authorized under this section.

(d)    Off-street parking requirements. Upon the request of a developer, off-street parking requirements for a residential or mixed-use project shall be reduced to the following maximums: (1) for dwelling units with zero to one bedroom(s) — one on-site parking space for each such dwelling; (2) for dwelling units with two (2) to three (3) bedrooms — two (2) on-site parking spaces for each such dwelling; and (3) for dwelling units with four (4) or more bedrooms — two and one-half (2½) parking spaces for each such dwelling. If the residential or mixed-use project is located within one-half mile of a major transit stop, as defined in Section 21155(b) of the Public Resources Code and includes the maximum percentage of low- or very low-income units in Table 4-6, and there is unobstructed access from the development to the transit stop, the maximum shall not exceed one-half parking space, inclusive of handicapped and guest parking, per dwelling unit. If the total number of parking spaces required for a residential or mixed-use project is other than a whole number, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. For purposes of this subsection, a residential or mixed-use project may provide on-site parking through tandem parking or uncovered parking, but not through on-street parking. Furthermore, the reduced parking requirement: (1) shall only apply to residential or mixed-use projects which receive a density bonus under this section; (2) must be specifically requested by a developer; and (3) is in addition to, and not in lieu of, the granting of incentives and concessions as provided in subsection (c).

Table 4-6

Density Bonus Provisions

 

Target Households

Density Bonus Factor

Very Low Income

Low Income

Moderate Income

Qualifying Resident

Foster Youth, Disabled Veterans, & Homeless Persons

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

A

B

 

 

 

 

10%—19%

1

 

 

 

5%—14%

 

 

 

 

20%—24%

2

 

 

 

15%—19%

5%

1

10%

1

25%

2

100%

0

10%

1

20%

 

 

 

 

26%

2

 

 

 

21%

 

 

11%

1

 

 

 

 

 

21.5%

 

 

 

 

27%

2

 

 

 

22%

6%

1

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

22.5%

 

 

12%

1

28%

2

 

 

 

23%

 

 

 

 

29%

2

 

 

 

24%

 

 

13%

1

 

 

 

 

 

24.5%

7%

1

 

 

30%

3

 

 

 

25%

 

 

14%

1

31%

3

 

 

 

26%

 

 

 

 

32%

3

 

 

 

27%

8%

1

15%

1

 

 

 

 

 

27.5%

 

 

 

 

33%

3

 

 

 

28%

 

 

 

 

34%

3

 

 

 

29%

9%

1

 

 

35%

3

 

 

 

30%

 

 

17%

1

 

 

 

 

 

30.5%

 

 

 

 

36%

3

 

 

 

31%

 

 

18%

1

37%

3

 

 

 

32%

10%

2

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

32.5%

 

 

 

 

38%

3

 

 

 

33%

 

 

19%

1

 

 

 

 

 

33.5%

 

 

 

 

39%

3

 

 

 

34%

11%

2

20%

2

40%

3

 

 

 

35%

Column A states the percentage of affordable units at the applicable income level as a total of the entire project, exclusive of the density bonus units.

Column B states the number of incentives and concessions, as permitted by subsection (c) for the project, depending on the applicable income level and percentage of affordable units.

 

Notes:

1.      The actual number of density bonus units for a specific residential project is determined according to the following formula:

         Density Bonus Units = Density Bonus Factor x Maximum Allowed Density (According to Underlying Zoning), rounded up to the next larger integer.

2.      “Qualifying resident” means senior citizens or other persons eligible to reside in senior citizen housing as provided in California Civil Code Sections 51.3 and 51.12, or a mobilehome park that limits residency based on age requirements for housing for older persons pursuant to Section 798.76 or 799.5 of the Civil Code.

3.      The units comprising the 10% shall be affordable to the same affordability level as very low income units and shall be subject to a recorded affordability restriction of 55 years.

4.      The density bonus provisions of this Table, as it pertains to moderate income, applies only to common interest residential projects.

 

(e)    Child care facilities. Unless the city council finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities, the City shall grant the following special incentives when a child care facility is proposed as part of a residential or mixed-use project for which a density bonus is granted under the provisions of this section, and such facility will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to, the residential or mixed-use project: (1) an additional density bonus that is an amount of square feet of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility; or (2) an incentive or concession that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. In exchange for these special incentives, the following conditions shall be imposed upon the residential or mixed-use project: (1) the child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the retention period for the density bonus units; and (2) enrollment at the child care facility shall be allocated among the target households in proportion to occupancy and reservation of affordable units within the residential or mixed-use project.

(f)    Condominium conversions. Where a residential project consists of converting apartments to condominiums, and the developer agrees to provide at least thirty-three (33%) percent of the total condominiums as affordable units for lower or moderate income households, or fifteen (15%) percent of the total condominiums as affordable units for lower income households, and agrees to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred in processing the request, the City shall: (1) grant a density bonus of twenty-five (25%) percent over the number of existing apartments; or (2) provide an equivalent financial incentive. A developer, at its discretion, may submit a preliminary proposal in advance of formal entitlement and subdivision applications. In such event, the City shall process the request as provided in subsection (k) within ninety (90) days of receipt of a written proposal. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the City to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums, provided, further that: (1) the City may place such reasonable conditions on the granting of a density bonus or equivalent financial incentive as it finds appropriate; and (2) a developer shall be not be eligible for more than one density bonus or incentive or concession under this section.

(g)    Target households. In determining the number of affordable units to be provided pursuant to subsection (b), the maximum residential density shall be multiplied by the density bonus percentages appearing in Table 4-6. The density bonus units shall not be included when determining the total number of affordable units in the residential or mixed-use project. When calculating the required number of affordable units, any resulting decimal fraction shall be rounded to the next larger integer.

(h)    Production schedule. Affordable units to be provided pursuant to this section shall be constructed concurrently with non-restricted units as part of the residential or mixed-use project unless both the City and the developer agree within the affordable housing agreement to an alternative schedule for development. Circumstances may arise in which the public interest would be served by allowing some or all of the affordable units associated with one residential or mixed-use project to be produced and operated at an alternative development site. Where the developer and the City form such an agreement, the resulting linked developments shall be considered a single residential or mixed-use project for purposes of this section. Under these circumstances, the developer shall be subject to the same requirements of this section for the affordable units to be provided on the alternative site.

(i)     Retention period. Affordable units for which a density bonus is granted under the provisions of this section shall remain restricted and affordable to target households for the time periods set forth below (or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program).

(1)    Basic incentive. All affordable units shall remain restricted and affordable to target households for a minimum period of fifty-five (55) years. Owner-occupied units, including affordable units within common interest subdivision reserved for moderate income households, shall be: (i) initially occupied at an affordable housing cost and thereafter remain restricted for the duration of the retention period; and (ii) governed by the terms and conditions of an affordable housing agreement which includes equity share provisions as stipulated in California Government Code Section 65915(c)(2).

(j)     Development standards. The affordable units resulting from density bonuses granted under this section: (1) may either be rental or for-sale dwellings; and (2) shall be comparable in number of bedrooms, exterior appearance and overall quality of construction to non-restricted units. The square footage of affordable units and interior features in affordable units is not required to be the same as or equivalent to those in non-restricted units in the same residential project or residential portion of the mixed-use project, so long as they are of good quality and are consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout the residential project, or residential portion of the mixed-use project, or, subject to the approval of a precise plan of design as provided in Section 10-2.2007, may be clustered within the residential project when this furthers affordable housing opportunities.

(k)    Conceptual review. A developer proposing a residential or mixed-use project pursuant to this section may submit its proposal for conceptual review by the City Council and/or Planning Commission prior to the submittal of any formal request for approval of a residential or mixed-use project. The purpose of the conceptual review is to identify issues, concerns and recommendations preparatory to making formal application. The conceptual review process, including form of application and processing fees, if any, shall be determined by the Director.

(l)     Conditions precedent. The granting of density bonuses under this section are expressly subject to and contingent upon: (1) obtaining all entitlements applicable to the residential or mixed-use project; and (2) satisfying the California Environmental Quality Act including, as appropriate, the preparation of necessary reviews and documentation in conjunction with entitlement applications for each residential or mixed-use project. In addition, an affordable housing agreement (consistent with the provisions of Section 10-2.704(g)(3)) shall be made a condition of zoning clearance and building permit issuance for all residential or mixed-use projects pursuant to this section. The affordable housing agreement shall: (1) be prepared and submitted by the developer of each residential or mixed-use project; (2) be subject to review and approval by the City Council prior to execution; and (3) be recorded as a restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the affordable units will be constructed.

(m)   Application process. An application pursuant to this section shall be processed concurrently with any other application(s) required for the residential project. The applicant shall be provided notice of the application’s completeness within thirty (30) days of its submission. Final approval or disapproval of an application (with right of appeal) shall be determined by the decision-making body having jurisdiction over the matter unless the developer requests: (1) a financial equivalent incentive in lieu of a density bonus and/or incentive or concession; or (2) a fee waiver or direct financial assistance is requested as part of an incentive or concession. In either of these events, the decision-making body with permit jurisdiction shall make a recommendation to the City Council who shall have the authority to make the final decision on the application.

(§ 2, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013, as amended by § 2, Ord. 888, eff. November 8, 2018)

 

Sec. 10-2.908. Housing trust fund.
(a)    Fund establishment. All housing in-lieu fees collected under this article shall be deposited into an affordable housing fund (“housing fund”). Separate accounts within such housing fund may be created from time to time to avoid commingling as required by law or as deemed appropriate to further the purposes of the fund.

(b)    Use of funds. Monies deposited in the housing fund along with any interest earnings on such monies shall be used solely to increase and improve the supply of housing affordable to households of very low, lower and moderate income including, but not limited to: (1) acquisition of real property, buildings and structures; (2) completion of on and off-site improvements; (3) donation of real property to private or public entities; (4) construction and rehabilitation of buildings and structures; (5) payment of insurance premiums, principal and interest, debt financing and carrying charges; (6) subsidization of market rate housing; (7) preservation of mobile homes and subsidized housing “at risk” of conversion to market rates; and (8) reasonable planning and administrative expenses.

(§ 2, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.909. Special housing needs.
(a)    Permitted uses. The uses listed below shall be allowed as permitted uses within the zone districts as specified and shall only be subject those restrictions that apply to other residential dwellings of the same type in the same zone. The physical attributes of new residential projects and modifications of existing developed properties which accommodate special needs housing shall conform to the development standards of the underlying zone district (i.e., building height, lot coverage, setbacks, etc.), design guidelines of the City, if applicable, and the provision of off-street parking at a ratio of one space for each habitable room, two (2) of which must be covered.

(1)    Agricultural employee housing shall be considered to be a permitted agricultural use with up to thirty-six (36) beds in a group quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces in the A and OS zone consistent with California Health and Safety Code Section 17021.6. Persons having the right to occupy employee housing shall be restricted to individuals engaged in agricultural occupations consistent with the standards and limitations prescribed in the Employee Housing Act and its implementing regulations.

(2)    Residential care homes and employee housing accommodating six (6) or fewer persons shall be considered to be a permitted residential use in all residential zone districts. Persons having the right to occupy residential care homes and employee housing shall be restricted to individuals for whom such housing is specifically provided as defined and regulated under the California Health and Safety Code.

(3)    Transitional and supportive housing, as defined and regulated under the California Health and Safety Code, shall be considered a residential use of property and permitted subject only to the same standards and procedures as apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.

(4)    Emergency shelters shall be considered to be a permitted commercial use in the BP zone with a cap of twenty-seven (27) emergency shelter beds. Once the cap of twenty-seven (27) emergency shelter beds have been reached within the BP zone, all subsequent emergency shelters should require issuance of a conditional use permit. Persons having the right to occupy emergency shelters shall be restricted to individuals for whom such housing is specifically provided as defined and regulated under the California Health and Safety Code.

(b)    Conditional uses. Special needs housing, other than permitted pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, shall be allowed by conditional use permit within the zone districts as specified below. The development standards for projects requiring a conditional use permit shall be those that are specified for the underlying zone district, together with other requirements on use, occupancy and design as may be determined through the discretionary permit process consistent with the provisions of Government Code Section 65583(a)(4).

(1)    Emergency shelters shall be allowed by conditional use permit within all commercial and industrial zone districts. Persons having the right to occupy emergency shelters shall be restricted to individuals for whom such housing is specifically provided as defined and regulated under the California Health and Safety Code.

(2)    Residential care homes and employee housing accommodating seven or more clients shall be allowed by conditional use permit within the R-2 and R-3 zone districts. Persons having the right to occupy residential care homes and employee housing shall be restricted to individuals for whom such housing is specifically provided as defined and regulated under the California Health and Safety Code.

(c)    Non-discrimination. No special needs housing shall be denied nor shall any condition be imposed on a project over which the City has discretionary approval (including, but not limited to, shared living arrangements, in-home supported services and licensed community care facilities) with regard to familial status, disability or other population segment stipulated in Fair Housing statutes (e.g., individuals with Alzheimer’s, AIDS/HIV, and homeless).

(§ 2, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013, as amended by § 7, Ord. 838, eff. April 11, 2014)

 

Sec. 10-2.910. Reasonable accommodations.
(a)    Definition of term. As used in this section, “disabled person” means a person with a disability consisting of: (1) a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more of a person’s major life activities; or (2) a record of having, or being perceived as having, a physical or mental impairment. It does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, a controlled substance (as defined by Section 102 of the Federal Controlled Substance Act, 21 U.S.C. Sec. 802).

(b)    Affordable housing. The Fair Employment and Housing Act prohibits discrimination in all aspects of housing (rental, lease, terms and conditions, etc.) because of a person’s disability. Disabled persons have the right to use the services of a guide, signal or service dog or other such designated animal and to keep such animals in or around their dwellings. At the request of a disabled person (or by someone acting on behalf of such person with his or her written consent), the developer of each affordable unit (and each subsequent owner thereof) must make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when these accommodations may be necessary to afford a disabled person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The developer (and each subsequent owner of an affordable unit) must allow a disabled person (at the tenant’s expense or at the expense of someone acting on behalf of such person with his or her written consent) to reasonably modify existing premises if the modifications are necessary to afford the disabled person full enjoyment of the premises. These provisions shall be stipulated in the affordable housing agreement.

(c)    Adaptive retrofit. At the request of a disabled person (or by someone acting on behalf of such person with his or her written consent), a housing provider must make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies, practices or services when these accommodations may be necessary to afford a disabled person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The housing provider must allow a disabled person (at the tenant’s expense or at the expense of someone acting on behalf of such person with his or her written consent) to reasonably modify existing premises if the modifications are necessary to afford the disabled person full enjoyment of the premises. Where such modifications require an exception in development standards of the underlying zone district, an adaptive retrofit permit application shall be processed as follows:

(1)    Director determination. The Director shall have jurisdiction over all adaptive retrofit permits and extensions of time thereof. Upon receipt of the required copies of the permit application, the Director shall consider the requested adaptive retrofit permit at a noticed public hearing and either approve, conditionally approve, or deny the request. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Article 29. Action of the Director shall be final subject to appeal to the Planning Commission and City Council as provided under Sections 10-2.2906 and 10-2.2907.

(2)    General provisions. A fee for the cost processing adaptive retrofit permits shall be charged in an amount equal to the current fee charged for a zoning clearance. Adaptive retrofit permits may be granted for such period of time and upon such conditions and limitations as may be required to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community. Such conditions shall take precedence over those required in the specific zone districts. Any amendments to an adaptive retrofit permit shall be processed in the same manner as specified by this title for approval of the original permit.

(3)    Required findings. An adaptive retrofit permit application shall be approved or conditionally approved only if all of the following findings are made:

(i)     Physical accommodation. The site for the project is: (i) adequate in size, shape, location, and physical characteristics to accommodate the adaptive retrofit proposed; (ii) specific modifications in building height limit, distance between buildings, setback, yard, parking, building coverage, landscaping or screening requirements specified in the applicable zone district are necessary and appropriate to accommodate the needs of the disabled person; and (iii) the project will not be detrimental to the health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the neighborhood and will be compatible with the surrounding area.

(ii)    Policy accommodation. The request for reasonable accommodation: (i) is necessary to make housing available to, and used by, a disabled person protected under fair housing laws; (ii) will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City; and (iii) will not require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s land-use and zoning regulations.

(4)    Time limits. At the time the Director approves an adaptive retrofit permit, a time limit may be established within which construction must commence or the use must begin. The time limit shall be a reasonable time based on the size and nature of the proposed development or use. If no date is specified, the time limit shall be one year from the date of approval. Such time may be extended by the Director once for good cause shown, provided a written request, including a statement of reasons for the time extension, is filed with the planning department prior to the expiration date.

(5)    Permit revocation. An adaptive retrofit permit shall become null and void and be automatically revoked if the approved use is discontinued for a period of more than one year. The time limit may be extended by the Director one time for good cause shown, provided a written request, including a statement of reasons for the time extension request, is filed with the Planning Department prior to the expiration date. If any of the conditions of the adaptive retrofit permit are not complied with, the Director, after written notice to the permittee and a noticed public hearing, may revoke the permit.

(§ 2, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Article 10. Creekside Development Standards
Sec. 10-2.1001. Purpose of article.
        The provisions of this article are intended to provide adequate buffer areas between creek corridors and adjacent development, to protect the creek corridors as valuable natural, scenic, and recreational amenities.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1002. Applicability.
        The provisions of this article apply to any property adjacent to or crossed by a creek or stream.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1003. Streambed analysis required.
        The project permit application shall include a site-specific streambed analysis prepared by a hydrologist, civil engineer, or other qualified professional (e.g., riparian biologist) to determine the precise boundary/top of bank of the waterway. The Director may waive this requirement if it is determined that the project, because of its size, location, or design would not have a significant impact on the waterway, or that sufficient information al-

 

ready exists and further analysis is not necessary. A required streambed analysis shall include all information and materials required by the Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1004. Development standards.
(a)    All structures (e.g., buildings, decks, fences) shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25′) feet from a blue line creek’s top of bank. Additional setbacks may be necessary to protect sensitive environmental resources (e.g., vernal pools). Setbacks adjacent to creekside paths or open spaces shall be measured from the outside boundary of the path or open space.

(b)    Structures, parking access, parking spaces, paved areas, swimming pools, or utilities (e.g., overhead or underground) shall not be constructed within a creek or creekside setback area.

(c)    Grading or filling, planting of exotic/non-native or non-riparian plant species, or removal of native vegetation shall not occur within a creek or creekside setback area.

(d)    Where drainage improvements are required, they shall be placed in the least visible locations and naturalized through the use of river rock, earthtone concrete, and/or landscaping with native plant materials.

(e)    The proposed development should incorporate permeable surfaces (e.g., wood decks, sand-joined bricks, and stone walkways) where feasible, to minimize off-site flows and facilitate the absorption of water into the ground.

(f)    Creek stabilization measures may be required if development or land use changes increase impervious surfaces or sedimentation that result in stream channel erosion.

(1)    Creek rehabilitation is the preferred method of stabilization, with the objective of maintaining the natural character of the creek and riparian area. Rehabilitation may include enlarging the channel at points of obstruction, clearing obstructions at points of constriction, limiting uses in areas of excessive erosion, and restoring riparian vegetation.

(2)    Concrete channels and other mechanical stabilization measures shall not be allowed unless no other alternative exists.

(g)    Public access and visibility to creeks may be provided through the use of single-loaded frontage roads adjacent to the creeks.

(h)    The provision of multi-purpose creekside trails and public open space is strongly encouraged. Open space areas may include planting for riparian enhancement with native shrubs and trees, paths and trails, lighting, benches, play and exercise equipment, and trash receptacles outside of the riparian habitat area, where appropriate.

(i)     Where streets are not used, frequent access to creekside trails and public open space should be provided at least every three hundred (300) feet, and may occur at the end of cul-de-sacs.

(j)     Fences that face creekside trails and public open space shall not be over six (6′) feet in height.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1005. Applicable regulations.
        All uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 24, Conditional Use Permits; Article 14, Parking and Loading Standards; Article 20, Design Review Permits; Article 16, Sign Standards; Article 12, Landscaping Standards; Article 22, Temporary Use Permits; Article 25, Minor Variances; Article 26, Variances.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 11. Hillside Development Standards
Sec. 10-2.1101. Purpose of article.
        The provisions of this article are intended to:

(a)    Preserve the City’s scenic resources by encouraging retention of natural topographic features and vegetation;

(b)    Acknowledge that as the slope of a development site increases so does the potential for environmental degradation, including slope failure, increased erosion, difficulty in re-establishing vegetation, sedimentation, and stormwater run-off; and

(c)    Encourage grading practices that are more appropriate in hillside areas.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1102. Applicability.
        The standards in this article apply to all subdivisions, uses, and development on slopes of fifteen (15%) percent or greater.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1103. Permit and application requirements.
(a)    Design review permit approval in compliance with Article 20 of this chapter shall be required for all development subject to the provisions of this article (unless exempt).

(b)    The design review permit application shall include all information and materials required by the Director for hillside development projects.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1104. Hillside development design criteria.
        Proposed hillside development shall comply with the following design criteria, as applicable:

(a)    The project shall be designed to fit the terrain rather than altering the terrain to fit the project. Development patterns that form visually protruding horizontal bands or steeply cut slopes for roads or parcels shall be avoided.

(b)    Streets shall follow the natural contours of the terrain to minimize the need for grading. Cul-de-sacs and loop roads are encouraged where necessary to fit the natural topography subject to the approval of the City Engineer and Fire District.

(c)    Site design shall utilize varying setbacks, structure heights, split-level foundations, and low retaining walls to blend the structures into the terrain.

(d)    Lot lines shall be placed at the top of slope areas to help ensure that slope maintenance would not be neglected.

(e)    Structures should be located in the most accessible, least visually prominent, and most geologically stable portion(s) of the site. Siting structures in the least visually prominent locations is especially important on open hillsides where the prominence of construction should be minimized by placing structures so that they would be screened by existing vegetation, rock outcroppings, or depressions in topography. In wooded areas, dispersed structures may be preferable to save trees and minimize visual impacts.

(f)    Structures shall be designed with the following principles in mind:

(1)    Building forms should be scaled to complement the character of the hillsides and to avoid excessively massive forms that dominate views of the hills.

(2)    Residential development on infill hillside parcels should be of a scale that is compatible with existing adjacent development, and should be designed to locate windows, balconies, and outdoor living areas with consideration for the privacy of adjacent dwellings and yards, where feasible.



Figure 3-7

DESIGN SENSITIVE TO TERRAIN

 

(3)    Building facades should change plane and use overhangs as a means to create changing shadow lines to further break up massive forms.

(4)    Wall surfaces facing towards viewshed areas should be minimized through the use of single-story elements, setbacks, roof pitches, and landscaping.

(5)    Roof pitches should generally be placed to follow the angle of the slope; but variation should be provided to avoid a monotonous appearance. See Figure 3-7.

(6)    Avoid structures which are more than six (6′) feet above finish grade and have visible structural underpinnings.

(g)    A harmonious mixture of materials, color, and forms should be used to blend the structures with the natural appearance of the hillsides:

(1)    Based upon the graphic principle that dark colors are less noticeable and light colors are more noticeable, darker tones, including browns, black, greys, greens, and terra cotta should be used for building elevations and roof materials in view-sensitive areas;

(2)    Surface materials should be of rough texture to blend with the coarseness of landscaping and natural vegetation. Textured stucco, wood, brick, and coarse block are appropriate; and

(3)    Roof materials should be of rough texture. Roof colors should utilize darker tones, including browns, black, greys, greens, and terra cotta. Bright colors should be avoided.

(h)    Night views of the hillsides should not be dominated by an array of bright lights. Lighting within view-sensitive areas should be properly shielded to avoid glare and the spill of light to surrounding areas. Low-level lighting and the use of multiple low fixtures are encouraged, as opposed to the use of fewer, but taller fixtures.

(i)     Large retaining walls in a uniform plane shall be avoided. Break retaining walls into elements and terraces, and use landscaping to screen them from view. Generally, no retaining wall should be higher than thirty-six (36″) inches. See Figure 3-8.

(j)     The Ventura County Fire Protection District shall review all proposed landscaping and vegetation for fire protection purposes.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1105. Hillside project development standards.


Figure 3-8

RETAINING WALL DESIGN

 

(a)    In order to help retain the natural features of hillsides and reduce potential negative impacts, densities shall be reduced as slope increases in compliance with Table 3-4. Each site to be developed shall be divided into cells of similar slope, utilizing the average slope ranges listed below. The maximum density of the base zoning district is then multiplied by the relevant reduction factor assigned to each cell. The result of this calculation is the maximum allowable density for each cell.

 

Table 3-4

ALLOWABLE RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BASED ON SITE SLOPE

 

Average Slope Range

Density Reduction Factor

0% to 15%

None

16% to 20%

10%

21% to 25%

20%

26% to 30%

40%

31% to 35%

60%

36% to 40%

1-acre minimum lot area

41% plus

5-acre minimum lot area

 

(b)    Clustered development is encouraged as a means of preserving the natural appearance of hillside areas and maximizing open space. Under this concept, dwelling units would be grouped in the more level portions of the site, while steeper areas would be preserved in a natural state. In consideration of implementing a clustered development concept, a density increase of up to ten (10%) percent above that allowed by Table 3-4 may be granted by the review authority. In this case, at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the total site area shall be left in natural, undisturbed open space or other open space areas as determined by the review authority, in compliance with Article 24 of this chapter.

(c)    On adjacent parcels having a difference in vertical elevation of three (3′) feet or more, the required side setback shall be measured from the nearest toe or top of slope to the structure, whichever is closer.

(d)    Structures placed on hilltops or ridgelines shall comply with the following height limits in addition to those required by Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter and Section 10-2.803

(1)    Structures shall not be placed on or near ridgelines so that they appear silhouetted against the sky when viewed from a public street, except where the review authority determines that the only feasible building site cannot comply with this standard. See Figure 3-9.

(2)    Except as provided by subsection (e)(3) below, structures shall be located so that a vertical separation of at least twenty-five (25′) feet is provided between the top of the structure and the top of the ridge or knoll to maintain the natural appearance of the ridge. Grading should also be avoided within twenty-five (25′) vertical feet of the top of a ridge or knoll. Placement of structures should also take advantage of existing vegetation for screening, and should include the installation of additional native plant materials to augment existing vegetation, where appropriate. See Figure 3-8.

(3)    Where the Director determines that a parcel contains no feasible building site other than where a structure would extend above the ridgeline, proposed structures shall not exceed a height of sixteen (16′) feet above the highest point on the ridgeline or hilltop within 100 feet of the proposed structure.

(4)    The vertical distance between the lowest point where the foundation meets finish grade and the lowest floor line of the structure shall not exceed ten (10′) feet.



Figure 3-9

SILHOUETTED STRUCTURES

 



Figure 3-10

LOCATION OF STRUCTURES BELOW RIDGELINES

 

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

 

Sec. 10-2.1106. Applicable regulations.
        All uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 26, Variances; Article 25, Minor Variances; Article 24, Conditional Use Permits; Article 22, Temporary Use Permits; Article 20, Design Review Permits; Article 16, Sign Standards; Article 14, Parking and Loading Standards; Article 12, Landscaping Standards.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 12. Landscaping Standards
Sec. 10-2.1201. Purpose of article.
The provisions of this article are intended to establish landscaping standards that would:

(a)    Enhance the aesthetic appearance of all development throughout the City by providing standards related to the quality, quantity, and functional aspects of landscaping;

(b)    Increase compatibility between abutting land uses and public rights-of-way by providing landscape screening and buffering;

(c)    Decrease the use of water for landscaping purposes by requiring the efficient use of irrigation, appropriate plant materials, and regular maintenance of landscaped areas; and

(d)    Protect public health, safety, and general welfare by minimizing the effect of physical and visual pollution, controlling soil erosion, preserving the integrity of neighborhoods, and enhancing pedestrian and vehicular traffic and safety.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1202. Applicability.
(a)    All projects that require the installation of landscaping in compliance with the development standards of these Zoning Regulations shall provide and maintain landscaping in compliance with the provisions of this article.

(b)    In addition to subsection (a), the following landscape projects shall include in required plan submittals the information called for in Section 10-2.1205:

(1)    New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

(2)    Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

(3)    Existing landscapes limited to Sections 10-2.1218 and 10-1219.

(c)    Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this article or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Section 10-2.1224.

(d)    For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Section 10-2.1224(5).

(e)    This article shall not apply to:

(1)    Registered local, State or Federal historic or landmark sites;

(2)    Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

(3)    Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

(4)    Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public.

(d)    The terms used in this article have the meaning set forth below:

“Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

“Automatic irrigation control” means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

“Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

“Certificate of completion” means the document required under Section 10-2.1211.

“Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer program.

“Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor Program.

“Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

“Common interest developments” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351.

“Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plans growth.

“Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

“Distribution uniformity” means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.

“Drip irrigation” means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

“Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

“Effective precipitation (Eppt)” or “usable rainfall” means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

“Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

“Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two (2) years of growth.

“Establishment period of the plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two (2) years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two (2) years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three (3) to five (5) years for establishment.

“Estimated total water use (ETWU)” means the total water used for the landscape.

“ET adjustment factor (ETAF)” means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two (2) major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

“Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

“Flow sensor” means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals operating master valves. This combination of flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.

“Friable” means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.

“Fuel modification plan guideline” means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone.

“Graywater” means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. “Graywater” includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12.

“Hardscape” means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious).

“Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

“Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

“Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification Program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “WaterSense” labeled auditing program.

“Irrigation efficiency (IE)” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this ordinance are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

“Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

“Irrigation water use analysis” means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

“Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the State of California Business and Professions Code Section 5615.

“Landscape area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

“Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

“Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for the purposes of this section.

“Landscape water meter” means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use.

“Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

“Local water purveyor” means the entity, whether public agency or private water company that provides retail water service to the subject property.

“Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

“Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

“Master shut-off valve” is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.

“Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA)” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with reclaimed water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)]

“New construction” means, for the purposes of this article, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

“Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.

“Mined-land reclamation project” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

“Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

“Non-resident landscape” means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.

“Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

“Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” or “overhead spray irrigation systems” means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

“Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.

“Parkway” means the area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress.

“Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

“Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

“Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants.

“Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 10-2.1203, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the City. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

“Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shutoff device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

“Record drawing” or “as-built” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

“Recreational areas” means areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.

“Recycled water” “reclaimed water,” or “treated sewage effluent water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

“Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year, and is an estimate of the vapotranspiration of a large field of four (4) inch to seven (7) inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered.

“Rehabilitated landscape” means any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of this section, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

“Residential landscape” means landscapes surrounding single-family or multi-family homes.

“Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

“Soil moisture sensing device” or “soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

“Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.

“Special landscape area” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with reclaimed water, water features using reclaimed water and areas dedicated to active play such as parks, sports fields, golf courses, and where turf provides a playing surface.

“Sprinkler head” or “spray head” means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

“Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

“Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

“Submeter” means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.

“Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

“Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass.

“Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

“Water conserving plant species” means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.

“Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area.

“Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 1, Ord. 841, eff. June 13, 2014, § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1203. Compliance with landscape documentation package.
(a)    Concept plans.

(1)    A concept landscaping plan shall be submitted as part of a land use permit application, except for single-family dwellings not a part of an active subdivision application, in compliance with Article 18 of this chapter; provided, however, that if a precise plan of design is required pursuant to Section 10-2.2007, detailed landscape plans which meet the requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall be submitted as part of the precise plan of design in accordance with Section 10-2.2008(k).

(2)    The concept landscaping plan shall:

(i)     Meet the purpose/intent of this article by exhibiting a generalized design layout which adequately demonstrates the proposed landscaping program in terms of location, function, scale, size, theme, and similar attributes;

(ii)    Provide the review authority with a clear understanding of the landscaping program before the preparation of a detailed, comprehensive landscaping plan;

(iii)   Address the functional aspects of landscaping (e.g., drainage, dust abatement, erosion control, fire clearance zones, glare reduction, microclimate zones, and provisions for shade, screening, sound absorption, and wind barriers);

(iv)   Clearly display all trees proposed for removal as well as the size and quantity of all new trees proposed for planting;

(v)    Be designed in compliance with the purpose and intent, and incorporate the applicable provisions, of the City’s adopted landscape guidelines;

(vi)   Be designed consistent with the water efficiency standards of Section 10-2.1205 when applicable.

(b)    Prior to construction of a project subject to this Article 12, the City shall:

(1)    Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for permits, plan checks or design reviews;

(2)    Review the landscape documentation package submitted by the project applicant;

(3)    Approve or deny the landscape documentation package;

(4)    Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and

(5)    Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor.

(c)    Prior to construction of a project subject to this Article 12, the project applicant shall submit a landscape documentation package to the City.

(d)    Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the City under this Article 12, the project applicant shall:

(1)    Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion;

(2)    Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or designee; and

(3)    Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 841, eff. June 13, 2014, § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017, § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1204. Landscape development standards.
(a)    The following areas of the site shall be landscaped:

(1)    All setbacks, parkways, non-work, and storage areas that are visible from a public street or from a parking lot available to the public;

(2)    All remaining areas of the site not necessary to meet other standards of these Zoning Regulations (e.g., access drives, parking and loading areas) shall also be landscaped unless the review authority determines that a lesser amount of landscaping would be appropriate given the specific characteristics of the development;

(3)    Areas proposed for development in another phase shall be temporarily treated to control dust and soil erosion if the phase would not begin construction within six (6) months of completion of the previous phase.

(b)    Trees shall be planted throughout the project in areas of public view, predominantly adjacent to and along structures and street frontages at a rate of at least one tree for each thirty (30) linear feet of structure wall and/or street frontage.

(c)    Landscape areas shall be a minimum of six (6) feet wide (excluding curbs). Narrower landscape areas may be allowed subject to the approval of the Director.

(d)    Trees and shrubs shall be planted so that at maturity they do not interfere with utility service lines, street lighting, traffic safety sight areas, on-site signs, and basic property rights of adjoining property owners, particularly the right of solar access.

(e)    Trees planted near public curbs and sidewalks shall have a limited root structure and shall be installed so as to prevent physical damage to public improvements. A root barrier system shall be used.

(f)    Landscape areas shall have plant material selected and plant methods used that are suitable for the soil and climatic conditions of the site. The use of water efficient, drought-tolerant plants shall be emphasized in compliance with Section 10-2.1205.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1205. Elements of the landscape documentation package.
(a)    The landscape documentation package shall include the following six (6) elements:

(1)    Project information.

(i)     Date,

(ii)    Project applicant,

(iii)   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)),

(iv)   Total landscape area (square feet),

(v)    Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed),

(vi)   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well,

(vii)  Checklist of all documents in the landscape documentation package,

(viii) Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner,

(ix)   Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package”;

(2)    Water efficient landscape worksheet.

(i)     Hydrozone information table,

(ii)    Water budget calculations:

a.     Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA),

b.     Estimated total water use (ETWU);

(3)    Soil management report;

(4)    Landscape design plan;

(5)    Irrigation design plan; and

(6)    Grading design plan.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 3, Ord. 841, eff. June 13, 2014, § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1206. Water efficiency standards.
(a)    A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet, available from the City, which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.

        In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the reference evapotranspiration table in Section 10-2.1228.

(b)    Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

(1)    The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

(2)    All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

(3)    All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated in the water efficient landscape worksheet, available from the City.

(4)    ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1207. Soil management report.
(a)    In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or designee, as follows:

(1)    Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

(i)     Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

(ii)    The soil analysis shall include:

a.     Soil texture;

b.     Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

c.     pH;

d.     Total soluble salts;

e.     Sodium;

f.      Percent organic matter; and

g.     Recommendations.

(iii)   In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven (7) lots or approximately fifteen (15) percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven (7) lots.

(2)    The project applicant, or designee, shall comply with one of the following:

(i)     If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the City as part of the landscape documentation package; or

(ii)    If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the City as part of the certificate of completion.

(3)    The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

(4)    The project applicant, or designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the City with certificate of completion.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1208. Landscape design plan.
(a)    For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

(1)    Plant material.

(i)     Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

a.     Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;

b.     Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants;

c.     Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance;

d.     Selection of trees based on applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area;

e.     Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists; and

f.      Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines.

(ii)    Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 10-2.1209(a)(2)(iv).

(iii)   Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

a.     Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;

b.     Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and

c.     Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

(iv)   Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five (25) percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four (4) feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 =slope percent).

(v)    High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.

(vi)   A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291, subdivisions (a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to the local fuel modification plan guidelines.

(vii)  The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged.

(viii) The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

(2)    Water features.

(i)     Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

(ii)    Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

(iii)   Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

(iv)   Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.

(3)    Soil preparation, mulch and amendments.

(i)     Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.

(ii)    Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section 10-2.1207).

(iii)   For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six (6) inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six (6) percent organic matter in the top six (6) inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.

(iv)   A minimum three (3) inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five (5) percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.

(v)    Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards.

(vi)   The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

(vii)  Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer organic products shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.

(b)    The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

(1)    Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

(2)    Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

(3)    Identify recreational areas;

(4)    Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

(5)    Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

(6)    Identify type of mulch and application depth;

(7)    Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

(8)    Identify type and surface area of water features;

(9)    Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);

(10)  Identify location, installation details, and twenty-four (24) hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the City or regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples are provided in Section 10-2.1221;

(11)  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in Section 10-2.1221 and their twenty-four (24) hour retention or infiltration capacity;

(12)  Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;

(13)  Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

(14)  Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, and 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1209. Irrigation design plan.
(a)    This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

(1)    System.

(i)     Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all nonresidential irrigated landscapes of one thousand (1,000) square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet (the level at which Water Code Section 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:

a.     A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or

b.     A privately owned meter or submeter.

(ii)    Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

(iii)   If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

a.     If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

b.     Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

(iv)   Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

(v)    Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

(vi)   Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.

(vii) Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all on nonresidential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger.

(viii) Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features.

(ix)   The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

(x)    Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

(xi) The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

(xii) The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 10-2.1206 regarding the maximum applied water allowance.

(xiii) All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/International Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

(xiv) It is highly recommended that the project applicant or City inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.

(xv) In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

(xvi) Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

(xvii) Head-to-head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

(xviii) Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turf grass.

(xix) Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.

(xx) Areas less than ten (10) feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.

(xxi) Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four (24) inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

a.     The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

b.     The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

c.     The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in subsection (a)(1)(ix) of this section. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

(xxii) Slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

(2)    Hydrozone.

(i)     Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

(ii)    Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

(iii)   Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.

(iv)   Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

a.     Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

b.     The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

(v)    Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

(vi)   On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. The irrigation design plan shall also designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. This valve number must be identified in the hydrozone information table of the water efficient landscape worksheet available from the City. This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.

(b)    The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

(1)    Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

(2)    Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

(3)    Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

(4)    Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

(5)    Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 10-2.1214;

(6)    The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

(7)    The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, and 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.)

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1210. Grading design plan.
(a)    For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other local agency permits satisfies this requirement.

(1)    The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:

(i)     Height of graded slopes;

(ii)    Drainage patterns;

(iii)   Pad elevations;

(iv)   Finish grade; and

(v)    Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

(2)    To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:

(i)     Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes;

(ii)    Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and

(iii)   Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.

(3)    The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1211. Certificate of completion.
(a)    The certificate of completion, for which the form is available from the City, shall include the following six (6) elements:

(1)    Project information sheet that contains:

(i)     Date,

(ii)    Project name,

(iii)   Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address,

(iv)   Project address and location, and

(v)    Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;

(2)    Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package:

(i)     Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these “as-built” or record drawings shall be included with the certification,

(ii)    A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes;

(3)    Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 10-2.1212);

(4)    Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 10-2.1213);

(5)    Irrigation audit report (see Section 10-2.1223); and

(6)    Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 10-2.1207).

(b)    The project applicant shall:

(1)    Submit the signed certificate of completion to the City for review;

(2)    Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or designee.

(c)    The City shall:

(1)    Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant;

(2)    Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the City shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1212. Irrigation scheduling.
(a)    For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

(1)    Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

(2)    Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

(3)    For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

(4)    Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

(i)     The plant establishment period;

(ii)    The established landscape; and

(iii)   Temporarily irrigated areas.

(5)    Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

(i)     Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);

(ii)    Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);

(iii)   Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;

(iv)   Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;

(v)    Application rate setting;

(vi)   Root depth setting;

(vii)  Plant type setting;

(viii) Soil type;

(ix)   Slope factor setting;

(x)    Shade factor setting; and

(xi)   Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1213. Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.
(a)    Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.

(b)    A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

(c)    Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency.

(d)    A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1214. Use of reclaimed water.
(a)    The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water.

(b)    All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and State laws.

(c)    Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1215. Street trees.
        On all new construction, the Director may require the planting of parkway/street trees, of a variety from the City’s master tree list. Street trees shall be installed in compliance with the following standards:

(a)    Minimum spacing requirements.

(1)    Spacing between trees will be determined by the Director during project review; and

(2)    Spacing between trees and various circulation and utility items shall be as follows:

(i)     Thirty-five (35) feet from street intersections;

(ii)    Fifteen (15) feet from street light and utility poles; and

(iii)   Ten (10) feet from driveways, sewers, and waterlines.

(b)    Street tree species shall be selected in compliance with the following standards/criteria:

(1)    New street tree plantings in older areas of the City shall reflect, to the greatest extent feasible, the existing species along the street, and every effort should be made to match or effectively blend with existing plant materials;

(2)    Street trees for a particular street shall generally require a uniform tree variety within a specified area in order to ensure ease of maintenance and maintain general aesthetic appearance;

(3)    Trees to be located under utility wires shall be properly selected, planted, and maintained subject to the recommendations of a certified arborist. Tree topping shall be avoided; and

(4)    Trees shall be standard single trunk, not multi-trunked, except for a limited number of specimen trees.

(c)    A minimum size of twenty-four (24) inch box with a minimum two (2) inch trunk diameter shall be required for each street tree. Each tree shall be eight (8) feet to twelve (12) feet tall with a minimum four (4) foot wide head at the time of planting. The Director may reduce the minimum size to fifteen (15) gallon in instances where a twenty-four (24) inch box tree would not be appropriate for the location.

(d)    Street trees shall not obstruct the vision of motorists or pedestrians.

(e)    Where parkways exist between the sidewalk and curb, street trees shall use tree wells with root barriers to mitigate against uprooting of sidewalks and curbs.

(f)    Where the parkway is located behind the sidewalk, street trees shall be planted five (5) feet behind the sidewalk measured from the outer edge of the sidewalk to mitigate sidewalk and curb damage.

(g)    All trees shall be free of insects, disease, mechanical injuries, and other objectionable features at the time of planting.

(h)    Any person or firm contracting to plant street trees shall post a performance bond guaranteeing the faithful performance of all irrigation and tree maintenance for at least a one-year period. The bond shall be an amount equal to the cost of the planting, irrigation, and maintenance as determined by the City Engineer.

(i)     Street trees shall not be removed without the approval of the City Engineer. Also, please see Section 10-2.1211.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1216. Maintenance of landscaping.
        All installed landscaping and irrigation systems shall be continually maintained in compliance with the following requirements:

(a)    Landscape maintenance shall consist of regular watering, mowing, pruning, fertilizing, clearing of debris and weeds, the removal and replacement of dead plants, and the repair and replacement of irrigation system components.

(b)    Before final inspection, the project proponent shall file, with the Department, a maintenance agreement and easement subject to the approval of the City Attorney. The agreement and easement shall ensure that if the landowner, or subsequent owner(s), fails to maintain the required or installed site improvements, the City would be able to file an appropriate lien(s) against the property in order to accomplish the required maintenance.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1217. Water-efficient model home requirements.
        These requirements apply to all new residential developments whenever two (2) or more model homes are involved. One model home may use non-drought tolerant species; the remaining models shall be designed to meet the water-saving landscaping criteria identified in this article and in compliance with the specific requirements of this section.

(a)    Each “water-saving” model home shall contain exclusively low-water use plant materials and efficient irrigation systems with appropriate signs and information for prospective homebuyers.

(b)    Each model in the complex, including the high-water use model, shall be equipped with a water meter to generate records on how much water the landscape uses. The information shall be used in public information materials about the models and the water-saving potential for low-water use landscapes.

(c)    All plants used at the water-saving models are to be water-efficient types that are readily available in Ventura County or other nearby sources. The plants used should be attractive, including some flowering types, require relatively little maintenance once established, and enhance the appearance of the model home(s).

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1218. Preservation of existing trees.
        All existing oak, sycamore, heritage, and other mature trees are considered significant aesthetic, ecological, and historical resources and shall be preserved in compliance with Chapter 4-10 of the Municipal Code. All tree protection provisions and associated tree fencing plans shall be clearly shown on the required grading plans.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1219. Applicable regulations.
        All uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 24, Conditional Use Permits; Article 14, Parking and Loading Standards; Article 20, Design Review Permits; Article 16, Sign Standards; Article 12, Landscaping Standards; Article 22, Temporary Use Permits; Article 25, Minor Variances; Article 26, Variances.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1220. Graywater systems.
Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to California Code Regulations Title 23, Section 490.1, subdivision (d) for the applicability of this article to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by graywater.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1221. Stormwater management and rainwater retention.
(a)    Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged.

(b)    Project applicants shall refer to the City or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements.

(c)    All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to Section 10-2.1208(a)(3).

(d)    It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either: (1) the one-inch, twenty-four (24) hour rain event; or (2) the 85th percentile, twenty-four (24) hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, State or Federal regulation.

(e)    It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and use:

(1)    Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.

(2)    Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways.

(3)    Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.

(4)    Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.

(5)    Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.

(6)    Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil.

(7)    Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1222. Reserved.
(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1223. Public education.
(a)    Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community.

(1)    The City shall provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget.

(b)    Model homes. All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this article.

(1)    Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.

(2)    Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1224. Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
(a)    This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are over one acre in size.

(1)    For all such landscapes that have a water meter, the City shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA= (0.8) (ETo) (LA) (0.62).

(2)    For all such landscapes, that do not have a meter, the City shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.

(b)    All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1225. Waste water prevention.
(a)    Local agencies shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions shall be established locally.

(b)    Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:

(1)    The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

(2)    The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1226. Effective precipitation.
The City may consider effective precipitation (twenty-five (25) percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance:

MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA)+ (045 x SLA)] for residential areas.

MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(045 x LA)+ (0.55 x SLA)] for nonresidential areas.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

Sec. 10-2.1227. Irrigation efficiency.
For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0. 75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1228. Penalties.
In addition to any other authority available to enforce violations of this Municipal Code, the City may establish and administer additional penalties to the project applicant for noncompliance with the ordinance to the extent permitted by law.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1229. Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table.
 

Table A — Ojai Reference Evapotranspiration (2015)

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sept

Oct

Nov

Dec

Year

2.2

2.6

3.2

3.8

4.6

4.7

5.5

4.9

4.1

3.4

2.5

2.0

43.5

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1230. Prescriptive compliance option.
(a)    This section contains prescriptive requirements which may be used as a compliance option to the Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

(b)    Compliance with the following items is mandatory and must be documented on a landscape plan in order to use the prescriptive compliance option:

(1)    Submit a landscape documentation package which includes the following elements:

(i)     Date.

(ii)    Project applicant.

(iii)   Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)).

(iv)   Total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf and plant material.

(v)    Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed).

(vi)   Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well.

(vii)  Contact information for the project applicant and property owner.

(viii) Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the prescriptive compliance option to the MWELO.”

(2)    Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four (4) cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet to a depth of six (6) inches into landscape area (unless contra-indicated by a soil test);

(3)    Plant material shall comply with all of the following:

(i)     For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for seventy-five (75) percent of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water. For nonresidential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for one hundred (100) percent of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water;

(ii)    A minimum three (3) inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated.

(4)    Turf shall comply with all of the following:

(i)     Turf shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the landscape area in residential areas, and there shall be no turf in nonresidential areas;

(ii)    Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of one foot vertical elevation change for every four (4) feet of horizontal length;

(iii)   Turf is prohibited in parkways less than ten (10) feet wide, unless the parkway is adjacent to a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles. Any turf in parkways must be irrigated by sub-surface irrigation or by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.

(5)    Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:

(i)     Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data and utilize a rain sensor.

(ii)    Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not lose programming data in the event the primary power source is interrupted.

(iii)   Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system to ensure the dynamic pressure of the system is within the manufacturers recommended pressure range.

(iv)   Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply.

(v)    All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the ANSI standard, ASABE/ICC 802-2014, “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

(vi)   Areas less than ten (10) feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.

(6)    For nonresidential projects with landscape areas of one thousand (1,000) square feet or more, a private submeter(s) to measure landscape water use shall be installed.

(c)    At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide the owner of the property with a certificate of completion, certificate of installation, irrigation schedule and a schedule of landscape and irrigation maintenance.

(§ 2, Ord. 872, eff. June 9, 2017)

 

Article 13. Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels
Sec. 10-2.1301. Purpose of article.
(a)    The provisions of this article are intended to establish uniform provisions for the administration and orderly termination of legal nonconforming uses and structures in order to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to bring these uses and structures into conformity with the goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

(b)    It is the intent of these Zoning Regulations to discourage the long-term continuation of these nonconformities, providing for their eventual elimination, but to allow them to exist under the limited conditions identified in this article. Accordingly, nonconformities may be properly maintained, but generally not enhanced or expanded.

(c)    It is hereby declared that nonconforming uses and structures within the City are detrimental to both orderly and creative development and the general welfare of the citizens, and should therefore be eliminated without unduly infringing upon the constitutional rights of the affected property owners.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

Sec. 10-2.1302. Land use allowed.
        No property in the City shall be used for any purposes except those allowed in the zoning district in which the property has been classified.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1303. Restriction on improvements of nonconformities.
        Nonconformities may be continued subject to the following provisions:

(a)    No nonconforming use may be reestablished after having been abandoned or discontinued for at least 180 days. This discontinuance shall cause the use to be deemed to have ceased and the use shall not be reinstated or further continued unless specifically allowed by the Commission after a hearing in compliance with this article.

        The discontinuance or abandonment of the active and continuous occupation or operation of the nonconforming use, or a part or portion thereof, for this period, is considered to be an abandonment of the nonconforming use, regardless of any reservation of an intent not to abandon or of an intent to resume active operations. If abandonment is evidenced by the actual removal of structures, machinery, furniture, equipment or other components of the nonconforming use, or where there are no business receipts or records (including a City business license, where applicable) available to provide evidence that the use is in continual operation, the abandonment shall be considered to be completed within a period of less than 180 days and all rights to reestablish or continue the nonconforming use shall terminate.

        If a nonconforming use is converted to a conforming use, no nonconforming use may be resumed. No nonconforming use may be established or replaced by another nonconforming use, except as provided by this article.

(b)    No nonconforming structure may be added to, structurally altered or enlarged in any manner, except as provided in subsection (f) below.

(c)    No nonconforming use occupying a conforming or nonconforming structure, or portion thereof, or occupying any parcel, shall be enlarged or extended into any other portion of the structure or parcel.

(d)    A nonconforming use of a portion of a nonconforming nonresidential center or complex may be replaced by another similar nonconforming use subject to the approval of a conditional use permit only if the Commission can make all of the following findings, in addition to those outlined in Article 24 of this chapter:

(1)    The nonconforming use is similar to the uses originally allowed in the center or complex;

(2)    The nonconforming use would not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to adjoining parcels and/or developments; and

(3)    The use of the entire center or complex has not been vacant or discontinued for a period of 180 days.

 

 

 

(e)    Any nonconforming use which does not conform to the conditions outlined in this subsection shall be immediately abated, subject to the notice and hearing procedures described in Sections 10-2.1306 and 10-2.1307

(f)    Where a structure is nonconforming only by reason of inadequate setbacks, yard size or open space, structural additions, alterations, or enlargements of the existing structure(s) shall be allowed, provided the additions, alterations, or enlargements comply with these Zoning Regulations and standards relating to the structure’s “building envelope” (e.g., setbacks, yards, heights and open space requirements) for the parcel or site. The Director may issue a zoning clearance in compliance with Article 19 of this chapter which would allow the new construction (e.g., additions, alterations, or enlargements) to be built in compliance with the previous or existing setbacks.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1304. Multi-family dwelling units exempt.
        Nonconforming multi-family residential dwelling units, involuntarily damaged or destroyed due to a catastrophic event may be reconstructed or replaced with a new structure(s) using the same development standards applied to the damaged or destroyed structure(s) (e.g., building envelope, density/number of dwelling units, and footprint standards) without complying with the cost limitations identified in Section 10-2.1315. The new construction shall comply with the current City adopted Building and Fire Code requirements.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1305. Termination of nonconforming uses.
(a)    A nonconforming use may be ordered terminated by the Council, upon the recommendation of the Commission, within a period to be specified in the order, which order shall be issued only after a public hearing by the Commission upon fifteen (15) days’ written notice to the nonconforming user, in compliance with Section 10-2.1306

(b)    If the nonconforming user has not made a substantial investment, or if the investment can be substantially utilized or recovered through a then allowed use, the order may require the complete termination of the nonconforming use within a minimum of twelve (12) months after the date of the order.

(c)    In making its recommendation, the Commission shall consider the total cost of the property and improvements, the length of time of the use, the adaptability of the land and improvements to a then allowed use, the cost of moving and reestablishing the use elsewhere, and other related factors.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1306. Notice.
(a)    Upon determination that the provisions of this article apply to a given parcel of land, the Director shall send a notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the owner as shown on the current tax assessor’s rolls, shall cause the property to be posted with a similar notice, and shall publish the notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation.

(b)    The notice provided for in this section shall state the following:

(1)    That the property in question has a nonconforming use;

(2)    The date of abatement; and

(3)    That the date of abatement may be appealed to the Commission within thirty (30) days of the date indicated on the notice.

(c)    The City has no legal obligation to notify subsequent owners of the affected parcels of land.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1307. Appeal.
        The owner of any parcel upon which a nonconforming use is being maintained may appeal the time for abatement described in the notice provided in compliance with Section 10-2.1306 by submitting an appeal, on a form provided by the Director and accompanied by any required fee in compliance with Section 10-2.1806, within thirty (30) days of the date indicated on the notice.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1308. Hearing.
(a)    Within sixty (60) days after receipt of an appeal, the Commission shall hold a public hearing to determine whether the nonconforming use should be abated as indicated in the notice, or whether a time extension should be granted in compliance with Section 10-2.1313

(b)    Notice of the hearing shall be provided in the same manner as the notice of abatement.

(c)    The Commission shall receive written and oral testimony at the hearing relating to the term of abatement.

(d)    At the close of the hearing, the Commission shall determine whether the nonconforming use should be abated, and whether the owner of the parcel can amortize the investment in the term for abatement provided in Section 10-2.1305, and if not, what term for abatement should be provided. The burden of proof shall be upon the owner to demonstrate, by a preponderance of the evidence, that the owner is entitled to a longer abatement period than provided for in Section 10-2.1305

(e)    The Commission shall also determine whether the nonconforming use can economically be used in its present condition or can successfully be modified for a purpose allowed by the zoning district in which it is located.

(f)    The Commission may require reasonable modifications or alterations to any nonconforming use to improve the nonconformity’s appearance or compliance with these Zoning Regulations, the Municipal Code, or State law, except that any modification or alteration which would extend the useful life of the nonconformity is expressly prohibited, unless provided by Section 10-2.1303

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1309. Decision and order.
        The decision of the Commission, and the findings in support thereof, shall be in the form of a written order and shall be served upon the property owner personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested, within ten (10) days after the decision is rendered. The order shall be binding upon the owner, and the owner’s successors, heirs, and assignees.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1311. Right of further appeal.
(a)    Any interested person may appeal the decision of the Commission to the Council within ten (10) days of service of the order upon the owner. The appeal hearing shall be noticed in the same manner as the original hearing before the Commission.

(b)    The appeal shall be accompanied by any documents, information, and fee the Director deems necessary to adequately explain and to provide proper notification for the appeal. The appeal shall outline specifically and in detail the grounds for the appeal. The Council may refuse to consider issues not raised in the written appeal of the Commission’s decision.

(c)    When an appeal has been accepted, the Director shall forward to the Council all documents and information on file pertinent to the appeal, together with the minutes or official action of the Commission, and a report on the basis of the decision and the appropriateness of the appeal.

(d)    The Council shall consider the appeal at a public hearing, including all information and evidence submitted with the original application, and any additional information and evidence the appellant may submit which the Council finds to be pertinent.

(e)    The action of the Council shall be to sustain, disapprove, conditionally sustain, or refer the appeal back to the Commission with direction(s), all in compliance with the same requirements and procedures that were applicable to the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1312. Recordation of order.
        At the conclusion of all hearings, notice of the decision and order of the Commission, or the Council in the case of an appeal, shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1313. Extension of time.
(a)    The Commission may grant an extension of the time for abatement of a nonconforming use where it finds that an unreasonable hardship would otherwise be imposed on the property owner.

(b)    The Commission shall base its decision as to the length of the allowed abatement period on any competent evidence presented, including the following:

(1)    The nature of the use;

(2)    The amount of the owner’s investment in improvements;

(3)    The convertibility of improvements to allowed uses;

(4)    The character of the neighborhood;

(5)    The detriment, if any, caused to the neighborhood by continuance of the nonconforming use;

(6)    The amount of time needed to amortize the investment; and

(7)    The depreciation schedule attached to the owner’s latest Federal income tax return.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1314. Conditional use permits.
        Any owner of a nonconforming use resulting only from Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter requiring a conditional use permit for the use shall apply for a conditional use permit within one (1) year of receiving a notice from the Director. The notice shall state that the owner has one (1) year to apply for the permit, and that if the owner does not apply, or if the permit is disapproved, an amortization period would be established in compliance with this article. A use in existence under a valid conditional use permit, which would not be allowable under current regulations, may continue as long as it remains in compliance with all of the conditions of the original approval.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1315. Maintenance, repair and alteration of nonconforming structures.
(a)    Ordinary maintenance, repairs and alterations may be made to a nonconforming structure, provided that no structural alteration shall be made if the expense for the alteration exceeds sixty (60%) percent of the reasonable replacement value of the structure at the time the construction is proposed. Single-family residential structures shall be exempt from the provisions of this section.

(b)    Any nonconforming structure partially destroyed may be restored provided restoration is started within 180 days of the date of partial destruction and diligently pursued to completion. Whenever a nonconforming structure is damaged in excess of sixty (60%) percent of its reasonable replacement value at the time of damage, the repair or reconstruction of the structure shall conform with all of the current provisions and standards of the zoning district in which it is located and it shall be treated as a new structure.

        Rebuilding or reconstruction required to reinforce non-reinforced masonry structures shall be allowed without replacement cost limitations, provided the retrofitting is limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards.

(c)    Where any part of a nonconforming structure is acquired for public use, the remainder of the structure may be repaired, reconstructed, or remodeled, with the same or similar materials used in the existing structure.

(d)    Disagreements with the interpretation of the provisions of this section shall be heard and resolved by the Commission, subject to appeal to the Council. The burden of proof shall be on the owner to demonstrate that the cost of repairs is less than sixty (60%) percent of the reasonable replacement value of the structure.

(e)    Nothing in this section shall be construed to excuse any owner, occupant, or contractor from rebuilding or repairing any damaged structure in compliance with the requirements of the City Building Code, or any other health or safety requirements imposed by local, regional, State, or Federal law or regulation in effect at the time of the repair or rebuilding.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1316. Expansion of nonconforming use.
        An existing legal nonconforming use may be minimally expanded subject to the granting of a conditional use permit in compliance with Article 24 of this chapter. The permit may be approved only if the Commission can make all of the following findings in addition to those listed in Section 10-2.2406;

(a)    The expansion is minimal as determined by the Commission;

(b)    The expansion would not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to adjoining properties;

(c)    There is a need for relief of overcrowded conditions or for modernization in order to properly operate the use; and

(d)    The use is existing and has not been discontinued for a period of 180 days.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1317. Substitution of a nonconforming use.
        A legal nonconforming use may be replaced by another nonconforming use subject to the granting of a conditional use permit in compliance with Article 24 of this chapter, provided that the substitute use is no more detrimental to the public welfare and to the property of persons located nearby than is the original nonconforming use. Thereafter, each successive replacement use shall be more restrictive than the previous use.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1318. Termination—Violation of laws.
        Any one of the following violations of these Zoning Regulations shall immediately terminate the right to operate a nonconformity, except as otherwise provided in this article:

(a)    Changing a nonconforming use to a use not allowed in the zoning district;

(b)    The addition to a nonconforming use of another use not allowed in the zoning district; or

(c)    Increasing or enlarging the area, space, or volume occupied by or devoted to a nonconformity.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1319. Unlawful uses and structures.
(a)    Uses and structures which did not comply with the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations or prior planning and zoning regulations when established are violations of these Zoning Regulations and are subject to the provisions of Article 35 of this chapter.

(b)    This article does not grant any right to continue occupancy of property containing an illegal use or structure.

(c)    The activity shall not be lawfully allowed to continue unless/until permits and entitlements required by these Zoning Regulations and the Municipal Code are first obtained.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1320. Public nuisance.
        Any nonconformity continuing beyond the date for abatement as established by Section 10-2.1305, or as extended by the Commission or Council is a public nuisance. In the event that a nonconforming use or structure is found to constitute a public nuisance, appropriate action shall be taken by the City.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1321. Nonconforming parcels.
        A nonconforming parcel of record that does not comply with the access, area, or width requirements of these Zoning Regulations for the zoning district in which it is located, shall be considered a legal building site if it meets at least one of the criteria identified in subsection (a) below.

(a)    It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one (1) or more of the following:

(1)    The parcel was created through a subdivision approved by the City or by the County before annexation;

(2)    The parcel is under one (1) ownership and of record, and was legally created by a recorded deed before the effective date of the zoning amendment that made the parcel nonconforming;

(3)    The parcel was approved through the variance procedure, in compliance with Article 26 of this chapter or resulted from a lot line adjustment; or

(4)    The parcel was created in compliance with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations, but was made nonconforming when a portion of the parcel was acquired by a governmental entity so that the parcel size was decreased not more than twenty-five (25%) percent, and the yard facing a public right-of-way was decreased not more than fifty (50%) percent.

(b)    Where structures have been erected on a nonconforming parcel, the area where structures are located shall not be later divided so as to reduce the building site area and/or frontage below the requirements of the applicable zoning district or other applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, or that makes the use of the parcel more nonconforming.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1322. Applicable regulations.
        All uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 24, Conditional Use Permits; Article 14, Parking and Loading Standards; Article 20, Design Review Permits; Article 16, Sign Standards; Article 12, Landscaping Standards; Article 22, Temporary Use Permits; Article 25, Minor Variances; Article 26, Variances.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 14. Parking and Loading Standards
Sec. 10-2.1401. Purpose of article.
        The provisions of this article are intended to provide off-street parking and loading standards to:

(a)    Provide for the general welfare and convenience of persons within the City by designating and reserving those areas that are needed for parking facilities to meet the needs generated by specific uses and thereby avoiding substantial impediments to public access to limited availability of parking spaces;

(b)    Provide accessible, attractive, secure, and well-maintained off-street parking and loading facilities and preventing public streets from becoming de facto used vehicle lots;

(c)    Increase public safety by reducing congestion on and reserving the primary purpose of public streets to facilitate traffic movement;

(d)    Ensure access and maneuverability for emergency vehicles;

(e)    Provide loading and delivery facilities in proportion to the needs of allowed uses.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1402. Applicability.
        Every use, including a change or expansion of a use or structure, shall have appropriately maintained off-street parking and loading areas in compliance with the provisions of this article. A use shall not be commenced and structures shall not be occupied until improvements required by this article are satisfactorily completed.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1403. General parking regulations.
(a)    Parking and loading spaces shall be permanently available, marked, and maintained for parking or loading purposes for the use they are intended to serve. The approval of a temporary use permit may allow the temporary reduction of parking or loading spaces in compliance with Section 10-2.2202

(b)    Owners, lessees, tenants, or persons having control of the operation of a premises for which parking or loading spaces are required by this article shall not prevent, prohibit, or restrict authorized persons from using these spaces without prior approval of the Director.

(c)    Vehicles, trailers, or other personal property shall not be parked on private property for the purpose of displaying the vehicle, trailer, or other personal property for sale, hire, or rental. However, one (1) vehicle or trailer owned by a person may be so displayed, so long as each displayed vehicle or trailer is not parked in any one (1) public location for more than forty-eight (48) consecutive hours nor more than fourteen (14) days total, whether or not consecutive, in any number of public property locations.

(d)    Tandem parking shall not be permitted without prior approval of the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1404. Single-family parking regulations.
(a)    Off-street covered parking accommodations for a minimum of two (2) motor vehicles shall be provided and continuously maintained for each single-family dwelling.

(b)    Each off-street parking space shall be at least nine (9′) feet wide and twenty (20′) feet long. Each enclosed garage shall have minimum inside dimensions of ten (10′) feet by twenty (20′) feet for a one (1) car garage or carport. A two (2) car garage or carport shall have minimum inside dimensions of twenty (20′) feet by twenty (20′) feet.

(c)    Existing garages or carports shall not be converted to other uses unless and until the minimum requirements of this article are satisfied.

(d)    Not more than fifty (50%) percent of a required front yard shall be designed, improved, or used for access driveways.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1405. Number of parking spaces required.
        Each use shall provide at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by this article, except where a greater number of spaces is required through land use entitlement approval or where an exception has been granted through approval of a discretionary permit.

(a)    Each land use shall provide the number of off-street parking spaces required by Table 3-5. Additional spaces may be required/approved through discretionary entitlement approval.

(b)    When a structure is enlarged or increased in capacity or intensity, or when a change in use requires more off-street parking, additional parking spaces shall be provided in compliance with this article. Also see Article 13 of this chapter.

(c)    A site with multi-tenants shall provide the aggregate number of parking spaces required for each separate use; except where the site is developed as a recognized shopping center, the parking ratio shall be that required for the shopping center as a whole as provided in Table 3-5. When a multi-tenant shopping center includes uses whose parking requirements are greater than a typical shopping center (e.g., restaurants, theaters) additional parking shall be required unless a specific parking reduction is approved in compliance with Section 10-2.1406

(d)    Land uses not specifically listed in subsection (a) above shall provide parking as required by the Director. The Director shall use the requirements of subsection (a) as a guide in determining the minimum number of off-street parking spaces to be provided.

(e)    Off-street parking spaces in excess of the requirements in Table 3-5 may be approved in conjunction with a discretionary entitlement, and when additional landscaping and pedestrian improvements are also provided.

(f)    Where fixed seating is provided in the form of benches or bleachers, a seat shall be construed to be eighteen (18″) inches of bench space for the purpose of calculating the number of required parking spaces as provided in Table 3-5.

(g)    The number of parking spaces required by this article does not include spaces needed for the parking of company-owned vehicles. Parking spaces for company-owned vehicles shall be provided in addition to the requirements for a particular land use as provided in Table 3-5.

(h)    When the parking requirements in Table 3-5 are based on structure square footages, they shall be based on the gross floor area of the structure.

 

Table 3-5

PARKING REQUIREMENTS BY LAND USE

 

Land Use Type

Vehicle Spaces Required

Manufacturing Processing and Warehousing

 

General manufacturing, industrial, and processing uses

1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of floor area for the first 25,000 sq. ft.; and 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. thereafter. Office space may comprise up to 20% of the total floor area without providing additional parking. Parking requirements for the office space comprising more than 20% of the total floor area shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for “Offices.”

Recycling facilities

Determined by Design Review Permit.

Research and development, laboratories

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 space for each company-owned vehicle.

Warehouses and storage facilities

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area for the first 25,000 sq. ft., and 1 space for each 2,000 sq. ft. thereafter. Office space may comprise up to 20% of the total floor area without providing additional parking. Parking requirements for the office space comprising more than 20% of the total floor area shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for “Offices.”

Wholesale and distribution operations not used exclusively for storage

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area for the first 10,000 sq. ft., and 1 space for each 2,000 sq. ft. thereafter. Office space may comprise up to 20% of the total floor area without providing additional parking. Parking requirements for the office space comprising more than 20% of the total floor area shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for “Offices.”

Recreation, Education, Public Assembly

 

Auditoriums, community centers, and other places of public assembly

1 space for each 4 seats, or 1 space for each 75 sq. ft. of floor area, whichever is greater.

Clubs, lodges, and private meeting halls

1 space for each 4 seats, or 1 space for each 100 square feet of floor area, whichever is greater.

Dance floors

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.

Equestrian facilities

Determined by Design Review Permit.

Golf

 

Golf courses and country clubs

7 spaces for each hole.

Golf driving range

1 space for each tee.

Miniature golf courses

2 spaces for each hole.

Indoor amusement/entertainment facilities

 

Arcades

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area.

Skating rinks

1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area.

Bowling alleys

5 spaces for each alley, plus additional spaces, as determined by the Director, for ancillary uses.

Health/fitness facilities/spas

1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of floor area.

Pool and billiard rooms

2 spaces for each table, plus additional spaces, as determined by the Director, for ancillary uses.

Swimming pools (public, private, and commercial)

1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of pool area (pool plus deck).

Libraries and museums

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area.

Outdoor commercial recreation

Determined by Planned Development Permit.

Religious facilities

1 space for each 4 seats, or 1 space for each 75 sq. ft. of floor area, whichever is greater.

Schools (public and private)

 

Kindergarten and nursery schools

1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 10 children.

Elementary/Junior high

1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 8 students.

High school

1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 6 students.

Colleges, universities, and institutions of higher learning (including trade and business schools and art, music, and dancing schools)

1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 3 students.

Studios: art, dance, martial arts, music, photography

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.

Tennis, handball, racquetball, or other courts

2 spaces for each court, plus 1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area for ancillary uses.

Theaters

1 space for each 4 seats, or 1 space for each 75 sq. ft. of floor area, whichever is greater.

Residential Uses

 

Caretaker, employee, or farm worker housing

1 space for each 4 persons housed. Parking areas are not required to be covered or paved. Parking areas shall not be located adjacent to any scenic corridor unless screened from public view by structures, fences, landscaping, or terrain features.

Condominiums

2 covered spaces plus 1 uncovered guest parking space for each dwelling unit.

Duplexes

2 covered spaces for each unit.

Group quarters

 

Rooming and boarding houses

1 covered space for each bedroom.

Mixed-use developments

Determined by Design Review Permit

Mobile homes

 

Individual mobile homes

1 space in a carport.

Mobile home park

1 space in a carport (may be in tandem) for each unit plus 0.5 uncovered guest parking space and 0.25 parking space for each unit for vehicle storage.

Multi-family dwellings

 

Four to eight dwelling units

2 covered spaces for each unit, plus 0.5 uncovered guest parking space for each dwelling unit.

Nine or more dwelling units

1.5 covered spaces for each dwelling unit plus 0.5 uncovered guest parking space for each 1 bedroom unit and 1 uncovered guest parking space for each dwelling unit containing 2 or more bedrooms.

Residential care homes

 

Six or fewer clients

2 covered spaces.

Seven or more clients

1 space for each 2 residential units, plus 1 space for each 4 units for guests and employees.

Second residential units

1 covered space in addition to that required for the single-family unit.

Senior housing projects

1 space for each unit with half the spaces covered, plus 1 guest parking space for each 10 units.

Single-family dwellings

2 spaces in a fully-enclosed garage or carport.

Triplexes

2 covered spaces for each unit.

Retail Trade

 

Art, antique, collectable, and gift sales

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.

Auto parts sales

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area.

Convenience and liquor stores

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.

Furniture, furnishings, and appliance stores

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area.

General retail stores

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.

Motor vehicle leasing, sales, and rental

1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of floor area or 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor sales area, with a minimum of 4 spaces.

Outdoor retail sales and activities

1 space for each 500 sq. ft. of sales area, with a minimum of 4 spaces.

Plant nurseries and garden supply stores

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of site area, plus 1 loading space, 15 ft. × 30 ft., for each acre of the site.

Restaurants (including bars, cafes, cafeterias, and other eating/drinking places)

 

Take-out only (no on-site seating)

1 space for each 180 sq. ft. of total gross floor area.

Fast food (counter service)

5 spaces, plus 1 space for every 3 seats in dining area or 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of total gross floor area, whichever is greater.

Table service

1 space for each 2.5 seats or 1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of total gross floor area, whichever is greater.

Shopping centers and complexes

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area. Reductions may be granted in compliance with 10-2.1406 (Reduction of Parking Requirements), below.

Service Uses

 

Banks and financial services

 

Banks

1 space for each 100 sq. ft. of gross retail floor area, plus 2 spaces for each ATM, and 1 space for each company-owned vehicle.

Financial institution

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.

Bed and breakfast inns

1 space for each guest room, plus 2 spaces for the resident family.

Car wash

 

Self service

2 spaces for each stall.

Full service

10 spaces, plus 6 spaces for each wash lane for queuing and drying area.

Child day care

 

Large family day care homes

3 spaces minimum; may include spaces provided to fulfill residential parking requirements and on-street parking so long as it abuts the site.

Child/adult care centers

1 space for each employee, plus 1 space for each 10 children.

Equipment sales and rental

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of outdoor use area.

Hotels and motels

1 space for each living/sleeping unit, plus 1 space for each 5 units, plus 1 space for the manager, plus additional spaces, as determined by the Director, for ancillary uses.

Laundry - Dry cleaning pick-up facilities and Laundromats

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.

Laundry - Laundries and dry cleaning plants

1 space for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area.

Medical services

 

Clinics, offices, and laboratories

1 space for each 200 sq. ft. of floor area, or 3 spaces for each examination room, whichever is greater.

Extended care

1 ½ spaces for each bed or number of patients the facility is licensed to accommodate.

Hospitals

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area, or 11/2 spaces for each bed or number of patients the facility is licensed to accommodate, whichever is greater.

Mortuaries and funeral homes

1 space for each 4 seats in the sanctuary, plus 1 space for each company-owned vehicle.

Motor vehicle services — Minor repair

1 space for each 300 sq. ft. of floor area or 4 spaces per service bay, whichever is greater, plus adequate queuing lanes for each day.

Offices - Administrative, business, governmental, production, and professional

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area, with a minimum of 4 spaces.

Personal services

 

Barber and beauty shops

3 spaces for each barber or beautician, with a minimum of 4 spaces.

Pet grooming

1 space for each 400 sq. ft. of floor area.

Service stations

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area or 3 spaces per service bay, whichever is greater, plus adequate queuing lanes for each service bay.

Storage

 

Outdoor

1 space for each 3,000 sq. ft. of lot area.

Personal self-service (mini-storage)

4 spaces for the manager’s office.

Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, and kennels

1 space for each 250 sq. ft. of floor area.

 

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1406. Reduction of parking requirements.
(a)    A reduction in the number of parking spaces required by this article may be allowed through the approval of a minor conditional use permit in compliance with Article 24 of this chapter.

(b)    Where two (2) or more nonresidential uses are developed as a recognized shopping or professional center and two (2) or more uses have distinct and differing peak parking usage periods, (e.g., a bank and a theater), a reduction in the required number of parking spaces may be approved by the Director through a minor conditional use permit (Article 24 of this chapter), provided that the most remote space is located within 300 feet of the use it is intended to serve (as measured along the most direct pedestrian path). The amount of reduction shall not result in a parking requirement less then that required for the most intensive of the uses sharing the parking. A shared parking analysis may be required by the Director to support a request for a parking reduction.

(c)    The following shared-use parking standards are based on the assumption that patrons would use a single parking space for more than one (1) destination and that a single parking space would be available for short-term parking to serve a variety of different uses that may have different peak hours.

(1)    Nonresidential new construction on sites of less than 20,000 square feet in size, new construction on sites greater than 20,000 square feet in size for retail commercial, restaurants (excluding fast food), and theaters, and additions to existing structures or changes in use shall be eligible to use the alternative shared-use parking standards within the C-1, B-P, and VMU Zoning Districts. However, existing uses shall not reduce current levels of parking as a result of the alternative shared-use parking standards.

(2)    Residential uses or new construction of hotel or office uses on sites greater than 20,000 square feet in size are not eligible to use alternative shared-use parking standards.

(3)    Once it has been established that parking is required, eligible projects within the C-1, B-P, and VMU Zoning Districts may choose to provide shared parking by using the alternative shared-use parking standards in Table 3-6 below, or provide parking for the project’s exclusive use under the requirements established in Section 10-2.1405(a).

        Projects developed under the shared-use parking standards shall enter into an agreement with the City which shall be recorded with the office of the County Recorder. The agreement shall require that the parking be operated on a nonexclusive basis, open and available to the general public for shared use at all times.

 

Table 3-6

ALTERNATIVE SHARED-USE PARKING STANDARDS

 

Use

Minimum Parking Ratios

New construction of office or hotel uses on sites greater than 20,000 sq. ft.

Excluded from use of shared-use parking standards

Office uses on sites less than 20,000 sq. ft.

2.5 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

Including:

 

1.  Banks, savings and loans, other financial institutions

 

2.  Medical or dental offices

 

3.  Professional and other offices

 

Public assembly on any size site including:

 

1.  Movie or performance theater

1 space for each 7 seats, plus 5 for employees

2.  Museum

3 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

Residential

Excluded from use of shared-use parking standards

Restaurants on any size site including:

 

1.  Restaurant, deli, coffee house, juice bar under 1,000 sq. ft. of usable area, excluding fast food

3 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

2.  Restaurant over 1,000 sq. ft. of usable area, excluding fast food

6 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

3.  Outdoor dining areas associated with a restaurant

none

Retail commercial on any size site

3 spaces for each 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area

 

(d)    Requirements for enclosed garages for single-family dwellings may be waived by the Director provided the area devoted to parking is visually screened from adjacent parcels. A design review permit shall be obtained before the waiver of the enclosed parking requirement is granted, in compliance with Article 20 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1407. Disabled/handicapped parking requirements.
        Parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to the disabled as follows:

(a)    Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with Section 1129B of the Uniform Building Code (UBC).

(b)    Disabled accessible spaces required by this article shall be reserved by the property owner/tenant for use by the disabled throughout the life of the approved land use.

(c)    If amendments to State law change standards for the marking, striping, and signing of disabled parking spaces, disabled accessible spaces shall be upgraded in compliance with the new State standards. Upgrading shall be completed by affected property owners within sixty (60) days of being notified in writing by the Department of new State standards.

(d)    Disabled accessible parking spaces required by this article shall count toward fulfilling off-street parking requirements.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1408. Development standards.
        Required parking areas shall be provided as follows:

(a)    Access to parking areas shall be provided in the following manner:

(1)    Parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that vehicles enter an abutting street in a forward direction. Parking lots shall be provided so as to prevent access at any point other than at designated access drives. Single-family homes and duplexes are excluded from this requirement.

(2)    Industrial uses located on arterial streets and commercial uses that provide fifty (50) or more parking spaces shall have access driveways that are not intersected by a parking aisle, parking space, or another access driveway for a minimum distance of fifty (50′) feet from the street right-of-way line.

(3)    A minimum unobstructed clearance height of fourteen (14′) feet shall be maintained above areas accessible to vehicles within nonresidential uses.

(b)    Applicants for nonresidential developments are encouraged to provide shared vehicle access to adjacent nonresidential properties to provide for convenience, safety, and efficient circulation. A joint access agreement running with the land shall be recorded by the owners of the abutting properties, as approved by the Director, guaranteeing the continued availability of the shared access between the properties. Shared pedestrian access between adjacent properties, including residential developments is also strongly encouraged.

(c)    Parking areas shall be located as follows:

(1)    Required residential parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served, and shall not be located in a required setback area abutting a street.

(2)    Required nonresidential parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served or within 500 feet of the parcel if shared parking or public parking facilities are used to meet parking requirements.

(3)    Nonresidential parking shall not be located within a required front setback area. Parking may be located within a required side or rear setback provided it is separated from the side or rear property line by a minimum five (5′) foot landscaped area.

(d)    Parking space and lot dimensions.

(1)    Minimum parking dimensions shall be as indicated in Table 3-7.

 

Table 3-7

MINIMUM PARKING STALL DIMENSIONS RESIDENTIAL USES

 

Standard Stall

Compact Stall

Length

Width

Length

Width

Garage (interior dimension)

 

 

20 feet

9 feet

N/A

N/A

Uncovered Spaces

 

 

Spaces shall conform to the standards in Table 3-6

16 feet

8 feet

 

(2)    Minimum parking dimensions shall be as indicated in Tables 3-8 and 3-9.

 

Table 3-8

MINIMUM PARKING STALL AND LOT DIMENSIONS

 

Standard Parking Stall Dimensions

Length

Width

20 feet with bumper overhang See (h)(5) (below)

9 feet

 

One-Way Traffic and Double-Loaded Aisles

Parking angle (degrees)

Turnaround

Curb length

Interior stall depth, with bumper overhang

Perimeter stall depth, with bumper overhang

Aisle with (travel lane)

30

18 feet

18 feet

16.5 feet

17.8 feet

13 feet

45

17 feet

12.7 feet

18.8 feet

20.5 feet

15 feet

60

14 feet

10.4 feet

19.6 feet

21.8 feet

19 feet

90

14 feet

9 feet

20 feet

20 feet

25 feet

 

Two-Way Traffic and Double-Loaded Aisles

Parking angle (degrees)

Turnaround

Curb length

Interior stall depth, with bumper overhang

Perimeter stall depth, with bumper overhang

Aisle with (travel lane)

30

27 feet

18 feet

16.5 feet

17.8 feet

25 feet

45

27 feet

12.7 feet

18.8 feet

20.5 feet

25 feet

60

27 feet

10.4 feet

19.6 feet

21.8 feet

25 feet

90

27 feet

9 feet

20 feet

20 feet

25 feet

 

Table 3-9

PARKING AREA DIMENSIONS

 

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

Parking Space Angle

Curb Length Per Car

Stall Depth

Back-up Driveway Width

Single Bay Width

Double Bay Width

Stall Depth to CL

Total Bay Width

1-Way

2-Way

1-Way

2-Way

1-Way

2-Way

0°

25′

9′

12′

20′

21′0″

29′0″

30′

38′0″

9′

18′

30°

18′0″

17′10″

12′

20′

29′10″

37′10″

47′8″

55′8″

13′11″

27′10″

45°

12′9″

20′6″

14′

20′

34′6″

40′6″

55′0″

61′0″

17′4″

34′8″

60°

10′5″

21′10″

18′

20′

39′10″

41′10″

61′8″

63′8″

19′7″

39′2″

90°

9′0″

20′0″

24′

24′

44′0″

44′0″

64′0″

64′0″

17′6″

40′0″

A      Angle of parking

B      Curb length per car

C      Stall depth

D      Back up or driveway width

D1    Driveway widths leading to parking areas to be per Section 20-2.1409

E      Total width single bay adjoining walls or other obstructions (C+D)

F       Total width double bay adjoining walls or other obstructions (2 × C+D)

G      Stall depth to center line of adjacent parking bays (C-H)

H      Total width of adjacent parking bays (2 × G)

 

(3)    Parallel parking spaces shall have a minimum width of nine (9′) feet and a minimum length of twenty-four (24′) feet. Aisle widths shall be twelve (12′) feet for one (1) way traffic and twenty-four (24′) feet for two (2) way traffic.

(4)    When thirty (30) or more parking spaces are required, compact car spaces may be provided up to a maximum of twenty-five (25%) percent of the parking spaces required for a multi-family residential project and up to twenty (20%) percent of the spaces required for a nonresidential project. The compact parking spaces shall have a minimum depth of sixteen (16′) feet and a minimum width of eight (8′) feet; a minimum depth of eighteen (18′) feet shall be provided for parallel spaces. Bumper overhang areas may be provided in compliance with subsection (h)(6) below. Each compact space shall be clearly marked as a compact space in letters reading “Compact Only.”

(e)    Drainage.

(1)    Surface water from parking lots shall not drain over sidewalks or adjacent parcels.

(2)    Parking lots shall be designed in compliance with the storm water quality and quantity standards of the City’s best management practices.

(f)    Directional arrows and signs.

(1)    In parking facilities containing forty (40) or more parking spaces, aisles, approach lanes, and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles.

(2)    The Director may require the installation of traffic signs in addition to directional arrows to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles in a parking facility.

(3)    The exit from a parking area that contains parking for forty (40) or more vehicles shall be clearly marked with a vehicle “STOP” sign unless this requirement is waived by the Director.

(g)    Grades of parking areas.

(1)    Ramps or driveways within the interior of a parking area (beyond twenty (20′) feet from an ultimate right-of-way line) shall have a maximum grade of fifteen (15%) percent. If a ramp or driveway exceeds ten (10%) percent, the design shall include transitions (at each end of the ramp) not less than eight (8′) feet in length, having a slope equal to one-half (½) the ramp or driveway slope.

(2)    Parking spaces and abutting access aisles shall have a maximum grade of five (5%) percent, measured in any direction.

(h)    Landscaping shall be provided in compliance with the following requirements:

(1)    A comprehensive landscape and irrigation plan shall be submitted for review and approval by the Director in compliance with Article 12 of this chapter.

(2)    Landscaping materials shall be provided throughout the parking lot area using a combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover.

(3)    All landscaped areas shall be provided with an automatic irrigation system in compliance with Section 10-2.1206

(4)    Areas containing plant materials shall be bordered by a concrete curb at least six (6″) inches high and six (6″) inches wide. Alternative barrier design to protect landscaped areas from damage by vehicles may be approved by the Director.

(5)    Parking lot landscaping shall be located so that pedestrians are not required to cross landscaped areas to reach structure entrances from parked cars. This should be achieved through proper orientation of the landscaped fingers and islands.

(6)    To increase the parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of twenty-four (24″) inches of the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of paving, allowing a two (2′) foot bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking dimensions.

(7)    Perimeter parking lot landscaping.

(A)   Parking areas for nonresidential uses adjoining a public street shall be designed to provide a landscaped planting strip between the street right-of-way and parking area equal in depth to the setback required by the zoning district or ten (10′) feet, whichever is more. Parking areas for residential uses shall maintain the required setback areas for the zoning districts in which they are located.

The landscaping shall be designed and maintained to screen cars from view from the street to a height of between thirty-six (36″) inches and forty-two (42″) inches. Screening materials may include a combination of plant materials, earth berms, solid masonry walls, raised planters, or other screening devices which meet the intent of this requirement. Trees shall be provided at a minimum rate of one (1) for every thirty (30′) lineal feet of landscaped area. Plant materials, signs, or structures within a traffic safety sight area of a driveway shall not exceed thirty-six (36″) inches in height.

(B)   Parking areas for nonresidential uses shall provide a perimeter landscaped strip at least six (6′) feet wide (inside dimension) where the facility adjoins a side or rear property line. The perimeter landscaped strip may include a required yard or buffer area. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one (1) for each thirty (30′) lineal feet of landscaped area.

(C)   When parking areas are located adjacent to nonresidential structures, a minimum six (6′) foot wide landscape strip shall be provided adjacent to the structure.

(D)   Parking areas for nonresidential uses adjoining residential uses shall provide a landscaped buffer yard with a minimum ten (10′) foot width between the parking area and the common property line bordering the residential use. A solid masonry wall or fence and landscape buffer shall be provided along the property line to address land use compatibility issues (e.g., nuisance noise and light/glare.) Trees shall be provided at the rate of one (1) for each thirty (30′) lineal feet of landscaped area.

(8)    Interior parking lot landscaping.

(A)   Multi-family, commercial, and office uses shall provide landscaping within the parking area at a ratio of eight (8%) percent of the gross area of the parking lot. One (1) tree shall be provided for every five (5) parking spaces. Industrial/manufacturing uses shall provide landscaping within the parking area at a ratio of six (6%) percent of the gross area of the parking lot. One (1) tree shall be provided for every ten (10) parking spaces.

Landscaping shall be evenly dispersed throughout the parking area. Use of an orchard-style planting scheme is encouraged for larger parking areas. Parking lots with more than 100 spaces should provide a concentration of landscape elements at main entrances, including specimen trees, flowering plants, enhanced paving, and project identification.

(B)   Trees shall be in planters located throughout the parking area.

(i)     Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. A minimum of one (1) footcandle of illumination shall be maintained at the parking surface throughout the parking area. Lighting fixtures shall be energy-efficient. Lighting standards shall be in scale with the height and use of the on-site structure(s). All illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed downward, away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way in compliance with Section 10-2.806

(j)     Striping and identification.

(1)    Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with four (4″) inch wide lines painted on the surface of the parking facility. Car pool spaces shall be clearly identified for car pool use only.

(2)    The restriping of any parking space or lot shall require the approval of a restriping plan by the Director.

(k)    Parking spaces and maneuvering areas shall be paved and permanently maintained with asphalt, concrete, or other all-weather surfacing approved by the Director. Other suitable surface materials (e.g., permeable paving materials) are encouraged for use in low-use areas, as approved by the Director.

(l)     Continuous concrete curbing at least six (6″) inches high and six (6″) inches wide shall be provided for parking spaces located adjacent to fences, walls, property lines, landscaped areas, and structures. Individual wheel stops may be provided in lieu of continuous curbing when the parking is adjacent to a landscaped area, and the drainage is directed to the landscaped area. When provided, wheel stops shall be placed to allow for twenty-four (24″) inches of vehicle overhang area within the dimension of the parking space.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1409. Driveways and site access.
        Driveways providing site access shall be from an improved street, alley, or other public right-of-way, and shall be designed, constructed, and maintained as follows:

(a)    A maximum of two (2) driveways shall be allowed for each multi-family and nonresidential parcel with 100 feet or less of street frontage, unless the Director and City Engineer determine that more than two (2) driveways are required to accommodate traffic volumes on specific projects.

(1)    Whenever a property has access to more than one (1) street, access shall be generally limited to the lowest volume street where the impact of a new access would be minimized.

(2)    Single-family and duplex residential developments shall only be allowed one (1) driveway.

(3)    Circular driveways shall only be allowed for parcels with seventy (70′) feet or more of street frontage.

(4)    A suitable curb cut shall be required wherever a driveway intersects with a public street, as approved by the City Engineer.

(b)    Driveways shall be located a minimum of 150 feet from the nearest intersection, as measured from the centerline of the driveway to the centerline of the nearest travel lane of the intersecting street. For parcels with frontages of less than 150 feet, the minimum distance shall be 100 feet unless a lesser distance is approved by the City Engineer.

(c)    Driveways shall be separated along the street frontage as follows:

(1)    Driveways for single-family and duplex residential developments shall be separated by at least six (6′) feet, unless a shared, single driveway is approved by the Director. The six (6′) foot separation does not include the transition or wing sections on each side of the driveway; and

(2)    Where two (2) or more driveways serve the same or adjacent multi-family or nonresidential development, the centerline of the driveways shall be separated by a minimum of fifty (50′) feet. Exceptions to this standard shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

(d)    Driveway width and length.

(1)    Single-family uses.

(A)   Driveways are intended only to provide access to required off-street parking spaces in garages. No other paving, except walkways, shall be allowed within the front setback area.

(B)   Driveways that provide access to garages having a setback greater than twenty-four (24′) feet from the street property line shall have a minimum width of ten (10′) feet and a maximum width of fourteen (14′) feet at the property line.

(C)   Driveways that provide access to garages having a setback less than twenty-four (24′) feet from the street property line shall not exceed the width of the garage door opening plus twenty-four (24″) inches.

(D)   When a garage is perpendicular (ninety (90º) degrees) to the driveway, a minimum twenty-four (24′) foot deep unobstructed back-out area shall be provided.

(E)   Driveways may be allowed with greater widths than provided above with the approval of the Director and City Engineer.

(2)    Multi-family uses.

(A)   Driveways for multi-family uses with six (6) or less units shall have a minimum paved width of ten (10′) feet for one (1) way driveways and twenty (20′) feet for two (2) way driveways.

(B)   Driveways for multi-family uses with more than six (6) units shall have a minimum paved width of twelve (12′) feet for one (1) way driveways and twenty-four (24′) feet for two (2) way driveways.

(3)    Driveways for nonresidential uses shall have a minimum paved width of twelve (12′) feet for one (1) way driveways and twenty-four (24′) feet for two (2) way driveways. The maximum driveway width shall be thirty (30′) feet, exclusive of the area provided for a median divider at project entries.

(e)    The nearest edge of a driveway curb cut shall be at least thirty-six (36″) inches from the nearest property line, the centerline of a fire hydrant, utility pole, traffic signal, light standards, or other similar facilities. Street trees shall be a minimum of ten (10′) feet from the driveway access, measured at the trunk. Driveways shall have an overhead clearance of fourteen (14′) feet in height except within a parking structure which may be reduced to seven (7′) feet, six (6″) inches.

(f)    Structures or landscaping over thirty-six (36″) inches in height shall not be allowed within a traffic safety sight area formed by the intersection of public rights-of-way, driveways, or alleys.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1410. Bicycle parking requirements.
(a)    The City strongly encourages the use of bicycles as an alternative means of transportation.

(b)    All commercial, office, and industrial uses shall provide suitably designed and adequately lockable facilities for bicycle parking which shall be located in a convenient and visible location, as determined by the applicable review authority.

(c)    The actual number and final design of the bicycle spaces shall be determined by the applicable review authority.

(d)    All bicycle facilities shall be designed, constructed, and maintained in compliance with the City’s adopted bicycle and pedestrian master plan.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1411. Loading space requirements.
(a)    Nonresidential uses shall provide off-street loading space(s) in compliance with Table 3-10 below. Requirements for uses not listed shall be determined by the Director based upon the requirements for comparable uses.

 

Table 3-10

REQUIRED LOADING SPACES

 

Gross Floor Area

Number of Spaces Required

1. Commercial, industrial, hotel, restaurants, senior housing, and schools, other than office uses:

Under 5,000 sq. ft.

None

5,001 to 20,000 sq. ft.

One

20,001 to 40,000 sq. ft.

Two

40,001 sq. ft. and over

Two + As required by the review authority

2. Office uses, hospitals, and institutions:

 

Under 5,000 sq. ft.

None

5,001 to 20,000 sq. ft.

One

20,001 to 50,000 sq. ft.

Two

50,001 sq. ft. and over

Two + As required by the review authority

 

(b)    Requirements for uses not specifically listed shall be determined by the Director based upon the requirements for comparable uses and upon the particular characteristics of the proposed use.

(c)    Off-street loading areas shall be provided in the following manner:

(1)    Minimum loading space dimensions shall be as identified in Table 3-11.

 

Table 3-11

MINIMUM LOADING SPACE SIZES

 

Size of Use

Min. Space Width

Min. Space Length

Min. Vertical Clearance

Up to 20,000 sq. ft.

12 Feet

25 Feet

14 Feet

Over 20,001 sq. ft.

12 Feet

40 Feet

14 Feet

 

(2)    Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting sources shall be shielded to prevent light spill beyond the property line. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of adjacent structure(s).

(3)    Plans for loading ramps or truck wells shall be accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions, and overhead clearances.

(4)    Loading spaces shall be located and designed as follows:

(A)   As near as possible to the main structure and limited to the rear two-thirds of the parcel, if feasible;

(B)   Situated to ensure that the loading facility is screened from adjacent streets to the greatest degree possible. Whenever possible, the loading facilities should not face a public street;

(C)   Situated to ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within a required front setback, adjacent public right-of-way, or other on-site traffic circulation areas;

(D)   Situated to ensure that vehicular maneuvers occur on-site;

(E)   Situated to avoid adverse impacts upon neighboring residential properties and located no closer than 100 feet from the boundary of a residential district unless adequately screened subject to the approval of the Director.

(5)    Loading areas shall be screened from abutting parcels and streets with dense landscaping or solid masonry walls with a minimum height of six (6′) feet.

(6)    Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for “loading only.” The striping shall be permanently maintained by the property owner/tenant in a clear and visible manner at all times.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1412. Applicable regulations.
        All uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 24, Conditional Use Permits; Article 14, Parking and Loading Standards; Article 20, Design Review Permits; Article 16, Sign Standards; Article 12, Landscaping Standards; Article 22, Temporary Use Permits; Article 25, Minor Variances; Article 26, Variances.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 15. Recycling Facilities
Sec. 10-2.1501. Purpose of article.
        The provisions of this article are intended to establish standards and procedures for the siting and operation of various types and sizes of commercial recycling facilities.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1502. Applicability.
        Recycling facilities are subject to entitlement review and are allowable only in the C-1, B-P, VMU, M-1, and MPD Zoning Districts in compliance with Table 3-12.

 

Table 3-12

ALLOWABLE RECYCLING FACILITIES

 

Type of Facility

Districts Allowed

Entitlement Required

Reverse Vending Machines

C-1, B-P, VMU, M-1, and MPD

Minor Conditional Use Permit

Small Collection

C-1, B-P, VMU, M-1, and MPD

Conditional Use Permit

Large Collection

M-1 and MPD

Conditional Use Permit

 

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1503. Development standards.
        All recycling facilities shall comply with the following standards:

(a)    Reverse vending machine(s) shall not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers, and shall:

(1)    Be installed as an accessory use to a commercial or industrial use which is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations and the Municipal Code;

(2)    Be located within close proximity to the entrance of the commercial or industrial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

(3)    Not occupy parking spaces required by the main use;

(4)    Occupy no more than fifty (50) square feet of space for each installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight (8′) feet in height;

(5)    Be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

(6)    Be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and telephone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative;

(7)    Have a maximum sign area of four (4) square feet for each machine, exclusive of operating instructions in compliance with Article 16 of this chapter;

(8)    Be maintained in a clean, sanitary, and litter-free condition on a daily basis;

(9)    Be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if there are operating hours between dusk and dawn; and

(10)  Maintain adequate refuse containers on-site for the disposal of non-hazardous waste.

(b)    Small collection facilities shall:

(1)    Be installed as an accessory use to an existing commercial or industrial use which is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations and the Municipal Code;

(2)    Be no larger than three hundred fifty (350) square feet and occupy no more than three (3) parking spaces not including space that would be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers;

(3)    Be set back at least ten (10′) feet from any public right-of-way, and not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

(4)    Accept only glass, metal, plastic containers, papers and reusable items;

(5)    Use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines;

(6)    Use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the collection schedule;

(7)    Store all recyclable material in the mobile unit vehicle and shall ensure that materials are not left outside of the unit when attendant is not present;

(8)    Ensure that the site is maintained clean, sanitary and free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis;

(9)    Not be located within fifty (50′) feet of any residential zoning district/use;

(10)  Have collection containers, site fencing, and signs of a color and design so as to be both compatible and harmonious with the surrounding uses and neighborhood;

(11)  Have containers clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure;

(12)  Have signs provided as follows:

(A)   Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum area of ten (10%) percent for each side of a structure or sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is greater, in compliance with Arti-

cle 16 of this chapter. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side would be measured from the ground to the top of the container;

(B)   Signs shall be consistent with the character of their location; and

(C)   Directional signs, consistent with Article 16 of this chapter, bearing no advertising message may be installed with the approval of the Director if found necessary to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way.

(13)  Not impair the landscaping required by Article 12 of this chapter for any concurrent use allowed by these Zoning Regulations;

(14)  Not require additional parking spaces for customers of a small collection facility located in the established parking lot of the main use; one space shall be provided for the attendant, if needed;

(15)  Have the mobile recycling units in an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present;

(16)  Ensure that the occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant would not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the main use unless a parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility would be on the site;

(17)  Ensure that small collection facilities located within five hundred (500′) feet of an RPD Zoning District would not operate, or be maintained or serviced, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;

(18)  Be subject to landscaping and/or screening requirements as determined by the Director;

(19)  Maintain adequate refuse containers on-site for the disposal of non-hazardous waste; and

(20)  Have the entitlement reviewed at the end of one year and again thereafter, as determined by the Director.

(c)    A large collection facility, which is larger than three hundred fifty (350) square feet or on a separate parcel not accessory to a “main” use, and which shall have a permanent structure, shall comply with the following standards:

(1)    The facility shall not be located adjacent to any residential zoning district/use.

(2)    The facility shall be screened from all public rights-of-way, within an enclosed structure.

(3)    Structure setbacks and landscape requirements shall comply with those provided for the M-1 and MPD Zoning Districts.

(4)    All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition at all times. Storage containers for flammable materials shall be constructed of nonflammable materials. Outdoor storage shall be screened by a minimum six (6′) foot high, solid decorative masonry wall. Storage, excluding truck trailers, shall not be visible above the height of the required wall.

(5)    The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary and free of litter and any other undesirable materials. Loose debris shall be collected on a daily basis and the site shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present.

(6)    Space shall be provided on-site for six (6) vehicles to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials.

(7)    Four (4) parking spaces for employees plus one parking space for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility shall be provided on-site.

(8)    If the facility is located within five hundred (500′) feet of any residential zoning district/use it shall not operate, or be maintained or serviced, between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(9)    Any containers provided for “after hours” donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least fifty (50′) feet from any residential zoning district/use, constructed of sturdy, rustproof materials, with sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected.

(10)  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material and the containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers.

(11)  Signs shall be installed in compliance with Article 16 of this chapter. Additionally, the facility shall be clearly marked with the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.

(12)  Dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration above ambient levels shall not be detectable from adjoining parcels.

(13)  Shall maintain adequate refuse containers on-site for the disposal of non-hazardous waste.

(d)    Any entitlement issued in compliance with this article (except for small collection facilities in compliance with subsection (b) above) shall have a maximum term of three (3) years. Before entitlement renewal, the City shall take into consideration the permittee’s history of compliance with the established conditions of approval, as well as the provisions of this article and the Municipal Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1504. Applicable regulations.
        All uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 24, Conditional Use Permits; Article 14, Parking and Loading Standards; Article 20, Design Review Permits; Article 16, Sign Standards; Article 12, Landscaping Standards; Article 22, Temporary Use Permits; Article 25, Minor Variances; Article 26, Variances.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 16. Sign Standards
Note
*       Editor’s note—Article 16, Sign Standards, consisting of Sections 10-2.1601 through 10-2.1614, as added by Ordinance No. 771, effective February 13, 2004, amended by Ord. Nos. 801, 804, 815 and 830, was amended in its entirety by Ord. No. 876, effective November 12, 2017.

 

Sec. 10-2.1601. Purpose.
        This article establishes a comprehensive system of City sign regulations. The intent of these regulations is to:

(a)    Manage signs in a manner that preserves the historic, small-town aesthetic and character of the City while also avoiding visual clutter and adverse impacts to pedestrian and traffic safety.

(b)    Assist the public in easily identifying uses and premises, thereby minimizing confusion and improving traffic safety.

(c)    Allow signs in residential neighborhoods that are consistent with residential scale and character.

(d)    Encourage signs in commercial, office, and industrial areas that will create attractive places to work and shop.

(e)    It is the City’s policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner that does not favor commercial speech over non-commercial speech and is content-neutral as to non-commercial messages which are within the protections of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution and the corollary provisions of the California Constitution. Therefore, pursuant to the United States Supreme Court’s decision in Reed v. Town of Gilbert, Arizona and related cases, this article is intended to narrowly regulate signs within the City by imposing reasonable, content-neutral regulations while leaving open ample alternative avenues of communication for the City’s residents, businesses, and visitors.

        Definitions of the specialized terms and phrases used in this article may be found in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.3602(s)(6).

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1602. Applicability.
(a)    The standards of this article shall apply to all signs, unless otherwise indicated. In the event two (2) or more provisions of this article apply to a particular sign, the more specific provision shall prevail.

(b)    Unless otherwise authorized by this article, a sign permit is required for all new signs displayed within the City. A sign permit is not required for signs designated as exempt pursuant to Section 10-2.1606.

(c)    An applicant for a sign permit shall file the application on a form provided by the Community Development Department and pay a fee set by City Council resolution. A color, to-scale rendering of the design and text of a sign shall be submitted along with the application for a sign permit.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1603. General provisions for all signs.
(a)    Except as otherwise provided in this section, sign permits shall be approved by the Director through the sign permit process set forth in this article. Any proposed sign must be consistent with the purpose and provisions of this article.

(b)    A sign approved by the Planning Commission via a comprehensive sign program and which is consistent with that program shall not require a further sign permit.

(c)    Maximum number. Any property not located in a residential-only zone, including any property in commercial or mixed-use zones, shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) on-site signs, except that a property with more than two (2) main entrances may have an on-site sign at each entrance. Exempt signs specified in Section 10-2.1606 do not count against this sign number limit.

(d)    Maintenance.

(1)    All signs and their supporting hardware shall be maintained in good repair and function properly at all times.

(2)    Repairs to a sign shall use materials and design of equal or better quality as the original sign.

(3)    A sign which is not properly maintained or is dilapidated may be deemed a public nuisance by the Director.

(4)    Upon written notice from the Director, any necessary alterations, maintenance, or repairs to a sign specified in the notice shall be made within thirty (30) days after the date of the notice.

(5)    When an existing sign is removed or replaced, all brackets, poles and other supports that are no longer required shall also be removed. Unpainted areas exposed by removal or replacement of the sign shall be painted to match the adjacent portion of the building or sign support structure.

(e)    Materials. All signs shall be constructed with materials and workmanship of high quality to avoid problems of deterioration and maintenance which would give rise to unsightly and unsafe conditions. Every sign and its frame shall be constructed in compliance with all applicable City, State, and Federal laws, codes, and regulations.

(1)    Signs with foundations or sign materials weighing over ten (10) pounds and/or mounted over eight (8′) feet above finish grade shall require, in addition to a sign permit, a building permit before installation.

(f)    Maximum height measurement. The maximum allowable sign height shall be measured by the distance from the average adjacent ground level within five (5′) feet of the base of the sign to the top of the sign, including the superstructure and any design element.

(g)    Maximum area measurement. The maximum allowable sign area, in compliance with Section 10-2.1607, shall be measured as follows:

(1)    The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by the number of square feet of the smallest rectangle within which a sign face can be enclosed.

(2)    The area of a building face or wall shall mean the outer street-facing surface of a structure or any main exterior wall or storefront, including parapet walls, calculated in square feet.

(3)    Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be computed as sign area.

(4)    A sign composed of more than one sign face shall be computed as including only the maximum single display surface that is visible from any ground position at one time, including the backing, borders, and framing for letters.

(5)    Where a sign consists of one or more three (3) dimensional objects (e.g., balls, clusters of objects, cubes, sculpture, or statue-like trademarks), the sign area shall be measured as the maximum projection of the 3-sides on a vertical plane, and shall be deemed as having four (4) sign faces.

(6)    Interior signs located inside a building or structure shall not be oriented towards building windows or openings. If the applicant or owner demonstrates that it is infeasible to orient interior signs away from windows or openings, such signs shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20′) feet from said windows or openings and shall not be larger than six (6) square feet. For window signs, see Section 10-2.1607(t).

(h)    Illumination. The artificial illumination of signs shall be designed, to the extent possible, to avoid negative impacts on surrounding properties.

(1)    External light sources shall be directed and shielded from view to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign.

(2)    Lights for indirectly illuminated signs shall only cast light on the sign face and must not cause light trespass to any other location or facility.

(3)    Lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner that may cause them to be confused with traffic control devices.

(4)    Illuminated signs shall not use more than ten (10) candlepower per square foot illumination measured at the sign face. In no event shall the intensity or brightness of an illuminated sign interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of properties in direct visual proximity to the sign.

(5)    The approval of an illuminated sign shall not be final until thirty (30) days after installation, during which time the Director may require dimming of the sign if the illumination is found to be inconsistent with this section, detrimental to adjacent property, or a traffic hazard.

(6)    In addition to a sign permit, an electrical permit shall be required for circuits installed to provide power to light an illuminated sign.

(i)     Colors, design, and text.

(1)    Sign colors shall be harmonious with the structure to which the sign pertains. Sign colors shall also be compatible with the City’s existing aesthetic character, including backgrounds of muted, flat, or matte colors, including browns, greys, and whites.

(2)    Lettering colors shall be subdued in brilliance.

(3)    The colors, design, and text of a sign shall be subject to any other applicable City-adopted guidelines or area plans.

(j)     Substitution clause. The owner of any sign which is otherwise allowed by this article may substitute non-commercial copy in place of any other commercial or non-commercial copy. This substitution of copy may be made without any additional approval or permitting. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over non-commercial speech or favoring of any particular non-commercial message over any other non-commercial message. This provision prevails over any other provision of this Code to the contrary.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1604. Landmark signs.
(a)    The Historic Preservation Commission shall review and approve or deny sign permits for all signs for designated landmark buildings, consistent with the purpose and provisions of this article.

(b)    Any Historic Preservation Commission approval or denial of a sign permit shall occur at a noticed public hearing. An applicant that wishes to obtain a sign permit that requires review by the Historic Preservation Commission is not required to submit a full work permit application to the Historic Preservation Commission, but is required to submit an application on a form developed by and available from the Community Development Department. The applicant may appeal a denial of a sign permit by the Historic Preservation Commission to the City Council, under the procedural requirements of Chapter 8 of Title 4 of the Ojai Municipal Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1605. Prohibited signs.
        The following signs, where visible by the general public from the public right-of-way or from private property which is generally accessible to the public, are inconsistent with the purpose and standards of this article and are prohibited in all zoning districts:

(a)    Animals or human beings, live or simulated, designed or used to attract attention to a business.

(b)    Animated, blinking (intermittent light), color-changing, flashing, fluctuating, moving, reflecting, revolving, changeable-copy signs, electronic reader board signs, or other similar signs, except for changeable-copy signs displaying time or temperature.

(c)    Balloon signs, and similar floating, flying, or inflated signs.

(d)    Commercial billboards and commercial off-site signs.

(e)    Bench signs, except for commemorative plaques.

(f)    Internally illuminated signs, unless specifically approved by the Director as in compliance with the illumination standards of Section 10-2.1603(h) and as consistent with the City’s aesthetic character.

(g)    Neon signs, except as specified in Section 10-2.1607(h), or as approved through a comprehensive sign program.

(h)    Pole signs, except for City signs, or as specified in Section 10-2.1606(j), (l), and (u).

(i)     Portable signs, including A- or T-frame sandwich board signs, unless approved by the Planning Commission in compliance with Section 10-2.1608, or allowed as specified in Section 10-2.1607(r).

(j)     Price signs, except for those located at service stations.

(k)    Rider signs that are appurtenances attached to a sign and which are not an integral part of the display panel of the approved sign.

(l)     Signs mounted on the roof of a structure or extending above the edge or eave of the roof.

(m)   A sign erected in a manner that would cause a portion of its surface or supports to interfere with the free use of a fire escape, exit, or standpipe; or obstruct a door, stairway, ventilator, or window required by law.

(n)    Signs that imitate, conflict or interfere with, or may be confused with traffic control devices.

(o)    Signs that obstruct or interfere with the safe and efficient flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

(p)    Signs that contain fighting words, obscene language or images, or create a clear and present danger to the general public.

(q)    Signs on public property or that project onto a public right-of-way, except as specifically allowed in this article or by Federal or State law, and then only with an encroachment permit issued by the City.

(r)    Vehicle signs, unless the vehicle is used for transporting goods or for services for business purposes. A vehicle sign must be affixed so as to not project from the usual profile of the vehicle. A vehicle bearing a vehicle sign may not be stored or parked on private or public property for the principal purpose of advertising the business, good, and/or service displayed on the sign.

(s)    Signs attached to fences, shrubs, trees, stones, utility poles, structures on public property or in the public right-of-way, or any similar object or structure, except as specifically allowed in this article or other applicable provisions of Federal, State, and local law.

(t)     Signs outlined by individual light bulbs.

(u)    Except as otherwise specifically allowed in this article or by Federal or State law, signs not intended for permanent display or erected for a limited duration, including signs that are glued, nailed, pasted, stapled, tacked, taped, or similarly secured to a structure.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1606. Exemptions from sign permits.
        Sign permits shall not be required for the signs listed in this section. Exempt signs shall not be included in the determination of the total allowable number of signs or total allowable sign area for a site or use.

(a)    Affiliation signs for auto-related uses, motels, and hotels that note services provided or required by law, trade affiliations, credit cards accepted, and similar content provided they are attached to an otherwise approved sign or structure. Affiliation signs shall not exceed one-half square foot in area per sign, and no more than six (6) affiliation signs are allowed for each business.

(b)    Change of sign copy within an approved comprehensive sign program that conforms to the provisions of the specific comprehensive sign program (see Section 10-2.1608).

(c)    Commemorative signs, plaques, and tables that are carved in aluminum, bronze, concrete, stone, wood, or other similar permanent material and mounted on a building or structure. These signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in area and five (5′) feet in height.

(d)    Gasoline pump and price signs erected and maintained in compliance with Sections 13470 through 13490 and 13530 through 13540 of the California Business and Professions Code.

(e)    Holiday decorations, provided that display of such decorations is limited to thirty (30) days before and after the holiday.

(f)    City placed or owned signs or signs as authorized by the City for a municipal purpose.

(g)    “No Trespassing” signs, not to exceed three (3) square feet in area, placed at each corner and each entrance to the property, and at intervals of not less than one hundred (100′) feet or in compliance with State requirements.

(h)    Occupant name, street number, and street name signs not exceeding three (3) square feet in area for each single-family or multi-family unit.

(i)     Official and legal notices required by a court or governmental agency, including any signs required by the City.

(j)     Official flags of a nation, the State of California, other states of the United States, and municipalities, provided that the pole height for such flags shall not exceed twenty-five (25′) feet in residential zoning districts and thirty-five (35′) feet in nonresidential zoning districts. The length of the flag shall not be more than one-fourth of the height of the pole. Larger flags may be allowed subject to the approval of the Director.

(k)    Political signs.

(l)     Public utility signs indicating danger, construction, excavations or similar hazards, or signs that serve as an aid to public safety, or show the location of underground facilities.

(m)   Service club signs, clustered on a single uniform sign of a design and location approved by the Director.

(n)    Signs on a construction site shall be allowed in all zone districts provided such signs do not exceed one per street frontage, nor forty (40) square feet in area nor fifty-four (54″) inches in height. All such signs shall be removed prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy from the City.

(o)    Signs erected and maintained in compliance with a governmental function or required by a law, ordinance or governmental regulation.

(p)    Signs for commercial, office, and industrial uses not exceeding two (2) square feet and limited to property identification, hours of operation, address, and emergency information.

(q)    Signs erected for the convenience of the public (e.g., signs identifying restrooms, public telephones, walkways and similar features and facilities), with a maximum area of two (2) square feet.

(r)    Signs on a property that is for sale, rent, or lease, subject to the following limitations:

(1)    One additional sign, beyond the base allowance in this chapter applicable to the property, shall be allowed on each such property.

(2)    One further additional sign is allowed on such property during an open house or other event promoting the property’s status as for sale, rent, or lease.

(3)    Additional off-site signs associated with a property for sale, rent, or lease, are allowed within a reasonable proximity of such property during and immediately before and after an open house or other event of a maximum four (4) days’ duration promoting the property’s status as for sale, rent, or lease.

(4)    These additional signs may be single- or double-faced, and shall be limited to three (3) square feet for each side or less on property in residential zoning districts, and six (6) square feet or less on property in all other zoning districts. These additional signs shall be placed outside the pedestrian path of travel.

(5)    These additional signs shall be removed when the property is no longer for sale, rent, or lease.

(s)    Signs limiting easement rights under Section 1008 of the California Civil Code.

(t)     One additional sign, beyond the base allowance in this chapter applicable to the property, shall be allowed on property under construction. This additional sign shall be removed upon the completion of the construction project.

(u)    Signs solely for the purpose of guiding traffic, parking, and loading on private property. Maximum area for such signs shall be four (4) square feet in residential and village mixed use zoning districts and six (6) square feet in all other zoning districts. Maximum height for freestanding versions of such signs shall be fifty-four (54″) inches in height. Taller signs may be allowed by the Director, if visibility would not be impaired.

(v)    Signs which are not visible by the general public from the public right-of-way or from private property which is generally accessible to the public.

(w)   Small window signs, limited to a maximum of twenty (20%) percent of the property’s total window area, minus the area devoted to window signs (as defined in Section 10-2.1607(t)).

(x)    Future tenant identification signs. One additional sign, beyond the base allowance in this chapter applicable to the property, shall be allowed on each property that will have a new occupant, owner, or lessee within the next three (3) months.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1607. Standards for specific types of signs.
(a)    Awning signs.

(1)    Awning signs shall only be located on building frontages, including those fronting a parking lot or pedestrian way.

(2)    Awning signs are limited to ground level occupancies only.

(3)    Awning signs shall not be internally illuminated. However, lighting directed downwards from the sign that does not illuminate the awning is allowed.

(b)    Banner signs.

(1)    A newly opened business shall be allowed one on-site banner sign, in addition to any other allowed signs.

(2)    Existing businesses shall be allowed one on-site banner sign up to a maximum of four (4) times per year, in addition to any other allowed signs. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any business whose principal activity is the presenting or sponsoring of multiple or changing events, shows, programs and activities such as theater art, fine art, and music events shall be allowed one on-site banner business sign up to a maximum of eight (8) times per year, in addition to any other allowed signs.

(3)    A banner sign may be posted for up to thirty (30) days. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a banner sign may be posted for up to sixty (60) days by any business with its principal activity being the presenting or sponsoring of multiple or changing events, shows, programs and activities, such as theater art, fine art, and music events.

(4)    A banner sign shall be affixed to the exterior wall(s) of the building or structure to which the sign pertains, and shall not hang between posts, or from trees, or be within the public right-of-way, or be placed on a rooftop. However, if the building or structure is at least fifty (50′) feet from the public right-of-way the banner sign may be placed on a front fence, wall or other structure approved by the Director. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any business whose principal activity is the presenting or sponsoring of multiple or changing events, shows, programs and activities such as theater art, fine art, and music events shall be allowed to display banners on fixed posts that are integrated into the architecture of the adjacent building and attractively designed such that such posts do not detract from the aesthetics of the property.

(5)    Banner signs shall not exceed a maximum area of twenty-four (24) square feet or fifty (50%) percent of the allowed permanent sign area for the particular site, whichever is less. Additional square footage may be allowed through design review approval by the Director, in compliance with Article 20 of this chapter.

(6)    Banner signs shall be maintained in good repair at all times.

(c)    Signs on any property within the commercial and manufacturing zoning districts that display the name of any entity located on the property.

(1)    These signs shall be limited to a maximum of two (2) signs for each property within the commercial and manufacturing zoning district, except that a property having more than two (2) main entrances may have a sign indicating each entrance.

(2)    The combined area of all signs on a property within the commercial and manufacturing zoning district shall not exceed forty (40) square feet or ten (10%) percent of the main building face area, whichever is less. However, if the building on the site in which the entity is located is set back at least fifty (50′) feet from the public right-of-way, the combined area for all signs on the site shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet or thirteen (13%) percent of the main building face, whichever is less.

(d)    Halo-lit or back-lit signs.

(1)    Halo-lit letters are to be lit from behind and should be properly integrated into the building design.

(2)    The mounting surface of the halo-lit sign must be opaque and shall not reflect the image of lamps contained within the letters.

(3)    All lamps must be fully concealed within the letters so as not to be visible from any location accessible to the public.

(4)    The rear face of each letter shall be no more than one inch from the background surface.

(5)    Each letter shall be completely enclosed with the front and side surfaces made of opaque material and the back surface made of white translucent Plexiglass.

(6)    Standoff brackets shall be center mounted and painted to match the adjacent surfaces, so as not to be visible to the public.

(7)    Halo-lit or back-lit signs must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission prior to being erected.

(e)    Marquee signs.

(1)    Marquee signs shall be mounted only on the front or sides of a marquee.

(2)    Marquee signs shall not project more than six (6″) inches from the face of the marquee.

(3)    Marquee signs shall not extend above the top of a marquee.

(4)    A minimum distance of eight (8′) feet shall be maintained from the lowest part of a suspended marquee sign to the ground below.

(f)    Monument signs.

(1)    The area of a monument sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet or ten (10%) percent of the main building face area, whichever is less, and shall be included within the total business sign area allowed on the site. However, if the building on the site in which the business is located is set back at least fifty (50′) feet from the property line, the area of a monument sign shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet or thirteen (13%) percent of the main building face, whichever is less, and shall be included within the total business sign area allowed on the site. In the event a monument sign is located in a residential zone and there is no main building face area from which to measure maximum sign area, the applicant must obtain a comprehensive sign program pursuant to Section 10-2.1608.

(2)    Monument signs are allowed only for frontages adjoining a public street.

(3)    Monument signs shall not obstruct traffic safety sight areas.

(4)    There shall be a minimum of fifty (50′) feet between two (2) monument signs on adjoining sites to ensure adequate visibility for all signs; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not prohibit an individual legal parcel from having a monument sign.

(5)    Landscaping shall be provided at the base of the supporting structure equal to twice the area of one face of the sign. For example, twenty (20) square feet of sign area would require a minimum of forty (40) square feet of landscaped area.

(6)    The height of monument signs may not exceed fifty-four (54″) inches. However, height may be increased by the Director upon the consideration of factors such as the location of the monument sign, the intensity of the illumination and glare produced, sign visibility with respect to topography and other obstructions, traffic safety, and compatibility with surrounding uses.

(7)    Text for monument signs shall be raised or routed. Other text styles must be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission prior to being displayed.

(8)    Monument signs may be indirectly illuminated.

(g)    Multiple tenant signs.

(1)    A multiple tenant sign requires a comprehensive sign program.

(2)    The area of a multiple tenant sign shall be limited to the following, and shall be included within the total sign area allowed on the site:

(A)   Each site with multiple tenants shall be allowed one multiple tenant sign in the form of a monument sign not to exceed sixty (60) square feet.

(B)   The maximum sign area for each tenant in a multiple tenant sign shall be limited to ten (10) square feet.

(h)    Neon and other similarly lighted signs. No neon or similarly lighted signs or architectural elements are allowed in the City with the exception of a two (2) square foot “OPEN” neon or similarly lighted sign allowed for commercial businesses. This exception shall follow the following requirements:

(1)    Neon signs and linear tubing shall be UL (Underwriters Laboratories) listed with a maximum twenty (20) amps per circuit and be designed to accommodate a dimmer in order to reduce the brightness of the neon.

(2)    The neon sign manufacturer shall be registered with UL (Underwriters Laboratories).

(3)    Neon sign tubing shall not exceed one-half inch in diameter.

(4)    Neon sign tubing shall not be combined with any reflective materials (e.g., mirrors, polished metal, highly-glazed tiles, or other similar materials).

(5)    Neon signs hung inside a business window shall count towards the maximum sign area allowed for window signs.

(6)    These signs may utilize lighting technologies other than neon gas.

(i)     On-building directory signs.

(1)    The area of an on-building directory sign shall not exceed eight (8) square feet, and shall be included within the total sign area allowed on the site.

(2)    The height of an on-building directory sign shall not exceed eight (8′) feet above ground level, or as may be approved by the Director.

(3)    Individual signs within or composing an on-building directory sign shall be uniform in shape, design, and style of text and shall not exceed one square foot in sign area.

(4)    The colors of on-building directory signs shall be the same for all individual signs and shall be compatible with the building color and style of the architectural features and Section 10-2.1603(i).

(5)    On-building directory signs shall be mounted flat on the surface of the structure on which they are placed or displayed.

(j)     Outdoor merchandise displays. Outdoor merchandise displays shall be allowed in C-1, B-P and VMU Zoning Districts, subject to such regulations, as adopted from time to time by the Planning Commission, or as allowed pursuant to Article 24 (Conditional Use Permit) of these Zoning Regulations.

(k)    Painted wall signs.

(1)    The area of a painted wall sign shall be determined as the sum of the sign area of text, plus an additional area equal to an average of nine (9″) inches around the perimeter of the text space. The area of a painted wall sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet or ten (10%) percent of the main building or structure face, whichever is less, and shall be included within the total sign area allowed on the site.

(2)    Colors of painted wall signs shall be subdued, and shall be compatible with the building or structure’s color and Section 10-2.1603(i).

(3)    Text of painted wall signs shall be compatible with the structure’s style of architecture, and shall be of professional quality as determined by the Director.

(l)     Parking lot signs.

(1)    The area of parking lot signs shall not exceed four (4) square feet in residential and village mixed use zoning districts and six (6) square feet in other zoning districts.

(2)    The maximum height of a parking lot sign shall be fifty-four (54″) inches, except that taller signs may be approved by the Director.

(3)    The colors of parking lot signs shall be compatible with the building color and style of the architectural features and Section 10-2.1603(i).

(m)   Projecting signs.

(1)    The area of a projecting sign shall not exceed ten (10) square feet, and shall be included within the total sign area allowed on the site.

(2)    The height of a projecting sign shall not be less than eight (8′) feet above ground level, unless the architectural features of the building or structure prohibit this height, in which case the maximum height shall be determined by the Director.

(3)    A projecting sign shall not project out more than forty-two (42″) inches from the surface of the building or structure.

(4)    A projecting sign shall not extend to within twenty (20″) inches of the curb line.

(5)    Text for projecting signs shall be raised or routed. Other text styles may be considered and approved by the Planning Commission.

(n)    Special event signs.

(1)    The area of a special event sign shall not exceed thirteen (13) square feet.

(2)    The height of a special event sign, including support structures, shall not exceed fifty-four (54″) inches above ground level. Special event signs hanging under a canopy shall have a minimum of eight (8′) feet of clearance as measured from the bottom of the sign to the grade below.

(3)    Special event signs shall be maintained in good repair and shall not pose a public hazard.

(4)    A special event sign shall not be posted more than forty-eight (48) hours before the event that the sign promotes and shall be removed no later than twenty-four (24) hours after the event is over. Additional time may be approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 10-2.1608 (Comprehensive Sign Program).

(5)    Special event signs shall be limited to two (2) per event and, unless otherwise authorized by the Director or as provided in subsections (6) and (7) below, shall be located on the site at which the advertised event is occurring. If the event is held at multiple sites throughout the City, the special event signs shall be limited to one sign per participating site. Additional special event signs shall be allowed in multiple locations as approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to Section 10-2.1608 (Comprehensive Sign Program).

(6)    Special event signs shall not be posted in the public right-of-way unless and until the applicant first secures, in addition to a sign permit, an encroachment permit from the Public Works Department.

(7)    Prior to displaying any special event sign on private property, the applicant shall obtain the written permission of the property owner.

(8)    Special event signs that are to be displayed across Ojai Avenue shall be subject to the following conditions:

(A)   The applicant shall obtain, in addition to a sign permit, an encroachment permit issued by the Public Works Department, which permits shall be issued on a first-come first-served basis pursuant to Ojai Municipal Code, Title 7, Chapter 1.

(B)   The applicant shall obtain written approval to post the sign or signs from the California Department of Transportation to be submitted with the encroachment permit application, unless such approval has been obtained previously by the Public Works Department.

(C)   The applicant shall comply with the City’s “Ojai Avenue Banner Standards” of construction and installation.

(9)    Special event sign text shall be clear and simple with minimal graphics so as not to unnecessarily distract drivers or create a traffic hazard.

(10)  Special event signs displayed in the Historic Landmark Arcade and the Pergola at Ojai Avenue in front of Libbey Park are subject to review and approval by the Historic Preservation Commission consistent with the purpose and provisions of this article.

(11)  If a comprehensive sign program is approved for an annual special event, special event signs for the event may be posted in subsequent years pursuant to Article 19 (Zoning Clearances) of Title 10 if the Director determines that the subsequent sign plan is in substantial compliance with the original Planning Commission approved comprehensive sign program.

(o)    Under canopy signs.

(1)    The area of an under canopy sign shall be limited to ten (10) square feet, and shall be included within the total sign area allowed on the site.

(2)    Under canopy signs shall have a minimum of eight (8′) feet of clearance as measured from the bottom of the sign to the grade below. The Director may approve seven and one-half (7.5′) feet upon showing of good cause.

(3)    Text for under canopy signs shall be raised or routed. Other text styles may be considered and approved by the Planning Commission.

(p)    Wall mounted signs.

(1)    Wall mounted signs shall not project from the surface upon which they are attached more than required for construction purposes and in no case more than four (4″) inches.

(2)    Wall mounted signs shall not obstruct any portion of a window or exceed the outside wall height (including parapet) of any structure.

(3)    Wall mounted signs shall be compatible with the architectural features of the structure.

(4)    Text for wall mounted signs shall be individual letters or raised or routed on a background to create a dimensional appearance. Other text styles may be considered and approved by the Planning Commission.

(q)    Window signs.

(1)    The area of a window sign shall not exceed forty (40) square feet or ten (10%) percent of the main face of the structure, whichever is less, and shall be included within the total sign area allowed on the site. However, if the building on the site in which the business is located is set back at least fifty (50′) feet from the property line, the area of such window signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet or thirteen (13%) percent of the main building face, whichever is less, and shall be included within the total sign area allowed on the site.

(2)    Window signs shall not occupy more than twenty (20%) percent of the window area of any one window.

(3)    Window signs shall be compatible with the building’s architectural features.

(4)    Colors shall be compatible with the building’s colors and Section 10-2.1603(i).

(5)    For small window signs that are exempt from a sign permit, see Section 10-2.1606(w).

(r)    Portable signs. Two (2) or fewer non-illuminated, off-site portable signs are allowed per each entity on a property, if placed outside of the pedestrian path of travel on private property or adjacent public right-of-way. These signs must not exceed forty (40″) inches in height and are limited to seven and one-half (7.5) square feet in area.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1608. Comprehensive sign program.
(a)    The purpose of a comprehensive sign program is to integrate a project’s or special event’s signs with the design of the buildings or structures upon which they are to be affixed, and thereby achieve a unified architectural statement and overall harmony with Ojai’s small town character. A comprehensive sign program provides a means for flexible application of sign regulations for multi-tenant projects and other users of multiple signs; encourages creativity and provides incentive and latitude in the provision of multiple signs; and avoids circumvention of the intent of this article.

(b)    The Planning Commission may approve a comprehensive sign program which may modify the development standards for signs for an eligible project or event. Standards for signs provided in this article shall serve as a reference for evaluating comprehensive sign program applications. Prohibited signs shall not be allowed by a comprehensive sign program. A comprehensive sign program shall be required whenever any of the following circumstances exist:

(1)    Multi-tenant developments of three (3) or more separate tenants that share either the same parcel or structure and use common access and parking facilities, including all multiple tenant signs;

(2)    Whenever five (5) or more signs are proposed for a new or existing development;

(3)    Whenever three (3) or more signs are requested by a single tenant in an existing multi-tenant project that currently is not covered by a comprehensive sign program;

(4)    Whenever the organizer of a special event intends to utilize more signs than permitted by Section 10-2.1607(n).

(c)    A request for approval of a comprehensive sign program shall clearly detail the location, number, size, and type of each proposed sign. Elevations of each sign shall be provided clearly indicating the proposed colors, letter size, materials, method of illumination, method of attachment to a structure, text, and use of logos. All signs included in the proposed comprehensive sign program shall have a uniform background.

(d)    Lessees within developments subject to the requirements of an approved comprehensive sign program shall be made aware of the program in their lease and their responsibility to comply with the approved comprehensive sign program.

(e)    The Director may approve revisions to a comprehensive sign program determined to be minor in nature in that the intent of the original approval and any conditions would not be affected. Revisions that would substantially deviate from the original approval shall require Planning Commission approval.

(f)    Installation of signs or modification of signs that are consistent with an approved comprehensive sign program and that are consistent with that program shall not require a further sign permit.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1609. Abandoned signs.
(a)    Abandoned signs shall be removed by the permit holder or the owner of the structure or premises within thirty (30) days after the date of the event which caused the sign to be considered an abandoned sign. No on-site non-commercial sign shall be considered abandoned.

(b)    A condition of approval for all sign permits shall be that the permit holder or owner of the structure or premises, at their own expense, shall remove all abandoned signs. An abandoned sign may be removed by the City after the thirty (30) day period identified in subsection (a) above, and the permit holder or owner shall be charged for the cost of removal, and the permit holder or owner may incur a fine for noncompliance with this section.

(c)    New signs for a structure or property on which an abandoned sign is located shall not be approved until the abandoned sign is removed. Approval may be given on the condition that the abandoned sign(s) will be removed before a new sign is erected.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1610. Nonconforming signs.
        Any sign which was lawfully erected and maintained before the effective date of this article, but which does not conform with the provisions of this article, or any amendment hereto, shall be a nonconforming sign.

(a)    “Lawfully erected” shall mean signs erected before any sign regulations were applicable to the property, signs erected in conformance with the then applicable sign regulations, but not including the requirement for a land use permit or a zoning clearance, and signs erected in compliance with an approved design review permit, conditional use permit or variance.

(b)    “Lawfully maintained” shall mean signs maintained in conformity with the applicable sign regulations existing on the effective date of any applicable amendment to this article, including signs maintained in compliance with an approved design review, conditional use permit or variance, and signs maintained as nonconforming signs.

(c)    Nonconformance may include height, location, number, sign use, size, type of sign, and failure to conform to an approved comprehensive sign program.

(d)    All nonconforming signs may be continued and maintained for a ten (10) year period from the effective date of any amendment to this article rendering signs nonconforming. At the end of the ten (10) year period, the nonconforming signs shall lose their status as nonconforming signs and become illegal signs in violation of the provisions of this article and shall be removed or brought into conformance with this article by obtaining a permit in compliance with this article.

(e)    During the ten (10) year amortization period for any sign on any parcel identified in subsection (d) above, signs may be affixed, altered, changed, erected, installed, or relocated on the parcel provided:

(1)    The signs would be in conformance with this article;

(2)    That together the nonconforming and conforming signs on the parcel would not exceed either the total number of signs or the total sign area for all of the signs allowed by this article; and

(3)    A permit shall be obtained in compliance with this article.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Sec. 10-2.1611. Violations of sign regulations.
(a)    Unless specifically allowed in this article or by Federal or State law, it is unlawful to do any of the following within the City:

(1)    Display, erect, place, post, paint or secure any sign, pennant, flag, banner, balloon, card, poster, text, or similar attention-seeking device on:

(A)   Any public property or within the public right-of-way, or

(B)   Any curb, sidewalk, street, pole, post, utility box, hydrant, bridge, tree, building or other surface that is located on public property or in the public right-of-way.

(2)    Display any sign that requires a sign permit without an approved sign permit; or

(3)    Display any sign on any premises contrary to the provisions of this article.

(b)    Violations of this article shall be treated as strict liability offenses regardless of intent.

(c)    Any sign affixed, altered, applied, constructed, converted, enlarged, erected, installed, maintained, relocated, or set up contrary to the provisions of this article shall be unlawful and a public nuisance, which nuisance may be abated in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 6 of Title 5 of this Code and Article 35 of this chapter, and the cost of abatement may be made a special assessment against the land upon which the sign is located. The City may remedy any violation of this article pursuant to the procedures set forth in Chapter 6 of Title 1 of this Code.

(d)    The Director is authorized and directed to investigate all purported violations of any of the provisions of this article. If a violation is determined to exist or to be impending, the Director is authorized and directed to take the measures as deemed necessary and expedient to enforce and secure compliance with the provisions of this article, including the signing of complaints and other legal documents. Where any sign installation is undertaken contrary to the provisions of this article, the Director may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing of the work to be done and the person shall stop the work until authorized by the Director to proceed.

(e)    The Director, as charged with the enforcement of this article, acting in good faith and without malice toward the City, shall not be rendered personally liable, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of the duties directly related to enforcement.

(f)    Any suit brought against the Director, because of the act or omission, shall be defended by the City Attorney until the final termination of the proceeding.

(g)    The Director may request, and shall receive as far as may be necessary in the discharge of the duties directly related to enforcement, the assistance and cooperation of other City officials.

(h)    With the consent of the owner or occupier of any structure or premises, or under an inspection warrant issued in compliance with State law (Sections 1822.50 through 1822.57 of the Code of Civil Procedure), and upon prior notice to the owner of any sign which is not in compliance with this article, the Director may enter at a reasonable time any structure or premises in the City to perform any duty imposed by this article.

(i)     If the Director is unable to otherwise enforce the provisions of this article, the matter may be referred to the City Attorney for appropriate legal action, civil or criminal, or both.

(j)     Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or an infraction at the discretion of City authorities as provided in Section 1-2.03 of the Municipal Code and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties provided in Chapter 2 of Title 1 of the Municipal Code. The person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this article is allowed, committed, or continued by the person, firm, or corporation, and shall be punishable as provided in this subsection.

(k)    The remedies provided for in this article shall be cumulative and not exclusive in compliance with Article 35 of this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

 

Article 16.5. Exterior Lighting Standards
Sec. 10-2.16.501. Purpose.
        The general purpose of this article is to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare, the quality of life and the ability to view the night sky, by establishing regulations and a process of review for exterior lighting in order to accomplish the following:

(a)    To save energy in an attempt to ensure the City’s sustainability;

(b)    To protect against direct glare and excessive lighting, thereby minimizing light pollution caused by inappropriate or misaligned light fixtures, and promoting common courtesy among neighbors;

(c)    To provide safe roadways and pathways for motorists, cyclists and pedestrians;

(d)    To protect and reclaim the ability to view the night sky and thereby help preserve the quality of life and the tourist experience of this desirable visual resource;

(e)    To prevent light pollution in all areas of the City and neighboring areas;

(f)    To promote efficient and cost effective lighting;

(g)    To ensure that sufficient lighting can be provided where needed to promote safety and security;

(h)    To allow for flexibility in the style of lighting fixtures;

(i)     To provide lighting guidelines for efficient and moderate use; and

(j)     To provide appropriate lighting according to current technology, evolving advancements, energy use, and economic needs.

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.16.502. Definitions.
        Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings designated in this section:

        Community Development Department/Director shall mean the Community Development Director of the City or his/her representative.

        Directional lighting methods: Direction of light downward, rather than upward or outward, with the intention of directing light where it is needed. Downward lighting also prevents unnecessary and unwanted light trespass to adjacent areas and properties.

        Fully shielded shall mean a light fixture constructed and installed in such a manner that all light emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or a diffusing element, or indirectly by reflection or refraction from any part of the fixture, is projected below the horizontal plane through the fixture’s lowest light-emitting part.

        Glare shall mean light entering the eye directly from a light fixture or indirectly from reflective surfaces that causes visual discomfort or reduced visibility.

        Installed shall mean the initial installation of outdoor light fixtures defined herein, following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article. A project with an approved building permit prior to the effective date of said ordinance is excluded from compliance with the Article for the initial installation only.

        “IES” or “IESNA” Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. The professional society of lighting engineers, including those from manufacturing companies, and others professionally involved in lighting.

        Light pollution shall mean the material adverse effect of artificial light including, but not limited to, glare, light trespass, skyglow, energy waste, compromised safety and security, and impacts on the nocturnal environment, including light sources that are left on when they no longer serve a useful function. The determination of what is a material adverse effect may be made based on exceedance of quantitative thresholds determined by the City in this article.

        Light trespass shall mean light that falls beyond the property it is intended to illuminate. Permissible levels of light trespass shall be limited to those specific, quantitative thresholds of light intensity set forth in Section 10-2.16.504(i) of this article.

 

        Non-essential lighting shall mean lighting that is not necessary for an intended purpose after the purpose has been served. Does not include any lighting used for safety, security, and/or public circulation purposes.

        Outdoor light fixtures shall mean outdoor electrically powered illuminating devices, outdoor light or reflective or refractive surfaces, lamps and similar devices including all parts used to distribute the light and/or protect the lamp, permanently installed or portable, used for flood lighting or general illumination. Such devices shall include, but are not limited to, search, spot, and flood lights for:

(1)    Buildings and structures, including canopies and overhangs;

(2)    Recreation facilities;

(3)    Bike paths, greenbelts and parks;

(4)    Parking lot lighting;

(5)    Landscape lighting;

(6)    Street lighting;

(7)    Display and service areas; and

(8)    Walkway lighting.

        Outdoor recreation facility shall mean an area designed for active recreation, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, baseball and softball diamonds, soccer and football fields, golf courses, tennis courts and swimming pools.

        Public Works Director shall mean the Public Works Director of the City or his/her representative.

        Residential entrance light or porch light shall mean lighting of low-lumen intensity installed above or near a front, back, or side entrance to a residence. In this definition, a low-lumen light is a light of no more than four hundred fifty (450) lumens (forty (40) watt incandescent, nine (9) to thirteen (13) watt compact fluorescent, or four (4) to five (5) watt LED).

        Sky glow shall mean the brightening of the nighttime sky that results from scattering and reflection of artificial light by moisture and dust particles in the atmosphere. Sky-glow is caused by light directed or reflected upwards or sideways and reduces one’s ability to view the night sky.

        Uplighting shall mean any artificial light source that distributes light above a horizontal plane passing through the lowest light emitting point of the light fixture.

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.16.503. Applicability.
(a)    All outdoor light fixtures maintained upon private property, public property, or public right-of-way installed, modified, or replaced requiring a building or planning permit after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article shall be fully shielded. In addition, light pollution shall be reduced to the maximum level feasible through the use of directional lighting, fixture location and height, as well as motion sensors and timers to control non-essential lighting.

(b)    When the valuation of development or redevelopment, exceeds twenty-five percent of the valuation of the existing building being altered or added, then all outdoor lighting of the building being altered shall be reviewed and brought into compliance with this article.

(c)    Signs are not subject to this Article. Regulations for lighting of signs are set forth in the City’s Sign Standards (Article 16 of Chapter 2 of Title 10 of the City Municipal Code).

(d)    Any outdoor light fixtures existing as of the effective date of this article that provide for directed light shall be directed downward so as to eliminate or reduce glare and light trespass onto adjacent properties. In addition, such pre-existing lighting is encouraged to be modified or retrofitted to be fully shielded to eliminate glare and light trespass.

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.16.504. General requirements.
(a)    All outdoor light fixtures shall be installed and maintained in such a manner that the shielding does not permit light trespass in excess of those amounts set forth in subsection (i), below. Further, any fixed objects that reflect or diffract light, such as windows, mirrors, or other reflective surfaces must not permit light pollution.

(b)    All non-essential outdoor light fixtures shall be turned off after business hours (in the case of non-residential properties) and/or when not in use for the intended purpose. Automated control methods such as motion sensors and timers, shall be utilized if needed to comply.

(c)    (Reserved).

(d)    Outdoor light fixtures used for outdoor recreational facilities:

(1)    Shall be fully shielded except when such shielding would cause impairment to the visibility required in the intended recreational activity. In such cases, partially shielded fixtures and directional lighting methods shall be utilized to limit light pollution, glare and light trespass to a reasonable level, as determined by the Community Development Director, without diminishing the performance standards of the intended recreational activity.

(2)    Illumination from recreational facility light fixtures shall be shielded to minimize light pollution extending toward roadways where impairment of motorist vision might cause a hazard and toward neighboring residential areas.

(3)    That are not required to be shielded, as noted above, shall not be illuminated between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise, except to complete a specific organized recreational event that is in progress as of 10:00 p.m.

(e)    If a property or use with non-conforming lights is abandoned for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days, then all outdoor lighting shall be reviewed and brought into compliance with this article before a new use is approved.

(f)    In addition to the provisions in this article, all outdoor light fixtures shall be installed in conformity with all other applicable provisions of this Municipal Code.

(g)    All existing outdoor light fixtures that are not fully shielded and directed downward, or that otherwise do not meet the new exterior lighting requirements, may be retained; however, any such lighting shall be turned off between 10:00 p.m. and sunrise.

(h)    All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels, such as, kerosene lanterns or gas lamps, may be allowed, subject to a Design Review Permit in accordance with Section 10-2.2001 et seq.

(i)     Allowable light trespass. New outdoor lighting shall conform to the following quantitative lighting limits. For the purposes of the following table, the Downtown Business District is defined as the area bounded to the west by Cañada Street, to the north by Matilija Street, to the east by Waite Street north of Drown Avenue and Drown Avenue and Olive Mill Lane south of Drown Avenue, and to the south by Topatopa Street including an extension thereof east to Fox Street and thereafter to the south by the first property with frontage on Ojai Avenue (as depicted in the map below).



 

Residential Zones—Single-Family (AG, R-O-4 thru R-O, and R-1)

 

Horizontal-plane limit

0.1 foot-candles at property lines

Vertical-plane limit

0.1 foot-candles at property lines

Residential Zones—Multi-Family (including VMU) Outside of Downtown Business District (R-2, R-3, and VMU)

Horizontal-plane limit

0.2 foot-candles at property lines

Vertical-plane limit

0.2 foot-candles at property lines

Non-Residential Zones (but including VMU) Within the Downtown Business District

Horizontal-plane limit

1.0 foot-candles at 15 feet beyond property lines

Vertical-plane limit

1.0 foot-candles at 15 feet beyond property lines

Non-Residential Zones Outside of Downtown Business District

 

Horizontal-plane limit

0.25 foot-candles at property lines*

Vertical-plane limit

0.25 foot-candles at property lines*

Note:

*       With an allowance of up to 0.5 foot-candles on a case by case basis, subject to approval by the Planning Commission as part of a Design Review Permit.

 

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.16.505. Exemptions.
        The following are exempt from the provisions of this article:

(a)    All outdoor light fixtures existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this article, provided, however, that no replacement or structural alteration of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this article.

(b)    Temporary lights used for holiday decorations. Holiday lights must not be installed prior to forty-five (45) days before and removed no later than fifteen (15) days after the applicable holiday.

(c)    Construction or emergency lighting provided such lighting is temporary and is discontinued immediately upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency necessitating said lighting.

(d)    Lighting for public roadways for traffic control such as signals and other devices.

(e)    Vehicular lights and all temporary emergency lighting needed by the Fire and Police Departments, or other emergency services.

(f)    Navigation lights such as radio/television towers.

(g)    School district sites and/or other governmental facilities which are otherwise exempt from local regulations.

(h)    Any facility or equipment which is subject to preemptive state or federal standards for illumination levels.

(i)     Outdoor lighting for a designated historic landmark, provided the Historic Preservation Commission determines that:

(1)    Strict applications of the requirements of this article would be inconsistent with and injurious to preservation of the historical character of the Historic Landmark either as a result of necessary modifications to the structure or unavailability of compliant lighting fixtures; or

(2)    The cost of meeting the requirements of this article would not be feasible while retaining the historic character of the historic landmark; and

(3)    The granting of the exemption will generally be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.

(j)     Security lights of no more than two thousand six hundred (2,600) lumens (one hundred fifty (150) watt incandescent or equivalent) per light, as long as these are: (1) fully shielded; and (2) controlled by a motion-sensor or timer switch that does not keep the light(s) on for longer than twelve (12) minutes after activation.

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.16.506. Director’s exemption.
(a)    In accordance with Section 10-2.104(b)(3)(A)(xi) of the Municipal Code, a person may submit a written request to the Community Development Director for an administrative exemption from the requirements of this article. The request shall state fully the circumstances and conditions relied upon as grounds for an administrative exemption and shall be accompanied by adequate plans and a legal description of the property involved. In addition, the request shall contain at a minimum the following information:

(1)    Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;

(2)    Location of the outdoor light fixture(s) for which the exemption is being requested;

(3)    The nature of the circumstances which necessitate the administrative exemption request;

(4)    Use of the outdoor light fixture(s) involved;

(5)    Type of outdoor light fixture to be used, including total light output and character of the shielding, if any; and

(6)    Such other data and information as may be required by the Director as appropriate.

(b)    The Community Development Director may grant an administrative exemption from the provisions of this article when it appears from the facts contained in the application, and from any other relevant information available that all of the following conclusions can be reached:

(1)    There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land, buildings, or outdoor light fixtures for which the administrative exemption is sought, which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land, buildings or outdoor light fixtures and do not apply generally to the land, buildings or outdoor light fixtures in the neighborhood;

(2)    The aforesaid circumstances or conditions are such that the strict application of the provisions of this article would deprive the applicant of the reasonable use of the land, buildings or outdoor light fixtures and that the administrative exemption is the minimum exemption that will accomplish this purpose; and

(3)    The granting of the administrative exemption will generally be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this article and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare.

(c)    If the request for an administrative exemption is approved, such determination shall be made in writing with notice of the determination mailed to property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property, and a record kept which shall be open to the public. An administrative exemption would be subject to a fifteen (15) day appeal period, with the appeal body the Planning Commission, in accordance with Article 30 of this chapter.

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.16.507. Temporary exemption.
(a)    The Community Development Director may grant a temporary exemption, as defined herein, for such activities, including, but not limited to, circuses, fairs, carnivals, sporting events, and promotional activities, if he or she finds the following:

(1)    The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to extend beyond thirty (30) days;

(2)    The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light pollution as much as feasible; and

(3)    The proposed lighting will comply with the general intent of this article.

(b)    The application for a temporary exemption shall include the following information:

(1)    Name and address of applicant and property owner;

(2)    Location of proposed fixture(s);

(3)    Type, wattage and light output of lamp(s);

(4)    Type and shielding of proposed fixture(s);

(5)    Intended use of lighting;

(6)    Duration of time for requested exemption;

(7)    The nature of the exemption;

(8)    Such other information as the Community Development Director may request.

(c)    The Community Development Director shall rule on the application within ten (10) business days from the date of submission of the request and notify the applicant in writing of his or her decision.

(d)    The Community Development Director may grant one renewal of the application for up to an additional thirty (30) days if it finds that, because of an unanticipated change in circumstances, a renewal would be in the public interest. The Community Development Director is not authorized to grant more than one thirty (30) day temporary exemption and one renewal for up to a thirty (30) day period for the same property within one twelve (12) month period.

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.16.508. Appeals.
        All appeals of decisions applicable to this article shall be made pursuant to Article 30 and within the times set forth therein for the filing of such appeals.

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.16.509. Enforcement.
        The Community Development Director is hereby empowered and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The Public Works Director is hereby empowered and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article relating to outdoor light control for street lighting, bike paths, and public parking lots.

        The remedies provided for in this article shall be cumulative and not exclusive in compliance with Article 35.

(§ 2, Ord. 825, eff. September 28, 2013)

 

Article 17. Standards for Specific Land Uses
Sec. 10-2.1701. Purpose of article.
        The provisions of this article are intended to establish standards for the location, development, and operation of specified land use activities that are allowed by Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter in individual or multiple zoning districts, and for activities that require special standards to mitigate their potential adverse impacts.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1702. Applicability.
        Land uses and activities covered by this article shall comply with the provisions of the sections applicable to the specific use, in addition to all other applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations.

(a)    The uses that are subject to the standards in this article shall be located in compliance with the requirements of Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter.

(b)    The uses that are subject to the standards in this article shall be authorized by the land use entitlement required by Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter, except where a land use entitlement requirement is established by this article for a specific use.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1703. Bed and breakfast establishments.
        This section provides locational, developmental, and operational standards for the development and operation of bed and breakfast (B&B) establishments. All B&B establishments shall be located, developed, and operated in the following manner:

(a)    B&B establishments may only be allowed in the B-P zoning district, subject to the issuance of a zoning clearance, and in the C-1 and VMU Zoning Districts, subject to the approval of design review and condi-

tional use permits in compliance with Articles 20 and 24 of this chapter. They shall not be allowed within any single-family zoning district.

(b)    The parcel upon which the B&B establishment is to be developed and operated shall conform to all standards of the subject zoning district.

(c)    Service shall be limited to the rental of bedrooms. Meal service shall be limited to the provision of meals for registered guests.

(d)    There shall be no additional food preparation areas for the guests.

(e)    Receptions, private parties, or activities, for which a fee is paid or which is allowable as a condition of room rental, shall not be allowed.

(f)    Each guest shall register upon arrival, stating their date of occupancy, name, current residence address, and the license plate number of the motor vehicle that is being used by the guest. The registration form shall be kept by the owner or operator for a period of two (2) years and shall be made available for examination by appropriate City representatives upon one days’ notice.

(g)    A current City business license shall be maintained and displayed in compliance with Chapter 1 of Title 6 of the Municipal Code.

(h)    All B&Bs shall be subject to the City’s transient occupancy tax in compliance with Chapter 1 of Title 8 of the Municipal Code.

(i)     Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one space for each bedroom available for rent. This parking shall not be located within the required front setback.

(j)     Signs shall be limited to one on-site sign not to exceed four (4) square feet in area and shall be installed and maintained in compliance with Article 16 of this chapter. In the event of alley access to a guest parking area, a second sign, not to exceed two (2) square feet in area, may be approved by the Director in order to identify the parking area.

(k)    The B&B shall meet all of the requirements of the Ventura County Fire Protection District.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1704. Child day care facilities.
        This section provides definitions and applicability provisions for small family day care homes, large family day care homes, and child day care centers as well as locational, developmental, and operational standards for child day care centers, in compliance with State law and in a manner that recognizes the needs of child care operators and minimizes negative impacts on adjoining properties. These standards apply in addition to the other provisions of these Zoning Regulations and the requirements of the California Department of Social Services. Licensing by the Department of Social Services is required for all child day care facilities.

        The establishment of a child day care facility shall comply with Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter, and the following criteria and standards:

(a)    Child day care facilities shall be allowed as follows:

(1)    Small family day care homes (eight (8) or fewer children) are allowed within all single-family residences located in a residential zoning district.

(2)    Large family day care homes (nine (9) to fourteen (14) children) are allowed in all single-family residences located in a residential zoning district.

(3)    Child day care centers (fifteen (15) or more children) are allowed in all nonresidential zoning districts subject to approval of design review and conditional use permits, in compliance with Articles 20 and 24 of this chapter, and the standards identified in subsection (b) below.

(b)    The following standards shall apply to all child day care centers:

(1)    The minimum parcel size for a child day care center shall be 10,000 square feet.

(2)    Off-street parking shall be as determined through the approval of the required entitlement.

(3)    A safe area for picking up and dropping off children shall be provided. This activity shall only be allowed in a driveway, in an approved parking area, or in an area with direct access to the facility.

(4)    Potential noise sources shall be identified during the entitlement process, and noise attenuation and sound dampening shall be addressed. Noise levels shall be in compliance with the most recent guidelines of the noise element of the General Plan and Chapter 11 of Title 5 of the Municipal Code.

(c)    Alternatives to the standards of this section may be authorized through approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with Article 24 of this chapter if the Commission determines that:

(1)    The purpose and intent of these standards would be met; and

(2)    There would be no negative impact to surrounding properties or residents.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1705. Guest houses.
        Guest houses are subject to the approval of design review and conditional use permits in compliance with Articles 20 and 24 of this chapter, and shall be located, developed, and operated in the following manner:

(a)    Guest houses shall only be allowed in an agricultural, residential, or the VMU Zoning District.

(b)    The minimum parcel area shall be 20,000 square feet for properties located in an agricultural or residential zoning district, and no minimum parcel area shall be required for properties in the VMU Zoning District.

(c)    The maximum floor area of the guest house shall not exceed 640 square feet; provided, however, that a guest house on a parcel of five (5) acres or more may exceed 640 square feet of floor area, but shall not exceed 1,000 square feet of floor area.

(d)    Any guest house constructed within 300 feet from an existing sewer line shall be required to connect to the sewer line before first occupancy. All public utility services to the guest house shall be installed underground.

(e)    Guest houses shall not be allowed on parcels where a second dwelling unit, as defined in Article 35 of this chapter, presently exists.

(f)    Construction of the guest house shall comply with the following regulations of the subject zoning district:

(1)    Parcel coverage;

(2)    Front, side, and rear setbacks; and

(3)    Height and stories.

(g)    All street improvements required by the Director of Public Works in connection with the construction of the guest house shall be met.

(h)    No design review and conditional use permits for a guest house shall be granted unless the following findings, supported by substantial evidence, are first adopted in addition to those identified in Section 10-2.2406. The guest house would:

(1)    Be appropriate to the size and character of the parcel on which it would be located and to the character of the neighborhood;

(2)    Not overload the capacity of the neighborhood to absorb the guest house (in terms of parking, intensity of land uses, and the like) or cause a concentration of guest houses sufficient to change the character of the single-family neighborhood in which the guest house would be located; and

(3)    Not detract from the privacy of the surrounding residents.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1706. Motor vehicle sales.
        This section provides locational, developmental, and operational standards for new motor vehicle sales dealerships (including all light and medium duty licensed motor vehicles) in the City, which are expected to enhance and promote the prestigious residential resort image of the City, and shall present an aesthetically pleasing visual environment that promotes and protects the natural and built scenic beauty of the community. Design review and conditional use permits in compliance with Articles 20 and 24 of this chapter shall be required, and all new dealerships shall be constructed in the following manner:

(a)    The minimum site area for a new dealership shall be 15,000 square feet.

(b)    The sale of used motor vehicles may only be incidental to the new motor vehicle sales and long-term new motor vehicle leasing operations on-site. Stand-alone used vehicle sales or leasing operations are not allowed in the City.

(c)    The outdoor motor vehicle sale displays shall be located in the landscaped front setback area.

(d)    The storage of motor vehicles and lease inventory shall not be located between any structure and the public street frontage, except for customer and employee parking areas and the allowed outdoor motor vehicle display in the landscaped front setback area. “Storage” is defined as being the motor vehicle inventory not displayed for sale or lease. All storage areas shall be completely screened from public view with a combination of landscaping, trellises, and walls as appropriate.

(e)    All parts and accessories shall be stored within a fully enclosed structure.

(f)    Night lighting shall be limited to signs, outdoor motor vehicle displays, the indoor showroom, and incidental security lighting. All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary and directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.

(g)    All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in compliance with Article 12 of this chapter.

(h)    All on-site signs shall comply with the provisions of Article 16 of this chapter.

(i)     All loading and unloading of vehicles shall occur on-site where feasible and not in adjoining public rights-of-way.

(j)     All vehicles associated with the business shall be displayed, parked, or stored on-site on paved surfaces only and not in adjoining streets or alleys.

(k)    An adequate on-site queuing area for service customers shall be provided. Required off-street parking spaces may not be counted as queuing spaces.

(l)     Service bays with individual access from the exterior of the structure shall not directly face or front on a public right-of-way and shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining properties. Outdoor hoists shall be prohibited.

(m)   Off-street parking requirements shall be established during project review to adequately accommodate all on-site uses, including showroom, office, parts and service areas, as well as employee and customer parking.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1707. Motor vehicle service centers.
        Automotive (light and medium duty licensed motor vehicle) parts, repair, and service centers and facilities are allowable subject to the approval of design review and conditional use permits in compliance with Articles 20 and 24 of this chapter. Automotive service and repair facilities shall be developed and operated in the following manner:

(a)    The site shall be entirely paved, except for structures and landscaping, so that vehicles are not parked in a dirt or otherwise not fully improved area.

(b)    All temporarily stored (for more than five (5) consecutive days), damaged, or wrecked vehicles shall be completely screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties or public rights-of-way. Storage of vehicles shall not exceed a maximum of thirty (30) days. Outside storage of motor vehicles is prohibited.

(c)    Service bays with individual access from the exterior of the structure shall not directly face or front on a public right-of-way and shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining properties. Outdoor hoists shall be prohibited.

(d)    Service access shall be located at the rear or side of structures and as far as possible from adjoining residential uses.

(e)    Repair and service activities and vehicle loading and unloading shall only occur on-site and not in adjoining streets or alleys.

(f)    All repair facilities shall maintain closed windows when performing noise-generating activity. Exterior noise shall comply with the City’s Noise Ordinance.

(g)    All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, and directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.

(h)    All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained in compliance with Article 12 of this chapter.

(i)     All on-site signs shall comply with the provisions of Article 16 of this chapter.

(j)     All on-site parking shall comply with the provisions of Article 14 of this chapter. A specific parking plan shall be developed as part of the entitlement review process.

(k)    Work shall not be performed on vehicles between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday; or until 8:00 a.m. on Sundays.

(l)     The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times.

(m)   All discarded automotive parts or equipment or permanently disabled, junked, or dismantled vehicles shall be removed from the premises in a timely manner.

(n)    All hazardous materials resulting from the repair and service operation shall be properly stored and removed from the premises in a timely manner. Storage, use, and removal of toxic substances, solid waste pollution, and flammable liquids, particularly gasoline, paints, solvents, and thinners, shall conform to all applicable local, State, and Federal regulations.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1708. Outdoor dining.
        This section provides developmental and operational standards for outdoor dining activities. The purpose of these standards is to promote safe and visually appealing opportunities for outdoor dining within the City.

(a)    Outdoor dining is only allowed within the City with an outdoor dining permit, unless the establishment qualifies for an exemption in compliance with subsection (b) below.

(b)    Food establishments that primarily provide take-out service are exempted from the provisions of this section provided their outdoor facilities are limited to no more than two (2) chairs and one (1) table or one (1) booth. These establishments shall still file for and receive an encroachment permit from the Director of Public Works.

(c)    Allowed outdoor dining.

(1)    Outdoor dining shall require a conditional use permit in compliance with Article 24 of this chapter, in addition to the outdoor dining permit required by this section, issued in compliance with all adopted rules and regulations for outdoor dining.

(2)    Outdoor dining may be allowed where, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, traffic and pedestrian safety is compatible with outdoor dining. All outdoor dining areas shall be adjacent to and incidental to the operation of a food service establishment providing on-premises customer seating properly allowed for this type of service in compliance with all applicable State and County health regulations. Use of the sidewalk or public right-of-way shall be confined to the actual sidewalk and public right-of-way frontage of the restaurant or food service structure.

(d)    Outdoor dining is allowed only where, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works, the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the operation of the proposed outdoor dining. Each application request shall be field reviewed by the Director of Public Works to determine the width of sidewalk which shall remain clear and unimpeded for pedestrian traffic.

(e)    Outdoor dining is a revocable encroachment permit granted by the City. The City shall have the right, acting through the Director of Public Works, to suspend the operation of outdoor dining at any time because of anticipated or actual conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area or right-of-way. These conflicts may arise from scheduled festivals, or similar special events, marches or parades, repairs to the street or sidewalk, or from emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the outdoor dining will be suspended by the City.

(f)    The Director of Public Works shall issue an outdoor dining permit in compliance with administrative regulations adopted by resolution of the Commission and Council. At a minimum, these regulations shall determine and require the following:

(1)    The approval and execution of a standard permit and hold harmless agreement in a form acceptable to the City Attorney;

(2)    Proof of insurance naming the City as additional insured as identified in Municipal Code Section 7-1.106 in an amount of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) combined single limits;

(3)    Special site conditions as are needed or desirable;

(4)    Whether the design for seating and signs meets the minimum standards of the established regulations;

(5)    Other conditions as are necessary for public safety or to protect public improvements;

(6)    Conditions necessary to restore the appearance of the sidewalk or right-of-way upon the termination of the outdoor dining use;

 

(7)    Compliance with the applicable City building, design review, signs, and zoning requirements;

(8)    Approval of a conditional use permit by the Commission; and

(9)    The payment of an appropriate permit application and encroachment fee in an amount established by resolution of the Council.

(g)    The maximum term of an outdoor dining permit shall be twelve (12) months. Thereafter, the Director of Public Works may extend the permit for additional periods, not to exceed twelve (12) months each, following review and approval of the operation of the outdoor dining business. If the Director of Public Works considers additional or revised conditions necessary to carry out the intent of these Zoning Regulations, new conditions may be imposed upon the extension, including the imposition of a permit renewal fee.

(h)    Permits issued in compliance with the authority of these Zoning Regulations shall be nontransferable from one owner to another.

(i)     The provisions of Section 7-1.130 shall be applicable to the issuance of an outdoor dining permit.

(j)     An outdoor dining permit may be cancelled by the Director of Public Works for the reasons identified in Section 7-1.213.

(k)    The provisions of Section 7-1.224 shall be applicable to outdoor dining.

(l)     Any appeal of a decision of the Director of Public Works concerning the disapproval or revocation of an outdoor dining permit, or conditions attached to the permit, shall follow the provisions of Sections 7-1.801 through 7-1.803.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1709. Accessory dwelling units.
(a)    Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to provide guidelines, and minimum standards to facilitate both the construction of new accessory dwelling units, also known as second units, and the legalization of unpermitted accessory dwelling units.

(b)    Definitions. For the purposes of this section, certain words and phrases used in this section are defined as follows:

(1)    “Accessory dwelling unit” is a residential dwelling unit that is accessory to a principal residential dwelling unit located on the same parcel of land. It is an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit which provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation and be situated on the same parcel or parcels as the primary unit. An ADU must have exterior access independent from the primary unit and/or interior access independent from the primary unit.

(2)    “Accessory structure” means a structure that is physically detached from, secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with the primary structure and is either a habitable structure with no more plumbing facilities than a half-bath containing a toilet and a sink or a non-habitable structure.

(3)    “Attached unit” a unit shall be considered attached to the primary unit if the unit is attached by either a common wall, floor, or ceiling.

(4)    “Attic” means the area located between the ceiling of the top story of a building and the building’s roof and not usable as habitable or commercial space.

(5)    “Basement” means a portion of a building wholly underground or in which more than one-half the distance from the floor to the ceiling is below the average adjoining grade, and as otherwise defined in the Building Code currently in effect.

(6)    “Detached unit” has no common walls, floors or ceilings to another residential unit.

 

(7)    “Efficiency unit”: as defined in Section 17958.1 of the Health and Safety Code.

(8)    “Existing legal accessory building” means a building that is either existing legal conforming or existing legal nonconforming.

(9)    “Existing legal primary unit” means a unit that is either existing legal conforming or existing legal nonconforming.

(10)  “Floor area” means the interior habitable and non-habitable areas of a dwelling unit including basements and attics, not including a garage or any accessory structure.

(11)  “Habitable area”: an area within a building designed for general living, sleeping, eating, or cooking purposes.

(12)  “Home split”: the division of an existing single-family home into two (2) dwelling units, each containing a minimum of six hundred fifty (650) square feet of living space and meeting the following criteria: (i) the existing single-family home contains a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet of living area, is located on a legal lot and has a current Zoning District designation of any of the following zones: all R zones, OS, A, VMU, C-1, or B-P; (ii) does not expand the existing principal residence by more than ten (10%) percent of the existing floor area; (iii) results in no change in the physical appearance of the existing single-family home or otherwise complies with the provisions of Section 10-2.2003(c); and (iv) adheres with all applicable building code requirements and development standards of the underlying Zoning District.

(13)  “Junior accessory dwelling unit” means a residential dwelling unit that is no more than five hundred (500) square feet in size and contained entirely within an existing single-family structure. A junior accessory dwelling unit may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure.

(14)  “Living area” means the interior legally permitted habitable area, with minimum dimensions of eight (8) feet by ten (10) feet and with at least seven and one-half (7.5) feet of head room, of a dwelling unit including basements and attics but does not include a garage or any accessory structure.

(15)  “Lot coverage” means the percentage of total site area occupied by structures. Structure or building coverage is measured as the area enclosed by or within a structure, and includes the primary structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, accessory dwelling units) and architectural features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches, stairs).

(16)  “Manufactured home”: as defined in Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code.

(17)  “Multi-family dwelling” has the same meaning as set forth in Ojai Municipal Code Section 10-2.3602, subdivision (m)(12).

(18)  “Neighborhood” has the same meaning as set forth in Government Code Section 65589.5.

(19)  “Passageway” means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the accessory dwelling unit.

(20)  “Primary unit” means an existing single-family dwelling located on a lot in any of the following zones: all R zones, OS, A, VMU, C-1, B-P. ADUs are only permitted in the C-1 and B-P zones if the property’s existing single-family dwelling is legal, conforming or nonconforming, but not if the existing single-family dwelling lacks legal status.

(21)  “Short term rental” means the renting of a residential unit for less than thirty (30) days, excepting rentals with a duration of the entire month of February.

(c)    Applications. Notwithstanding any provision of these zoning regulations to the contrary, an application for a new or expanded accessory dwelling unit shall be approved ministerially by the Community Development Director, without discretionary review and a hearing, if the project conforms with the minimum standards and design criteria in this section. Any application for an accessory dwelling unit that does not conform to the minimum standards and design criteria in this section applicable to that type of accessory dwelling unit may be approved via approval of a design review permit issued under Section 10-2.2003, subsection (c), and subsection (d) of this section.

(1)    The accessory dwelling unit shall not be offered for sale apart from the primary unit.

(d)    Standards. The following development standards shall apply to accessory dwelling units, with the standards set separately for each accessory dwelling unit type.

 

Table A: Accessory Dwelling Unit Development Standards

 

 

New Detached Accessory Dwelling Unit

New Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit Attached to an Existing Legal Primary Unit

New Attached Accessory Dwelling Unit Solely by Conversion of Existing Interior Space in an Existing Legal Primary Unit

New Accessory Dwelling Unit Solely by Conversion of an Existing Legal Accessory Building

New Unit Within A New Second Story Over Existing Legal Primary Unit

Home-Split, as Defined Above and as Defined by Section 10-2.3602(H)(5)

Permitted Zones

 

All R zones, OS, A, VMU, C-1, B-P

All R zones, OS, A, VMU, C-1, B-P

All R zones, OS, A, VMU, C-1, B-P

All R zones, OS, A, VMU, C-1, B-P

All R zones, OS, A, VMU, C-1, B-P

All R zones, OS, A, VMU, C-1, B-P

Setbacks

Front

Side

Rear

Front Setback: As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Side and Rear Setback: 4ft.

Front Setback: As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Side and Rear Setback: 4 ft.

Utilizes the existing setbacks.

Utilizes existing setback if accessory building is legal.

Front Setback: As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Side and Rear Setback: 4 ft.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Lot Coverage

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Utilizes the existing lot coverage.

Utilizes the existing lot coverage.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Height

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Utilizes the existing height of the legal building.

Utilizes the existing height of the legal building.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Stories

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Utilizes the existing height of the legal building.

Utilizes the existing height of the legal building.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

As set forth in the zoning district the unit is proposed in.

Maximum Floor Area Size of Unit (3)

1200 square feet or 85% of the existing habitable area of the legal primary unit, whichever is smaller.

1200 square feet or 85% of the existing habitable area of the legal primary unit, whichever is smaller.

1200 square feet or  85% of the existing habitable area of the legal primary unit, whichever is smaller.

1200 square feet or 85% of the existing habitable area of the legal primary unit, whichever is smaller.

1200 square feet or 85% of the existing habitable area of the legal primary unit, whichever is smaller.

1200 square feet or 85% of the existing habitable area of the legal primary unit, whichever is smaller.

Number of Accessory Dwelling Units Allowed on Site (4)

1

1

1

1

1

1

Number of Junior Accessory Dwelling Units Allowed on Site

1

1

1

1

1

1

Parking for Units Not Within ½ Mile of a Transit Stop

One additional uncovered on-site paved parking space which may be tandem on an existing driveway.

None

None

None

None

One additional uncovered on-site paved parking space which may be tandem on an existing driveway.

Parking for Units Within ½ Mile of a Transit Stop

None

None

None

None

None

None

Parking for Units Located Within an Historic District

None

None

None

None

None

None

New Driveways to Parking Provided for an Accessory Dwelling Unit

Shall be pervious and shall be the minimum width to provide sufficient access to the parking.

Shall be pervious and shall be the minimum width to provide sufficient access to the parking.

Shall be pervious and shall be the minimum width to provide sufficient access to the parking.

Shall be pervious and shall be the minimum width to provide sufficient access to the parking.

Shall be pervious and shall be the minimum width to provide sufficient access to the parking.

Shall be pervious and shall be the minimum width to provide sufficient access to the parking.

Guest House

Each legal lot may have a guest house, under the restrictions of Section 10-2.1705.

Each legal lot may have a guest house, under the restrictions of Section 10-2.1705.

If a guest house exists, then a new accessory dwelling unit is allowed.

If a guest house exists, then a new accessory dwelling unit is allowed.

Each legal lot may have a guest house, under the restrictions of Section 10-2.1705.

Each legal lot may have a guest house, under the restrictions of Section 10-2.1705.

Accessory Structures1,2

Permitted, in compliance with applicable City regulations.

Permitted, in compliance with applicable City regulations.

Permitted, in compliance with applicable City regulations.

Permitted, in compliance with applicable City regulations.

Permitted, in compliance with applicable City regulations.

Permitted, in compliance with applicable City regulations.

Short Term Rental of Accessory Dwelling Unit Permitted

No

No

No

No

No

No

Design Review Permit Required

Only for two story units, units taller than 24′, or units on the second story.

Only for two story units, units taller than 24′, or units on the second story.

Only for new two story units or new units taller than 24′, or units on the second story outside the existing legal building envelope.

Only for new two story units or new units taller than 24′, or units on the second story outside the existing legal building envelope.

Only for two story units, units taller than 24′, or units on the second story.

Only for two story units, units on the second story, or units entailing expansion of the existing principal residence by more than ten (10%) percent of the existing floor area.

Notes:

(1)    Standards in common.

(A)            The accessory dwelling unit shall include a separate entrance, kitchen, and bathroom.

(B)            The accessory dwelling unit shall complement the primary residence in form, materials and color.

(C)            Mobile homes (except those fitting the definition of Section 18007 of the Health and Safety Code) and travel trailers shall not be permitted as second units.

(D)            Accessory dwelling units, including any portion of a pre-existing primary residential unit which would be incorporated into an accessory dwelling unit, shall comply with the minimum standards of Title 24, California Code of Regulations, the Uniform Building, Plumbing, Housing, and Mechanical Codes, the National Electrical Code, Fire, Health, and Safety Code and the noise insulation standards applicable at the time the building permit for the accessory dwelling unit is issued or when the accessory dwelling unit is permitted by the Director, whichever is most recent. Any condition of the primary unit which is detrimental to health and safety shall also be corrected by the applicant.

(E)            All applicable regulations of the Municipal Code shall be met, including the Building, Residential, Fire, and other requirements adopted by Chapter 1 of Title 9 of the Municipal Code.

(F)            Both primary and accessory dwelling units shall be connected to the public sewer system, unless sewer service via a new or existing private sewage disposal system is approved by the Building Official and in compliance with all applicable regulations. All public utility services to the accessory dwelling unit shall be underground. The accessory dwelling unit does not need a separate connection to any public utility service. The primary and accessory dwelling units shall be commonly or separately metered to all public utility services, at the option of the applicant. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if an accessory dwelling unit is proposed for a property with an existing private sewage disposal system, then the accessory dwelling unit may connect to the existing private sewage disposal system, if approved by the Building Official and in compliance with all applicable regulations.

(G)            Notwithstanding the standards of Table A, no minimum or maximum size for an accessory dwelling unit, size based upon a percentage of the proposed or existing primary dwelling, or limits on lot coverage, floor area ratio, open space, and minimum lot size, for either attached or detached dwellings shall be imposed that prohibit an 800 square foot accessory dwelling unit that is 16 feet in height with four-foot side and rear yard setbacks to be constructed in compliance with all other local development standards.

(2)    Junior Accessory Dwelling Units within single-family and multi-family dwellings shall be permitted in compliance with subsection (k) and all regulations stated in Government. Code Section 65852.2 and 65852.22.

(3)    Notwithstanding the maximum floor area standards of Table A, an accessory dwelling unit containing one bedroom shall be permitted up to 850 square feet in floor area and an accessory dwelling unit containing two or more bedrooms shall be permitted up to 1000 square feet in floor area.

(4)    Accessory dwelling units are allowed in multi-family dwellings in compliance with subsection (l) and all regulations stated in Government Code section 65852.2

(e)    Design review permit criteria. So long as the design criteria set forth in Table A “Standards” are met for the applicable accessory dwelling unit type and the common standards set forth in Section 10-2.1709(d)(1) are met, as determined by the Director, and provided that the accessory dwelling unit: (1) does not entail new two (2) story construction and is no taller than twenty-four (24) feet in height; or (2) is within the building envelope of the existing legal second story of an existing legal primary unit, has independent exterior access from the existing legal primary unit, and side and rear setbacks are adequate for fire safety as determined by the Director; or (3) if a home split, does not entail two (2) story construction or alteration of the second story of an existing two (2) story principal residence or expansion of the existing principal residence by more than ten (10%) percent of the existing floor area, then a Design Review Permit shall not be required under Section 10-2.2003.

(f)    Fees. No connection fees, capacity charges, school district fees, or similar impact fees shall be assessed on an accessory dwelling unit by the City. Accessory dwelling unit applications are subject to the City’s planning and building administrative and permit applications fees applicable at the time of the application.

(g)    Growth management allocation. All accessory dwelling units shall be exempt from the City of Ojai’s Growth Management allocation process.

(h)    Short-term rental. No accessory dwelling unit shall be utilized as a short-term rental facility.

(i)     Traffic impacts. Accessory dwelling units are expressly exempt from the City of Ojai’s traffic mitigation policies.

(j)     ADU/Second Unit Compliance Program. The owners of existing accessory dwelling units which existed prior to June 23, 2015, and not recognized as lawfully permitted may apply for an amnesty permit pursuant to the ADU/Second Unit Compliance Program Guidelines (“ADU/Second Unit Guidelines”) adopted by the City Council pursuant to this section. If approved, as provided in the ADU/Second Unit Guidelines, the ADU/Second Unit Compliance Permit shall convey legal nonconforming status on the second unit pursuant to Article 13 of Chapter 2 of Title 10.

(1)    Except as specifically provided in the ADU/Second Unit Guidelines, ADU/Second Unit Compliance Permit shall not be subject to the normal requirements for residential second units specified in this Code, but instead shall be subject to the specific requirements contained in Second Unit Guidelines.

(2)    Permit processing and development impact fees within the control of the City shall be discounted for residential second units which qualify for ADU/Second Unit Compliance Permit. The amount of such fees shall be set forth in a fee resolution adopted by the City Council.

(3)    The ADU/Second Unit Compliance Program shall remain in effect from the effective date of the ordinance originally adding this subsection until a termination date established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council. Any such termination shall not affect a complete application for an ADU/Second Unit Compliance Permit filed with the City prior to the termination date.

(k)    Junior accessory dwelling units.

(1)    All the requirements under this section apply equally to junior accessory dwelling units, unless stated otherwise in this subsection. A property owner may build a junior accessory dwelling unit, in addition to an accessory dwelling unit, provided each junior accessory dwelling unit and accessory dwelling unit, if applicable, are in compliance with the requirements of this section in any zone and for any property for which an accessory dwelling unit is permitted by Table A in subsection (d) of this section. Any junior accessory dwelling unit shall be built within the structure, and may extend to be within an up to one-hundred fifty (150) square foot addition to, an existing or proposed primary dwelling unit.

(2)    The owner must reside in the single-family residence but may choose to reside within the remaining portion of the structure or the newly created junior accessory dwelling unit, except as may be allowed otherwise by Government Code Section 65852.22, subdivision (a)(2).

(3)    All junior accessory dwelling units shall include, at a minimum, an efficiency kitchen and living area. It may include separate sanitation facilities or may share sanitation facilities with the existing structure. The junior accessory dwelling unit must include a separate entrance from the main entrance to the proposed or existing single-family residence.

(4)    The maximum floor area for a junior accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed five hundred (500) square feet.

(l)     Multi-family dwelling accessory dwelling units.

(1)    All the requirements under this section apply equally to multi-family dwelling accessory dwelling units, unless stated otherwise in this subsection. The owner of a multi-family dwelling may build one or more accessory dwelling units in compliance with this section in any zone and for any property for which an accessory dwelling unit is permitted by Table (A) in subsection (d) of this section.

(2)    The number and type of accessory dwelling units for a multi-family dwelling must comply with the following standards:

(i)     An owner of a multi-family dwelling may build multiple attached accessory dwelling units, up to twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of existing multi-family dwelling units, if solely within the portions of the existing multi-family dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, and if each attached accessory dwelling unit complies with all applicable building codes for dwellings. The maximum floor area for each attached multi-family accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.

(ii)    An owner of a multi-family dwelling unit may additionally build a maximum of two detached accessory dwelling units, if each detached accessory dwelling unit complies with all applicable building codes for dwellings, does not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height, and has a minimum of four (4) feet side and rear yard setbacks. The maximum floor area for each detached multi-family accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed eight hundred (800) square feet.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by §§ 2, 4, 12, Ord. 826, eff. June 28, 2013, § 2, Ord. 836, eff. February 28, 2014, § 2, Ord. 858, eff. August 29, 2015, §§ 3—6, Ord. 866, eff. November 15, 2016, § 2, Ord. 875, eff. September 17, 2017, § 2, Ord. 892, eff. April 11, 2019, and § 2, Ord. 905, eff. February 27, 2020)

 

Sec. 10-2.1710. Service (gasoline sales) stations.
        Service stations are subject to the approval of design review and conditional use permits in compliance with Articles 20 and 24 of this chapter, and shall be located, developed and operated in the following manner:

(a)    New service stations shall be allowed only at the intersections of major and secondary arterials, and their intersections with a State highway. A maximum of two (2) service stations shall be allowed at each intersection. The use shall not adjoin a residential zoning district or use.

(b)    The minimum site area for new service stations shall be fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet, with a minimum street frontage of one hundred (100) feet.

 

(c)    All repair and service activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, except as follows:

(1)    The dispensing of petroleum products, water, and air from pump islands;

(2)    The provision of emergency service of a minor nature; and

(3)    The sale of items via vending machines which shall be placed next to the main structure in a designated area not to exceed thirty-two (32) square feet, and which shall be screened from public view.

(d)    Pump islands shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20′) feet from a street property line; however, a canopy or roof structure over a pump island may encroach up to ten (10′) feet within this distance. Additionally, the cashier location shall provide direct visual access to the pump islands and the vehicles parked adjacent to the islands.

(e)    There shall be no more than two (2) vehicular access points to any one street.

(f)    There shall be a minimum distance of thirty (30′) feet between curb cuts along a street frontage.

(g)    Driveways shall not be located closer than fifty (50′) feet to the end of a curb corner nor closer than twenty (20′) feet to a common property line.

(h)    The width of a driveway may not exceed thirty (30′) feet, measured at the back of the apron.

(i)     On-site parking shall be provided in compliance with Article 14 of this chapter.

(j)     All temporarily stored (for more than five (5) consecutive days) or damaged vehicles shall be completely screened so as not to be visible from adjoining properties or public rights-of-way. Storage of vehicles shall not exceed a maximum of thirty (30) days. Outside storage of motor vehicles is prohibited.

(k)    Motor vehicle repair or service work shall be limited to light repair only (e.g., brake repair, lubrication, mufflers, tires, and tune-ups) and shall not occur outside of a fully-enclosed structure. Service bays with individual access from the exterior of the structure shall not directly face or front on a public right-of-way and shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining properties. Outdoor hoists shall be prohibited.

(l)     Motor vehicles shall not be parked on sidewalks, parkways, driveways or alleys.

(m)   Motor vehicles shall not be parked on the premises for the purpose of offering them for sale.

(n)    All light sources, including canopy, perimeter, and flood shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed within the roof canopy to ensure that all light is directed away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Lighting shall not be of a high intensity so as to cause a traffic hazard or adversely affect adjoining properties. No luminaire shall be higher than fifteen (15′) feet above finish grade.

(o)    Landscaping shall comprise a minimum of fifteen (15%) percent of the service station site area, exclusive of required setbacks, and shall be provided and permanently maintained in compliance with the following provisions, as well as those identified in Article 12 of this chapter:

(1)    A minimum five (5′) foot wide (inside dimension) and six (6″) inch high curbed planter area shall be provided along interior property lines, except for openings to facilitate vehicular circulation to adjacent properties. Where adjacent to a periphery wall, trees planted not more than sixteen (16′) feet apart shall be included in the planter areas.

(2)    An on-site planter area of not less than two hundred (200) square feet shall be provided at the corner of two (2) intersecting streets. Landscaping shall not exceed a height of thirty-six (36″) inches at this location.

(3)    A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of planter area shall be located along each portion of the main structure fronting on a public right-of-way.

(4)    Additional landscaping may be required by the Director to further screen the service station from adjacent properties.

(p)    All on-site signs shall comply with the provisions of Article 16 of this chapter.

 

(q)    Used or discarded automotive parts or equipment, or disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles shall not be located in any open area outside of the main structure.

(r)    Restroom entrances otherwise visible from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way shall be concealed from view by planters or decorative screening.

(s)    Noise from bells, loudspeakers or tools shall comply with the City’s noise ordinance and shall not be audible from residentially zoned or occupied parcels between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and Saturdays, and before 10:00 a.m. and after 7:00 p.m. on Sundays.

(t)     All parking, loading, circulation aisles, and pump island areas shall be constructed with concrete or a suitable alternative subject to the approval of the Director.

(u)    Service stations may receive used motor oil for subsequent recycling and removal, subject to the approval by the Ventura County Fire Protection District.

(v)    Service stations may provide facilities for dispensing alternative fuels (e.g., compressed natural gas [CNG]), which shall be located, installed, and operated in compliance with all applicable City, County, State, and Federal requirements.

(w)   Where an existing service station adjoins property in a residential zoning district or use, an eight (8′) foot high decorative masonry wall shall be constructed along the common property line at the time the station requires an entitlement for on-site improvement or modification. Materials, textures, colors, and design of the wall shall be compatible with on-site development and adjoining properties and shall be subject to the approval of the Director. When the wall reaches the established front setback line of a residentially zoned parcel adjoining or directly across an alley from the service station, it shall decrease to a maximum height of thirty-six (36″) inches.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1711. Service station conversion standards.
        A structure originally constructed as a service station and which is proposed for conversion to another allowable use shall require approval of design review and conditional use permits and upgrading and remodeling which may include the removal of all gasoline appurtenances (e.g., underground tanks), canopies, pump islands and overhead doors, additional landscaping provisions as required by Article 12 of this chapter, additional street improvements or modification of existing improvements to conform to access provisions, and exterior remodeling.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1713. Formula business establishments.
(a)    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate the location and design of formula business establishments in order to maintain the tourist attracting small town character of the City, the diversity of the community’s unique commercial areas and quality of life for visitors and residents.

(b)    Regulation.

(1)    A formula business may only be established on a site after obtaining a conditional use permit from the City for the operation of that use on such site, subject to the limitations of this section. Change of ownership, by itself, shall not require obtaining a conditional use permit pursuant to this section.

(2)    No permit application of any kind shall be accepted or processed for a formula business that also possesses at least two of the following characteristics:

(i)     Specializes in short order or quick service food and/or drink;

(ii)    Serves food and/or drink primarily in paper, plastic or other disposable containers; and

(iii)   Payment is made by customers before food and/or drink is consumed.

(3)    In addition to the findings required by Section 10-2.2406 as prerequisite to the issuance of a conditional use permit, the Commission shall make all of the following findings prior to the issuance of a conditional use permit for a formula business:

(i)     The proposed formula business will not result in an over-concentration of formula business establishments in its immediate vicinity or in the City as a whole;

(ii)    The proposed formula business will contribute to an appropriate balance of small, medium and large-sized businesses in the City; and

(iii)   The proposed formula business has been designed to preserve and enhance the City’s small town character and to integrate existing community architectural and design features which will preserve such character for the City’s residents and visitors.

(4)    The Commission may promulgate regulations to further define the scope and meaning of the foregoing findings to ensure consistent implementation of this subsection.

(5)    No conditional use permit shall be issued for a use that is a formula business located within the area of the Downtown Commercial land use designation of the City’s General Plan if either of the following are true: (i) such establishment has street-level frontage exceeding twenty-five (25) linear feet on any street, or (ii) the useable area of the building or structure wherein the formula business is to be located exceeds two thousand (2,000) square feet. For purposes of this section, “street level frontage” shall include frontage on private parking lots and access ways where the commercial building does not abut a public street.

(6)    Except as provided in subsection (b)(5) of this section, no conditional use permit shall be issued for a use that is a formula business if such establishment exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet of net total floor area.

(c)    Applicability. This section is in addition to, and not in replace of, any other regulations set forth elsewhere in this title. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this section, and any other regulations in this title, the provisions of this section shall prevail.

(d)    Definitions. “Formula Business” means a type of commercial business establishment, retail sales or rental activity and retail sales or rental establishment, including restaurants, hotels and motels, which, along with ten (10) or more other establishments, maintains two (2) or more of the following features: (i) standardized array of merchandise or standardized menu; (ii) standardized facade; (iii) standardized décor or color scheme; (iv) uniform apparel; (v) standardized signage; or (vi) trademark or service mark; provided, however, a “formula business” shall not include an automated, standalone vending machine.

(1)    “Standardized array of merchandise” means fifty (50%) percent or more of in-stock merchandise from a single distributor bearing uniform markings.

(2)    “Trademark” means a word, phrase, symbol or design, or a combination or words, phrases, symbols or designs that identifies and distinguishes the source of the goods from one party from those of others.

(3)    “Servicemark” means a word, phrase, symbol or design, or a combination or words, phrases, symbols or designs that identifies and distinguishes the source of a service from one party from those of others.

(4)    “Decor” means the style of interior finishings, which may include but is not limited to, style of furniture, wallcoverings or permanent fixtures.

(5)    “Color scheme” means selection of colors used throughout, such as on the furnishings, permanent fixtures, and wallcoverings, or as used on the façade.

(6)    “Façade” means the face or front of a building, including awnings, looking onto a street or an open space.

 

(7)    “Uniform apparel” means standardized items of clothing including but not limited to standardized aprons, pants, shirts, smocks or dresses, hat, and pins (other than name tags) as well as standardized colors of clothing.

(8)    “Signage” means a “business sign” as defined in Section 10-2.1607(c) of this Code.

(9)    “Standardized” does not mean identical, but means “substantially the same.”

(e)    Existing formula retail establishments. Formula business establishments existing on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this section are subject to Title 10, Chapter 2, Article 13 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels) of this Code.

(f)    Burden of proof. In the event the City determines that a permit application or permit subject to this section is for a formula business, the permit applicant or holder bears the burden of proving to the City that the proposed or existing use does not constitute a formula business.

(§ 2, Ord. 798, eff. December 27, 2007, as amended by § 2, Ord. 808, eff. October 22, 2009, § 2, Ord. 819, eff. April 27, 2012)

 

Sec. 10-2.1714. Applicable regulations.
        All uses shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 24 Conditional Use Permits; Article 14 Parking and Loading Standards; Article 20 Design Review Permits; Article 16 Sign Standards; Article 12 Landscaping Standards; Article 22 Temporary Use Permits; Article 25 Minor Variances; Article 26 Variances.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 3, Ord. 798, eff. December 27, 2007)

 

LAND USE PERMITS AND ADMINISTRATION
Article 18. Application Filing and Processing
Sec. 10-2.1801. Introduction.
        The purpose of Articles 18 through 35 of this chapter is to outline procedures together with various land use permit options, in addition to providing for amendments to the General Plan, the Zoning Map, and these Zoning Regulations.

       

 

 

Table 4-1 identifies the full range of land use permit options and applicable review authority.

 

Table 4-1

THRESHOLD OF REVIEW

 

Type of Application

Director (1)

Planning Commission

City Council

Amendments (e.g., General Plan, Zoning Map, and Zoning Text

R

R (2)

F

Conditional Use Permits

R

F

A

Design Review Permits

R

F

A

Development Agreements

R

R (2)

F

Home Occupation Permits

F

A

A

Interpretations

Issuance

A

A

Lot Line Adjustments

F

A

A

Minor Conditional Use Permits

F

A

A

Minor Variances

F

A

A

Development Permits

R

F

A

Planned Development Permits

R

F

A

Sign Permits

Issuance

A

A

Specific Plans

R

R (2)

F

Temporary Use Permits

F

A

A

Tentative, Parcel, and Final Maps

R

R

F

Variances

R

F

A

Zoning Clearances

Issuance

A

A

 

Key:

R      Review and recommendation body

F      Final decision-making body

A     Appeal body

 

Notes:

1.      The Director may defer action and refer any entitlement application to the Commission for final determination.

2.      Commission recommends to Council for final determination.

3.      The Department’s design review process is an integral part of the review and recommendation process for all discretionary entitlements.

 

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

THE ENTITLEMENT REVIEW PROCESS



 

Sec. 10-2.1802. Multiple permit applications.
(a)    An applicant for a development project, which requires the filing of more than one (1) application, shall file all related applications concurrently, unless waived by the Director, and submit appropriate processing deposits/fees in compliance with Section 10-2.1806

(b)    Permit processing and environmental/design review shall be concurrent and the final decision on the project shall be made by the highest level of review authority, in compliance with Table 4-1. For example, a project requiring a conditional use permit and a variance shall be determined by the Commission, while a project requiring a planned development permit and a tentative tract or parcel map shall ultimately be determined by the Council.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1803. Pre-application conference.
(a)    A prospective applicant is strongly encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the Department before submittal of a single land use permit application.

(b)    This conference should take place before any substantial investment (e.g., land acquisition, site, engineering and construction plans) in the preparation of the proposed development project application. During the conference, the Department representatives shall inform the applicant of applicable General Plan policies, plans, and requirements as they apply to the proposed development project, review the appropriate procedures identified in these Zoning Regulations, and examine possible alternatives or modifications relating to the proposed project. Preliminary evaluation of environmental issues and potential technical studies relating to future environmental review should be identified.

(c)    Neither pre-application review nor the provision of available information and/or pertinent policies shall be construed as a recommendation for approval/disapproval by the Department representative(s). A fee may be imposed for the pre-application conference in compliance with the City’s fee resolution.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1804. Concept review.
(a)    A prospective applicant is strongly encouraged to request a “concept review” from the Department for all development projects involving multiple permit applications or complex land use issues.

(b)    The applicant should examine the advantages of utilizing a publicly-noticed concept review process in order to obtain necessary neighborhood input at the earliest possible stages of concept design and planning.

(c)    The publicly-noticed concept review process is strongly encouraged for residential projects containing four (4) or more dwelling units and nonresidential projects containing 10,000 square feet or more of total building area.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1805. Application filing.
(a)    Filing procedure. Applications for amendments, entitlements, and other matters pertaining to these Zoning Regulations shall be filed with the Department in the following manner:

(1)    The application shall be made on forms furnished by the Department.

(2)    All necessary fees and/or deposits shall be paid in compliance with the City’s fee resolution.

(3)    The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for the particular application, and may include address labels, exhibits, maps, materials, plans, reports, and other information required by the Department, to describe clearly and accurately the proposed work, its potential environmental impact, and its effect on the terrain, existing improvements, and the surrounding neighborhood.

(4)    Applicants are encouraged to contact the Department before submitting an application to verify which materials are necessary for application filing.

(5)    Acceptance of the application does not constitute an indication of approval by the City.

(b)    Eligible applicants.

(1)    Applications may only be made by the owners or lessees of property, or their agents, with the written consent of the owner; or

(2)    Persons who have contracted to purchase or lease property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary entitlements in compliance with these Zoning Regulations.

(c)    Evidence to support findings. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish the evidence in support of the findings required by the applicable sections entitled “Findings and Decision.”

(d)    Failure to support a prima facie right.

(1)    If the Director determines that the application does not support a prima facie right to the granting of the application (e.g., a request for a Zoning Map amendment or tentative map that could not be granted in the absence of a required General Plan amendment application, a request for a conditional use permit allowing a use that is not allowable in the subject zoning district), the applicant shall be so informed.

(2)    If the application is subsequently filed and the required fee(s) paid, the fact that the applicant was so informed shall be noted on the application and the signature of the applicant shall constitute verification of being informed.

(3)    Acceptance of the application does not constitute an indication of approval by the City.

(e)    Filing date. The filing date of an application shall be the date on which the Department receives the last submittal, map, plan, or other material required as a part of that application by subsection (a) above in compliance with Section 10-2.1807, and deemed complete by the Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1806. Fees.
(a)    Filing fees required.

(1)    The Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for amendments, entitlements, and other matters pertaining to these Zoning Regulations, referred to as the City’s fee resolution.

(2)    The schedule of fees may be changed only by resolution of the Council.

(3)    The City’s processing fees are cumulative. For example, if an application for a parcel map also requires a variance, both fees shall be charged.

(4)    Unusually large or complex projects may be subject to an hourly rate in addition to the basic application fees/deposit.

(5)    Processing shall not commence on an application until all required fees/deposits have been paid.

(6)    Without the application fee, or a deposit if appropriate, the application shall not be deemed complete.

(7)    The City is not required to continue processing any application unless additionally required fees/deposits (e.g., additionally required “real cost” deposits) are paid in full.

(8)    Failure to pay the applicable fees/deposits is grounds for disapproval of the application.

(9)    Conditional use permits, lot line adjustments, and other similar legal documents shall not be recorded by the City until all required fees have been paid in full.

(b)    The Council may waive any of the fees required by the City’s fee resolution for sufficient cause being demonstrated by the applicant. The determination of what shall constitute “sufficient cause” shall be at the discretion of the Council. Factors to be considered include:

(1)    The required fees are deemed disproportionate to the value of the proposed project which is subject to the application;

(2)    The subject application is deemed to be clearly erroneous or based upon a mistake of fact or law;

(3)    Substantial doubt exists as to the need for the application; or

(4)    The applicant is a non-profit organization proposing a project that would significantly benefit or enhance publicly-owned lands.

(c)    Refunds and withdrawals.

(1)    Recognizing that filing fees are utilized to cover City costs of public hearings, mailing, posting, transcripts, and staff time involved in processing applications, no refunds due to disapproval are allowed.

(2)    In the case of a withdrawal, the Director may authorize a partial refund based upon the pro-rated costs to-date and determination of the status of the application at the time of withdrawal.

(d)    School facilities fees are identified in Title 10, Chapter 8 of the Municipal Code.

(e)    Impact fees are identified in Title 10, Chapter 9 of the Municipal Code.

(f)    Specific plan fees are identified in Title 10, Chapter 10 of the Municipal Code.

(g)    In lieu parking facilities fees are identified in Title 10, Chapter 13 of the Municipal Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1807. Initial application review.
        All applications filed with the Department shall be initially processed as follows:

(a)    The Director shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as being complete and officially filed.

(1)    The applicant shall be informed in writing within thirty (30) days of submittal, either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in the letter, shall be provided.

(2)    Where the Director has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the Director is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance with Article 30 of this chapter.

(3)    When an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required additional information shall not be considered part of the time within which the determination of completeness shall occur. The time available to an applicant for submittal of additional information is limited by subsection (a)(4) of this section.

(4)    Expiration of application.

(A)   If a pending application is not able to be deemed complete within 180 days after the first filing with the Department, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn.

(B)   The Director may grant one (1) 180-day extension.

(C)   A new application, including exhibits, fees, plans, and other materials which shall be required to commence processing of a project application on the same property, may then be filed in compliance with these Zoning Regulations.

(D)   If the applicant disagrees with the determination of the Director that the application is not able to be deemed complete, the applicant may appeal the determination, in compliance with Article 30 of this chapter.

(5)    After an application has been accepted as complete, the Director may require the applicant to submit additional information needed for the environmental review of the project in compliance with Section 10-2.1808

(6)    An application shall not be deemed complete, and/or shall not be processed or approved, in the event that a condition exists on the subject property in violation of these Zoning Regulations or any entitlement granted in compliance with these Zoning Regulations, other than an application for the entitlement, if any, needed to correct the violation.

(b)    At the discretion of the Director, or where otherwise required by these Zoning Regulations, State, or Federal law, an application may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use activity.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1808. Environmental assessment.
(a)    After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed in compliance with the CEQA and the City’s environmental review procedures to determine whether:

(1)    The proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA;

(2)    The proposed project is not a project as defined by CEQA;

(3)    Whether a negative declaration may be issued; or

(4)    Whether an environmental impact report (EIR) shall be required.

(b)    These determinations and, where required, the preparation of initial studies and EIRs, shall be in compliance with the City’s environmental review procedures.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 19. Zoning Clearances
Sec. 10-2.1901. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to ensure that any construction or initiation or re-establishment of a legally-allowed use within a legally established (or a legal nonconforming) structure shall comply with these Zoning Regulations and all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1902. Application.
(a)    The following shall not take place until a nondiscretionary zoning clearance has first been issued by the Director:

(1)    Structure(s) shall not be erected (new or remodeled);

(2)    Altered, repaired, vacant, or hereafter erected structure(s) shall not be occupied; or

(3)    Change(s) in use of land or structure(s) shall not be inaugurated.

(b)    An application for the clearance shall be filed with the Department in compliance with Section 10-2.1805

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.1903. Applicability.
        A zoning clearance shall be required for:

(a)    A clearance for a structure which is to be erected or remodeled shall be filed in conjunction with the companion building permit application.

(b)    A clearance for the use of vacant non-residential land or structure(s) shall be filed at least fourteen (14) days before the intended use inauguration.

(c)    In order to provide for an expeditious development permit review/reconstruction process, which may only be available following the occurrence of a bona fide emergency (e.g., natural disaster), as determined by the Council, an Emergency Building Permit and Temporary Zoning Clearance may be issued by the appropriate City departments with adequate deposits/security required by subsection (d) of this section.

(d)    A temporary zoning clearance may be issued by the Director allowing almost “immediate” construction or use of the structures, subject to the conditions imposed on the use, provided that a deposit/security is filed with the Department before the issuance of the temporary clearance. The deposit/security shall guarantee the faithful performance and completion of all terms, conditions, and performance standards imposed on the proposed structure or use. The form of the deposit/security shall be subject to the approval of the Director. The deposit/security shall be processed for return to the depositor following a determination by the Director that all of the terms, conditions and performance standards have been met and permanent occupancy has been granted.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

 

Sec. 10-2.1904. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 20. Design Review Permits
Sec. 10-2.2001. Purpose of article.
        The City is primarily a residential community, noted for its recreational, cultural and educational facilities. Its charm and enduring attraction result from the natural beauty of its unique mountain and valley location, its climate and equally from the distinct character and traditions of community life established by the people who have chosen to live there. The maintenance and orderly growth of this environment, with emphasis upon harmonious architectural development, is essential to the survival of these values. The Commission, by City laws, is charged with the responsibility of the maintenance of architectural standards which will contribute to these ends, sustain property values and further the public welfare. The design of the buildings most characteristic of the City has been inspired chiefly by traditional types developed under similar climatic conditions. The successful adaptation of these architectural forms, with ingenious variations to meet modern needs, has resulted in an architectural design that identifies particularly the central business district of the City from other communities. It is essential to a rational and continued improvement of the community that property owners, architects and builders recognize these facts and use initiative and their best judgment and talents toward the development of buildings of character that harmonize with their surroundings and are suitable for the proposed site.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2002. Application.
(a)    An application for a design review permit shall be filed in compliance with Section 10-2.1805.

(b)    For project applications other than those for which a precise plan of design is required, the plans, elevations and other drawings and information necessary to permit adequate review by the Commission shall be prescribed by the Director and the requirements therefor be made available to each applicant by the Department.

(c)    Each project application with accompanying information shall be considered by the Commission at the first reasonably practical scheduled meeting after the application is deemed complete. The Commission may continue the matter to the next meeting or any future meeting at the discretion of the Commission.

(d)    The Commission may grant or deny the application, in whole or in part, and with such conditions, modifications and limitations as it deems appropriate to carry out the purposes and standards of this article subject to the following limitations:

(1)    The basis for approving, conditionally approving or denying a design review permit is expressly limited to physical attributes of a project as opposed to use, occupancy or considerations other than compliance with the standards set forth in Sections 10-2.2004 and 10-2.2009.

(2)    Approval, conditional approval or denial of a design review permit (including appeals filed pursuant to Article 30) shall be accompanied with findings, supported by substantial evidence, that the action is justified on the basis of the findings set forth in Sections 10-2.2004 and 10-2.2009.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 5, Ord. 827, eff. June 28, 2013)

 

 

Sec. 10-2.2003. Applicability.
(a)    The following proposed projects shall be subject to design permit review by the Commission:

(1)    All applications for building permits, other than an application for the construction of or an improvement to a single-family residential dwelling in a single-family zone; provided, however, that if the application for a building permit is for the construction of a single-story residential dwelling equal to or in excess of twenty-four (24′) feet in height, a two (2) story single-family residential dwelling or a second story addition to an existing single-family residential dwelling or single-family residential dwellings within a subdivision by the subdivider thereof, the application shall be subject to review by the Commission;

(2)    All applications for construction or reconstruction of any building or structure requiring a conditional use permit, minor variance, planned development permit or variance;

(3)    Any construction (whether or not a building permit is required) which affects the exterior elevation of any existing building or structure other than a single-story single-family residential dwelling;

(4)    A change in the use of an existing commercial or industrial building which will require additional parking; and

(5)    Any exterior alteration (whether or not a building permit is required) that modifies the structure, architectural details or visual characteristics, such as paint color, surface texture, grading and paving, of any property located within the C-1 (general/commercial), BP (business/professional commercial) and VMU (village mixed use) zones; provided, however, that the foregoing provisions of this subsection shall not apply to routine maintenance of existing structures.

(b)    Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the Director shall be empowered to exempt from design review by the Commission those projects which, in his or her opinion, are minor in nature and the review of which by the Commission would not serve to carry out the purposes of this article.

(c)    So long as the design criteria for a second residential unit set forth in Section 10-2.1709(d) are met as determined by the Director, and provided that the second residential unit does not entail two-story construction or alteration of the second story of an existing two-story principal residence, a Design Review Permit shall not be required pursuant to this Section. At the applicant’s discretion (with or without a Director’s determination), a Design Review Permit may be sought directly from the Commission, in which case, the Commission’s decision shall be final.

(d)    So long as the design criteria set forth in Section 10-2.1709(d) are met as determined by the Director, and provided that a home split (as defined in Section 10-2.3602) does not entail two-story construction or alteration of the second story of an existing two (2) story principal residence, a Design Review Permit shall not be required under Section 10-2.2003 for exterior physical alterations to the existing principal residence or expansions of up to ten (10%) percent of the existing floor area.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by §§ 3, 6, Ord. 826, eff. June 28, 2013, and § 4, Ord. 840, eff. June 13, 2014)

 

Sec. 10-2.2004. Standards.
        In reviewing project applications subject to the provisions of Section 10-2.2003, the Director, Commission and the Council shall be guided by the purposes of this article, the general standards set forth in this section and such written policies as the Commission from time to time may adopt consistent with such purposes and standards.

(a)    All projects shall be evaluated for adherence to the following design principles (illustrated in Figures 1-1 and 1-2):

 



 



 

(1)    Context - new structures should employ materials, colors, textures, styles, building mass, and scale that are compatible with the architectural character and form of surrounding buildings, as appropriate;

(2)    Continuity - buildings should be set back from the street consistent with the pattern of existing development located in the vicinity of the property;

(3)    Scale - building forms should maintain a human scale at the street and an appropriate height transition to adjacent properties; and

(4)    Architectural Design - high quality architecture should be employed to avoid monotonous building elevations and create architectural interest.

(b)    All projects shall be evaluated for compliance with applicable general plan policies, in particular, the following:

(1)    LU-2 - Preserve the following physical components of Ojai’s small town character, along with the desirable features of individual neighborhoods, and incorporate them into the design of new development wherever feasible.

(A)   Retention of a feeling of openness and preservation of views of the hills and mountains which form the Ojai Valley, defining the extent of urban development, as well as preservation of the natural character of these hillside areas.

(B)   Preservation of significant community monuments such as Libbey Park, the arcade, and the post office, as well as the visual prominence of these features within the downtown area.

(C)   An emphasis on the retention of natural landforms and the natural environment over its conversion to urban forms; and an emphasis on ease of pedestrian and bicycle access and transportation.

(D)   A generally low profile form of development.

(2)    LU-10 - Require that new developments be at an appropriate density or intensity based upon compatibility with the majority of existing surrounding uses. As part of the development review process, treat the densities and intensities outlined in the Land Use Element for specific designations as the maximum allowable, and do not approve the maximum allowable density or intensity unless the proposed project is consistent with provisions of each of the elements of the Ojai General Plan.

(A)   Require that adequate buffering and transitions be provided between dissimilar uses. Where a question of compatibility exists, require the new use to conform to the lower intensity.

(B)   As part of the development review process, new development or the alteration of existing development is to be viewed not only as a freestanding object, but also as part of a street, neighborhood, and as part of the entire community.

(C)   Require that the bulk and massing of new structures relate to the prevailing or planned scale of adjacent development. Require that setbacks from sweets relate to existing setbacks along the street, the scale of the structure, and the desired character of the development.

(D)   Require that new development respect the views of existing developments; provide view corridors which are oriented toward existing or proposed community amenities, such as parks, open spaces, and natural features.

(c)    All Affordable Housing projects developed on property with an SPL designation shall be evaluated for adherence to the following design parameters:

(1)    Building Height - Building heights allowed under the SPL zone designation shall be treated as the maximum allowable and projects shall not be approved to the maximum allowable unless all of the requirements of Sections 10-2.2004 and 10-2.2009 are met; and

(2)    Site-Specific Considerations - All Affordable Housing projects proposed on property with an SPL zone designation shall adhere to the site-specific design parameters listed in Section 10-2.704, Table 2-10.

(d)    All projects shall be evaluated for adherence to the following general standards:

(1)    All buildings shall be designed in accordance with recognized principles of architectural design and shall harmonize with or complement adjacent or nearby principal structures. Nearby structures which are obsolete or of no architectural importance may be disregarded.

 

(2)    The overbuilding of a site shall be discouraged. The provision of open areas that will permit suitable landscaping complementary to the proposed design, such as front setbacks, walls, courts, patios, planters, window boxes and the like are elements that will contribute substantial economic benefits to the owner and enhance the beauty of the neighborhood.

(3)    The Commission recognizes the requirements of contemporary, business and society and that modern methods of construction and new materials make possible many solutions of a design consistent with these standards and the purposes of this article, and the Commission does not intend to restrict ingenuity provided the design is compatible with adjacent or nearby principal structures. “False-front” designs shall be discouraged.

(4)    The choice of materials, such as stucco or masonry walls in light tones and irregular textures with roofs of tile or other coarse material, should reflect the inherent character of the building. Harsh, boxlike forms, the extensive use of glossy surfaces, bright metals or strong and glaring colors are not generally consistent with the purposes of this article and will not be favorably considered.

(5)    The design of signs and other advertising media should harmonize with and be subordinate to the building served.

(6)    The color of the building and trim is of utmost importance in relating a building to its surroundings. Proper study of the color scheme will result in improved aesthetic values that will reflect true value in the property to the owner and to the community. Soft, muted colors will receive most favorable consideration.

(7)    Buildings and structures proposed to be erected in manufacturing zones shall reflect compliance with the policies set forth in this section consistent with the limitations of the structure, with due consideration of screen planting and other similar devices to improve the appearance of the property.

(8)    The area surrounding the central business district, through the original construction of the Arcade and adjacent buildings, has established an architectural character which is known far and wide, and its perpetuation is important to the people of the City. Therefore, design guidelines have been established where special emphasis has been placed on maintaining a harmonious design in keeping with, and complementing, the existing patterns of the central business district. This does not mean the literal copying of existing styles, but rather the maintenance of appropriateness and harmony in relation to the existing buildings of traditional significance in the area. Such buildings can still be functionally planned and be appropriate to the needs of changing times, but with emphasis on the selection of materials and colors as suggested in this section. Adherence to these principles will be of major influence in determining the acceptability of a proposed design.

(9)    To the maximum extent feasible (as defined in Section 10-2.704), the profile of buildings in excess of two (2) stories shall be moderated through a combination of means including, but not limited to:

(A)   A graduated stair stepping of stories with increased setbacks from the story below;

(B)   Construction of subterranean parking so as to expose only the upper two (2) stories as viewed by the public; and

(C)   Contouring of the building site through grading techniques that effectively accomplish the same objectives.

(e)    All projects shall be evaluated for compliance with the standards of review set forth in Section 10-2.2009, in particular, the following:

(1)    Existing open space which can be viewed from State highways shall be protected to the extent feasible and consistent with the proposed land use. Existing scenic vistas shall be protected to the extent feasible and consistent with the proposed land use.

 

(2)    The following are so designed and arranged that traffic congestion is avoided, pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are provided and no adverse effect of any type on surrounding property will result: (i) buildings, structures and improvements; (ii) vehicular ingress, egress and internal circulation; (iii) setbacks; (iv) height of buildings; (v) location of services; (vi) walls and fences; and (vii) landscaping.

(f)    Architectural features and rooflines in residential zones with height in excess of twenty-five (25′) feet, but no more than thirty (30′) feet in height, may be approved provided that such features are consistent with the context of the neighborhood, do not have an unreasonable deleterious impact on neighboring properties, comply with Section 10-2.405 regarding solar access, do not have a deleterious impact on viewsheds and are otherwise consistent with the requirements of this section. This does not include habitable space.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 6, Ord. 827, eff. June 28, 2013, and § 5, Ord. 840, eff. June 13, 2014)

 

Sec. 10-2.2005. Reference to design guidelines/policies.
(a)    The Director shall refer to any design guidelines/policies that have been adopted by the Council/Commission in order to provide guidance to applicants seeking to comply with the requirements of this article. The Council/Commission may amend the design guidelines/policies whenever deemed appropriate in order to carry out the purpose of this article. Copies of any adopted design guidelines/policies shall be available to the public at the Department.

(b)    The adopted design guidelines are to be used by property owners, developers, architects, designers and landscape architects in the planning and design of projects in the City. The design guidelines communicate the desired qualities and characteristics of development and are intended to promote quality design that is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood and what is desired to help implement the General Plan. The design guidelines/policies are used by City staff, the Commission and the Council as adopted criteria for the review of development proposals subject to design review.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2006. Public structures and complete streets.
(a)    Public structures. No public building or structure, fountain, monument, wall, arch or other structure shall be erected, placed on or upon or be removed from, relocated or altered on or upon any public land or be allowed to extend over or upon any street, avenue, square, park, recreation ground or other public property unless plans for the same and the location thereof shall first have been approved by the Commission.

(b)    Complete streets. Every project subject to design review under this article shall affirmatively further the principles and practices of complete streets, where feasible (as defined in Section 10-2.704). As used herein, the term “complete streets” means the accommodation of all travelers, particularly public transit users, bicyclists, pedestrians (including individuals of all ages and individuals with mobility, sensory, neurological, or hidden disabilities), and motorists, to enable all travelers to use the roadway safely and efficiently.

(c)    Design guidelines. The Commission shall devise design guidelines relating to the design, planning, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, and maintenance of public rights-of-way in furtherance of the principles and practices of complete streets. In the absence of locally adopted guidelines, the Commission shall employ the following resources to guide its design review: “Complete Streets Local Policy Workbook” (published by Smart Growth America and National Complete Streets Coalition, in Association with the Walkable and Livable Communities Institute, August 2012); and “Complete Streets Best Policy and Implementation Practices” (published by American Planning Association Planning Advisory Service, 2010).



 



 

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 3, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.2007. Precise plans—When required.
        Unless the Director or the Commission has determined that a precise plan of design is not required, the following project applications shall be accompanied by a precise plan of design:

(a)    Any application for a building permit to commence the new construction of the following:

(1)    Any building other than a single-family residential dwelling in a single-family zone; provided, however, that if the proposed project consists of a two (2) story single-family residential dwelling or a second story addition to an existing single-family residential dwelling or the construction of single-family residential dwellings within a subdivision by the subdivider thereof, then, in that event, such application shall require a precise plan of design; and

(2)    A structure or building for which a conditional use permit, minor variance, planned development permit or variance is required.

(b)    Any application for a building permit to remodel or reconstruct more than fifty (50%) percent of the floor area of any existing building other than a single-family residential dwelling, except as provided in subsection (a)(1) hereinabove.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2008. Precise plans—Contents.
        Where a precise plan of design is required, an applicant shall submit sufficient copies thereof, as determined by the Department, for review by the Commission. The Council, by resolution, may establish fees for the review of precise plans in addition to any other fees provided in connection with the project application. The precise plan shall be drawn to scale appropriate for display purposes and shall indicate clearly and with full dimensioning the following information:

(a)    The lot dimensions;

(b)    All buildings and structures, including the location, size, height, color, architectural treatment and proposed use, the trash enclosure areas, mechanical equipment, storage yards and the like, as well as cross-section elevations indicating the relationship between the proposed buildings and structures and the surrounding grades, adjacent lots and streets and the proposed drainage patterns for the site;

(c)    A site plan that includes the ground elevations, dimensions, quantity, location and extent of any proposed grading and cross-section views through the property to be graded demonstrating the relationship of the proposed cut and fill to the natural grade and the proposed pattern for the site;

(d)    The yards and spaces between buildings;

(e)    The walls and fences, including the location, height and materials;

(f)    The off-street parking, including the location, the number of parking spaces and/or the dimensions of the parking area and internal circulation patterns;

(g)    The access, including pedestrian, vehicular, service and plans of ingress and egress;

(h)    The signs, including the location, size, height, color, intensity of lighting and the like, as provided for in Article 16 of this chapter;

(i)     The loading, including the location, dimensions, number of parking spaces and internal circulation;

(j)     The site lighting, including the location, general type and shielding devices;

(k)    The landscaping and irrigation plan in accordance with Article 12 of this chapter, including the location, container size, common and botanical names, irrigation lines, sprinkler head sizes and locations and all existing trees and the approximate size and species of those to be retained;

(l)     The street widths, dedications and improvements, including the curbs, gutters and sidewalks;

(m)   The “will serve” letters from respective agencies certifying the availability of utilities;

(n)    The location and description of existing and proposed utility services on and adjacent to the development, including water and sewer mains, drainage and power and telephone lines;

 

(o)    The location and dimensions of any utility, access or general-purpose easements;

(p)    The location and dimensions of ingress and egress points providing direct access from or to the site from a public road or State highway;

(q)    The location and height, including cross-section elevations, of any structure on the site which may affect State highway lines of sight or safety or which may affect views from adjacent properties and from State highways;

(r)    For all uses other than single-family dwellings and uses which, pursuant to the manual titled Trip Generation (Institute of Transportation Engineers), produce less than fifty (50) average daily trips per day and which have direct access to a State highway, as shown on the circulation element of the Ojai General Plan or any applicable and adopted specific plan, the following shall be required: a traffic analysis performed by a registered professional engineer indicating the anticipated or projected average daily trip generation (ADT) and peak hourly traffic resulting from the proposed use; proposed vehicle stacking areas; sight-distances from the access points; distances from proposed access points to existing intersections and driveways within 500 feet; the directional distribution of site-generated trips; estimated trip lengths; distribution of in-bound and out-bound trips; assignment of site-generated trips to competing routes (State highways, collectors, local streets); turning movements at driveways intersecting with the abutting State highway; identification of congestion and turning movement conflict; need for traffic signalization or control; need for acceleration/deceleration lanes and/or left- and right-turn lanes at key intersections, the need, if any, for other traffic mitigation measures including, but not limited to, construction of improvements, access control techniques and transportation system management techniques; and a parking analysis indicating the required number of parking spaces per square foot or other relevant unit of measurement, for uses or a mix of uses not otherwise listed in Section 10-2.1405 of these Zoning Regulations.

        At the option of the applicant for development approval, the traffic analysis may be undertaken and performed by a registered professional engineer retained by the applicant subject to approval by the City, or, by the City, but with the cost thereof borne by the applicant. In either case, the traffic analysis shall be based, to the maximum extent possible, upon data and information from public (City, County and State) sources and may rely, to the extent practicable, on similar studies performed by the City or other applicants for development projects abutting the same State highway providing the primary access to the subject development. The traffic analysis may be performed as part of a required project-specific environmental review, but, if so, must meet all applicable CEQA requirements as well as the requirements of this article; and

(s)    Such other data as may be required to permit the findings set forth in this article.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2009. Findings and decision.
        Within the time that is provided in Article 32 of this chapter for the review of project applications, the Commission shall approve, if the conditions deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare are met, or disapprove, if the requirements of the zoning or other regulations of the Municipal Code are not met, the design review permit. In approving the design review permit, the Commission shall find that:

(a)    All basic provisions of these Zoning Regulations are complied with;

(b)    The following are so designed and arranged that traffic congestion is avoided, pedestrian and vehicular safety and welfare are provided and no adverse effect of any type on surrounding property will result:

(1)    Buildings, structures and improvements,

(2)    Vehicular ingress, egress and internal circulation,

(3)    Setbacks,

(4)    Height of buildings,

(5)    Location of services,

(6)    Walls and fences, and

(7)    Landscaping;

(c)    The proposed lighting is so arranged as to be directed away from adjoining properties;

(d)    The proposed signs shall not, by size, location, color or lighting, interfere with traffic, limit visibility or be so directed as to adversely affect surrounding properties or be in conflict with any provision of these Zoning Regulations; and

(e)    In approving a design review permit for a development with direct access to a State highway as shown on the circulation element of the Ojai General Plan or any applicable and adopted specific plan, the Commission shall make the following supplemental findings:

(1)    That existing open space which can be viewed from State highways is protected to the extent feasible and consistent with the proposed land use,

(2)    That existing scenic vistas are protected to the extent feasible and consistent with the proposed land use,

(3)    That the performance standards of this article are complied with,

(4)    That the site design and development of the proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable and adopted specific plan,

(5)    That the proposed development will not cause existing State highways which are functioning at an acceptable level of service to function below an acceptable service level,

(6)    That the proposed development will not worsen traffic conditions on existing State highways which are currently functioning below an acceptable service level,

(7)    That the proposed development will not cause future State highways to function below an acceptable service level, and

(8)    That, if the findings set out in subsections (5) through (7) above cannot be made, the applicant shall submit a plan for mitigation including, but not necessarily limited to, a project construction schedule and funding commitment for specific road improvements which would ensure that the finding could be made within a reasonable period of time.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2010. Design review permit—Dates and signatures.
        The approved design review permit, with any conditions shown thereon or attached thereto, shall be dated and signed by the Director. One (1) copy of such approved design review permit and conditions shall be promptly mailed to the applicant.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2011. Design review permit—Conformity—Determinations of the Building Official.
        Before a building permit may be issued for any building or structure requiring Commission approval, the Building Official shall make a determination that the proposed building or structure is in conformity with the plans, conditions and other provisions of such design review permit.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2012. Modification of design review permit.
        Substantial revisions to an approved design review permit required by the provisions of this article shall be made in exactly the same manner as required by the provisions of this article for its original approval. Minor revisions to an approved design review permit or other plan may be approved by the Director. The determination of whether revisions to an approved design review permit are substantial or minor in nature shall be made by the Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2013. Compliance required.
        No person shall violate or fail to comply with any approved design review permit or any conditions or provisions thereof, nor shall a building permit be issued for any structure which would violate or fail to comply with any approved design review permit for the parcel or parcels on which such structure is to be located.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2014. Approvals and conditions—Compliance.
        No final inspection shall be performed, nor shall any occupancy permit be issued, unless the completed work complies with all plans approved and conditions of the design review permit required by the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2015. Design review permit expiration.
(a)    Within one (1) year of design review permit approval, the permit shall be exercised in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter or the permit shall be deemed void, unless such approval is extended by the Commission for good cause either before or after the expiration of such time limit.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2016. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; Article 31, Changes to an Approved Project; Article 29, Public Hearings; Article 34, Revocations and Modifications; and Article 32, Time Limits and Extensions.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 21. Home Occupation Permits
Sec. 10-2.2101. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to allow for the conduct of home occupations which are deemed incidental to and compatible with surrounding residential uses. A home occupation represents a legal commercial enterprise conducted by an occupant of the dwelling.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2102. Application.
        The application shall be filed with the Department in compliance with Section 10-2.1805. A home occupation permit may be approved, modified, conditioned, or disapproved by the Director. The Director may defer action and refer the application to the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2103. Operating standards.
        Home occupations shall comply with all of the following operating standards:

(a)    The home occupation shall be incidental and secondary to and compatible with surrounding residential uses.

(b)    Only the occupant(s) of the dwelling may be engaged in the home occupation.

(c)    The home occupation shall not alter the appearance of the dwelling.

(d)    A home occupation shall not be initiated until a current business license is obtained in compliance with Title 6, Chapter 1 of the Municipal Code.

(e)    Displays, distribution, sale, or storage of merchandise on the premises, or advertising signs on or off the premises shall not be allowed.

(f)    Signs, other than the address and name of the resident, shall not be allowed.

(g)    Advertising (e.g., telephone directory) which identifies the home occupation by street address shall not be allowed;

(h)    The home occupation shall be confined completely to one (1) room located within the dwelling. A portion(s) of any carport or other accessory structure shall not be used for home occupation purposes, with the exception that garage area in excess of the requirements of these Zoning Regulations may be used for this purpose.

(i)     Only one (1) vehicle no larger than a one (1) ton truck may be used by the occupant(s) directly or indirectly in connection with a home occupation.

(j)     Use of commercial vehicles, larger than two (2) ton capacity, for delivery of materials to or from the premises shall not be allowed.

(k)    Encroachments into any required parking, setback, or open space areas shall not be allowed. Home occupation activities may not occur out of doors.

(l)     Use of mechanical equipment, unless determined to be similar to a normal household or hobby use, shall not be allowed.

(m)   The use shall not create or cause dust, electrical interference, fumes, gas, glare, light, noise, odor, smoke, toxic/hazardous materials, or vibration that can or may be considered a hazard or nuisance.

(n)    Negative impacts that may be felt, heard, or otherwise sensed on adjoining parcels or public rights-of-way shall not be allowed.

(o)    Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the dwelling. Utility consumption shall not exceed typical residential usage.

(p)    Creation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or parking demand in excess of that customarily associated with the residential zoning district in which it is be located shall not be allowed.

(q)    A home occupation permit shall not be transferable.

(r)    Only one (1) home occupation may be allowed in any dwelling.

(s)    For rental property, the property owner’s written authorization for the proposed use shall be obtained and submitted with the application for a home occupation permit.

(t)     Any special condition(s) established by the Director and made part of the record of the home occupation permit, as deemed necessary to carry out the purpose of this article.

(u)    All pre-existing home occupations shall conform with all applicable requirements of these Zoning Regulations before or upon renewal of the annual business license.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2104. Prohibited home occupations.
        The following list presents example commercial uses that are not incidental to or compatible with residential activities, are suitable only in nonresidential zoning districts, and are therefore prohibited:

(a)    Adult business;

(b)    Businesses which entail the harboring, training, breeding, raising, or grooming of dogs, cats, or other animals on the premises;

(c)    Carpentry and cabinet making;

(d)    Dance club/night club;

(e)    Fortune telling (Psychic);

(f)    Massage parlor;

(g)    Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories;

(h)    Mini-storage;

(i)     Plant nursery;

(j)     Vehicle repair (body or mechanical), upholstery, automobile detailing (e.g., washing, waxing) and painting. (This does not prohibit “mobile” minor repair or detailing at the customer’s location.);

(k)    Visitor serving accommodations;

(l)     Welding and machining;

(m)   Other uses determined by the Director not to be incidental to or compatible with residential activities.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2105. Decision.
        The Director may approve a home occupation permit that would be operated in compliance with Section 10-2.2103, or the Director may defer action and refer the application to the Commission for final action.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2106. Revocation.
        The Director may revoke or modify a home occupation permit in compliance with Article 34 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2107. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; Section 10-2.2103, Operating Standards; and Article 34, Revocation and Modification.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 22. Temporary Use Permits
Sec. 10-2.2201. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to allow for short-term activities that would be compatible with adjacent and surrounding uses when in compliance with this article.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2202. Allowable uses.
        The following temporary uses are allowed, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit within any nonresidential (e.g., commercial or manufacturing) zoning district. This article shall not apply to public park or public school sites, or other public property:

(a)    Christmas tree sale lots and Halloween pumpkin sales facilities; however, a permit shall not be required when the sales are in conjunction with a legally established commercial business, holding a valid business license, provided the activity may only be held from December 1 through December 31 of the same year for Christmas tree sales, and from October 1 through November 1 of the same year for Halloween pumpkin sales;

(b)    Arts and crafts exhibits, carnivals, circuses, concerts, fairs, farmers’ markets, festivals, outdoor entertainment/sporting events, rodeos, and rummage sales. Sponsorship shall be limited to educational, fraternal, religious, or service organizations directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts, or to tax-exempt organizations in compliance with Section 501(c) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code. The time period for the event shall not exceed five (5) consecutive days within any ninety (90) day period. No more than three (3) events shall be allowed at any one (1) time within the City;

(c)    Car washes, limited to one (1) event each month for each sponsoring organization, not exceeding one (1) day in length. Sponsorship shall be limited to educational, fraternal, religious, or service organizations directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts, or to tax exempt organizations in compliance with Section 501(c) of the Federal Internal Revenue Code;

(d)    Emergency public health and safety needs/land use activities;

(e)    Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Director, are compatible with the subject zoning district and surrounding land uses.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2203. Application.
        The application shall be filed with the Department in compliance with Section 10-2.1805. A temporary use permit may be approved, modified, conditioned, or disapproved by the Director. The Director may defer action and refer the application to the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2204. Findings and decision.
        The Director shall review all applications and shall record the decision in writing with the findings on which the decision is based. The temporary use permit application shall be approved, with or without conditions, only if all of the following findings are made:

(a)    The design and layout of the proposed temporary use would:

(1)    Be consistent with the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan and the development and design standards/guidelines of the subject zoning district;

(2)    Not interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future developments, and would not create traffic or pedestrian hazards; and

(3)    Provide a desirable environment for its occupants and visiting public as well as its neighbors through good and proper aesthetic use of materials, texture, and color, and would be aesthetically appealing and retain an appropriate level of maintenance.

(b)    The proposed temporary use would not:

(1)    Be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the immediate vicinity; or

(2)    Substantially depreciate property values in the immediate vicinity or interfere with the use or enjoyment of property in the surrounding neighborhood.

(c)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of CEQA and the City’s environmental review procedures.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2205. Conditions of approval.
        In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the Director shall impose conditions which are deemed reasonable and essential to ensure that the permit would be in full compliance with the findings required by Section 10-2.2204. These conditions may address any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary event, or use, and may include the following:

(a)    Provision for adequate temporary pedestrian and vehicular circulation, parking facilities (including vehicular ingress and egress), and public transportation, if applicable;

(b)    Regulation of nuisance factors, including prevention of glare or direct illumination on adjacent parcels, dirt, dust, gases, heat, noise, odors, smoke, trash, and vibration;

(c)    Regulation of temporary structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;

(d)    Provision for sanitary and medical facilities, as appropriate;

(e)    Provision for solid, hazardous, and toxic waste collection, recycling, and/or disposal;

(f)    Provision for police/security and safety measures, as appropriate;

(g)    Regulation of signs;

(h)    Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use; (i) Submission of a performance bond or other security measures, satisfactory to the Director, to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used would be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property would be restored to its former condition, or better as determined by the Director;

(j)     A requirement that the approval of the requested temporary use permit is contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of the Municipal Code and the successful granting of any/all required permits from any other department or governing agency; and

(k)    Other conditions which would ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner, and in full compliance with the purpose of this article.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2206. Condition of site following temporary use.
        Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use, and shall continue to be used in compliance with these Zoning Regulations.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2207. Revocation.
        The Director may revoke or modify a temporary use permit in compliance with Article 34 of this chapter with only a twenty-four (24) hour notice.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2208. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; and Article 34, Revocations and Modifications.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 23. Planned Development Permits
Sec. 10-2.2301. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to provide a means for encouraging creative and innovative development projects and to afford maximum flexibility in site planning/property development, while protecting the integrity and character of the City and ensuring consistency with the General Plan. At the time of application submittal, a review of the configuration, design, location and effect of the proposed use shall be conducted by comparing the use to established development/site standards. This review shall determine whether the permit should be approved by weighing the public need for, and the benefit(s) to be derived from, the proposed use against the potential negative effects it may cause.

(a)    This article is intended to promote and encourage flexibility in the City’s residential, commercial, and/or industrial zoning districts relating to property development, design, and open space areas, while protecting the public convenience, health, integrity, interest, safety, welfare, and character of the City, and ensuring consistency with the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

(b)    Planned development permits are encouraged and expected to produce a comprehensive development of greater quality and imaginative land planning concepts than that normally resulting from more traditional development.

(c)    Variety of land uses.

(1)    In compliance with the General Plan designation(s) for the subject site(s), the planned development permit may include an appropriate combination of different dwelling types and a variety of land uses which complement each other and harmonize with the existing and proposed land uses in the surrounding neighborhood.

(2)    The provisions are intended to encourage a diversity of open space relationships and structure heights in planned groups while ensuring substantial compliance with the purpose and spirit of these Zoning Regulations.

(d)    Project review shall determine whether the permit should be approved by weighing the public need for, and the benefit(s) to be derived from, the proposed development against the potential negative effect(s) it may cause.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2302. Pre-application conference.
        A pre-application conference is strongly encouraged, and should be conducted in compliance with Section 10-2.1803.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2303. Application.
(a)    The application for a planned development permit shall:

(1)    Be filed at the discretion of the applicant;

(2)    Be considered by the Commission;

(3)    Be required for all development proposals incorporating flexibility in the City’s residential, commercial, and/or industrial zoning districts relating to property development, design, and open space areas;

(4)    Not authorize a land use activity that is not allowed in the respective zoning district;

(5)    Ensure strict compliance with the purpose of the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan shall be required;

(6)    Be applied to areas under single or unified ownership or control;

(7)    Not be applied to any parcel having a net area of less than five (5) acres. This limitation shall not apply to parcels within the VMU Zoning District. Furthermore, the Commission may modify this requirement if it determines that the proposed development project is suitable for development as a single unit. Factors to be considered include the location of the development with respect to public streets and public open spaces;

(8)    Allow the modification of specified development standards.

(A)   May adjust or modify, where necessary and justifiable, all applicable development standards (e.g., building envelope, parking, street layout) identified in these Zoning Regulations, with the exception of an increase in the applicable density/intensity provisions.

(B)   Developments proposing increased density and/or intensity standards may only be approved by the Council in compliance Article 9 of this chapter.

(C)   Developments in the VMU Zoning District proposing increased lot coverage over fifty (50%) percent or floor area ratio over 0.50 may only be approved by the City Council in compliance with Article 5.

(b)    The application for a planned development permit shall be filed in compliance with Section 10-2.1805

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 10, Ord. No. 826, eff. June 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.2304. Applicability.
        The provisions of this article apply to all property identified in the General Plan with one of the following designations:

(a)    Special Housing Overlay (SPL) for projects with densities in excess of twenty (20) dwelling units per acre;

(b)    Manufacturing Planned Development (MPD);

(c)    Village Mixed-Use (VMU) for projects in excess of the Basic Allowance set forth in Table 2-5 of Section 10-2.504

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 11, Ord. No. 826, eff. June 28, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-2.2305. Review.
        Each application shall be analyzed to ensure that it is consistent with the purpose of this article and the City’s CEQA guidelines. To ensure effective implementation of General Plan policies relating to design, each application shall be reviewed in compliance with Article 20 of this chapter before determination by the Commission. Additionally, any application which may involve grading shall require the submittal of preliminary grading plans for review and recommendation by the City Engineer and approval by Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2306. Hearings and notice.
        Upon receipt in proper form of a planned development permit application and compliance with the City’s CEQA guidelines, a hearing shall be set and notice of the hearing given in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter for all applications subject to Commission review.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2307. Findings and decision.
        Following a hearing, the Commission shall record the decision in writing and shall recite the findings upon which the decision is based. The Commission may approve a planned development permit in whole or in part, and shall impose specific development conditions. These conditions shall relate to both on- and off-site improvements that are necessary to accommodate flexibility in site planning/property development, mitigate project-related adverse effects, and to carry out the purpose and requirements of the respective zoning district. The Commission may approve a planned development permit only if all of the following findings are made:

(a)    The proposed development is:

(1)    Allowed within the respective zoning district;

(2)    Generally in compliance with all of the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations relating to both on- and off-site improvements that are necessary to accommodate flexibility in site planning and property development and to carry out the purpose and requirements of the respective zoning district, including prescribed development standards and applicable design guidelines; and

(3)    Consistent with the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan.

(b)    The proposed project would produce a comprehensive development of stable and desirable character and superior quality (e.g., appropriate variety of structure placement and orientation opportunities, appropriate mix of structure sizes, high quality architectural design, increased amounts of landscaping and open space, improved solutions to the design and placement of parking facilities) than which might otherwise occur from more traditional development applications.

(c)    The design, location, shape, size, operating characteristics, and the provision of public and emergency vehicle access and public services and utilities (e.g., drainage, fire protection, sewers, water), would ensure that the proposed development would not endanger, jeopardize, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and the respective zoning district.

(d)    The design, location, and proposed uses would be compatible with the character of existing development in the surrounding neighborhood.

(e)    The subject site is:

(1)    Physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed;

(2)    Adequate in shape and size to accommodate the use and all fences and walls, landscaping, loading, parking, yards, and other features required by these Zoning Regulations; and

(3)    Served by streets adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic expected to be generated by the proposed development, and not result in any substantial traffic congestion on surrounding streets.

(f)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of CEQA and the City’s environmental review procedures.

(g)    There would be no potential significant negative effects upon environmental quality and natural resources that would not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a statement of overriding considerations is adopted by the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2308. Planned development permit expiration.
(a)    Within twelve (12) months of planned development permit approval, the permit shall be exercised in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter or the permit shall be deemed void.

(b)    If the application for the planned development permit also involves the approval of a tentative map, the permit shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2309. Time extension.
        The Commission may, upon an application being filed before expiration and for good cause, grant a one (1) time extension not to exceed 180 days, in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2310. Use of property before final decision.
        No permit shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a planned development permit until, and unless, the same shall have become final, in compliance with Section 10-2.2910.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2311. Modification of planned development permits.
        An approved planned development permit may be modified in compliance with Section 10-2.1805. Minor modifications to an approved permit may be approved by the Director, in compliance with Article 31 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2312. Performance guarantee.
        The development project’s applicant/owner may be required to provide adequate performance security for the faithful performance of any/all conditions of approval imposed by the review authority.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2313. Revocation.
        The Commission may revoke or modify a planned development permit in compliance with Article 34 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2314. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; Article 31, Changes to an Approved Project; Article 29, Public Hearings; Article 34, Revocations and Modifications; and Article 32, Time Limits and Extensions.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 24. Conditional Use Permits
Sec. 10-2.2401. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to allow for activities and uses requiring a conditional use permit and which are so unique that their effect on the surrounding environment cannot be determined before being proposed for a particular location. At the time of application, a review of the configuration, design, location and potential effect of the proposed activity or use shall be conducted by comparing it to established development and site standards. This review shall determine whether the proposed use should be allowed by weighing the public need for and the benefit to be derived from the proposed use, against the potential negative effects it may cause.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2402. Application.
        An application for a conditional use permit shall be filed in compliance with Section 10-2.1805.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2403. Applicability.
(a)    The land use activities listed in Articles 2 through 7 of this chapter may be allowable subject to the approval of a conditional use permit.

(b)    The following land use activities may be allowable with the approval of a minor conditional use permit:

(1)    A temporary real estate office may be established within the area of an approved development project solely for the first sale of homes. An application for a temporary real estate office may be approved for a maximum time period of two (2) years from the date of approval;

(2)    A temporary on- and off-site contractors’ construction yard (e.g., containers, trailers, offices) only in conjunction with an approved development project (good only for the length of construction of the project);

(3)    A temporary office (manufactured/mobile units) may be approved for a maximum time period of twelve (12) months from the date of approval, as an accessory use or as the first phase of a development project;

(4)    Open-air produce stands, only in conjunction with an on-site/on-going agricultural operation;

(5)    Outdoor dining facilities; and

(6)    Reverse vending machines for recycling purposes.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2404. Review.
(a)    Each application shall be analyzed to ensure that it is consistent with the purpose of this article and the City’s CEQA guidelines. To ensure effective implementation of General Plan policies relating to design, each application shall be reviewed in compliance with Article 20 of this chapter before determination by the applicable review authority. Additionally, any application which may involve grading shall require the submittal of preliminary grading plans for review and recommendation by the City Engineer and approval by the applicable review authority.

(b)    Applicable review authority.

(1)    Conditional use permits. The Commission shall be the review authority for conditional use permits; and

(2)    Minor conditional use permits. The Director shall be the review authority for minor conditional use permits. The Director may defer action and refer the application to the Commission for final determination.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2405. Hearings and notice.
        Upon receipt in proper form of a conditional use permit application and compliance with the City’s CEQA guidelines, a public hearing shall be set and notice of the hearing given in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2406. Findings and decision.
        Following a hearing, the applicable review authority shall record the decision in writing and shall recite the findings upon which the decision is based. The review authority may approve a conditional use permit (or minor conditional use permit) application in whole or in part, with conditions, only if all of the following findings are made:

(a)    The proposed use is conditionally allowed within, and would not impair the integrity and character of, the subject zoning district and complies with all of the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations;

(b)    The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan;

(c)    The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed use are compatible with the existing and future land uses and would not create significant noise, traffic, or other conditions or situations that may be objectionable or detrimental to other allowed uses operating nearby or adverse to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City;

(d)    The subject site is physically suitable for the type and density and intensity of use being proposed;

(e)    There are adequate provisions for public access, water, sanitation, and public utilities and services to ensure that the proposed use would not be detrimental to public health and safety;

(f)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of CEQA and the City’s environmental review procedures; and

(g)    There would be no potential significant negative effects upon environmental quality and natural resources that would not be properly mitigated and monitored, unless a statement of overriding considerations is adopted by the applicable review authority.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2407. Use of property before final decision.
        No permit shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a conditional use permit until and unless the same shall have become final in compliance with Section 10-2.2910.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2408. Conditional use permit expiration.
(a)    Within 180 days of conditional use permit approval, the permit shall be exercised in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter or the permit shall be deemed void.

(b)    If the application for the conditional use permit also involves the approval of a tentative map, the phasing shall be consistent with the tentative map and the permit shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map.

(c)    The Commission may impose a term for which a conditional use permit shall be valid. Upon the expiration of such term, unless an extension has been granted by the Commission, in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter, the permit shall be deemed void.

(d)    Discontinuance of the use permitted by the conditional use permit for a period of six (6) months shall cause the permit to be deemed void.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2409. Time extension.
        The applicable review authority may, upon an application being filed before expiration and for good cause, grant one (1) time extension not to exceed 180 days, in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2410. Modification of a conditional use permit.
        An approved conditional use permit may be modified in compliance with Article 31 of this chapter. Minor modifications to an approved permit may be approved by the Director, in compliance with Article 31 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2411. Periodic review.
        The applicant and/or owner may be required to provide appropriate funds to reimburse the City for the periodic review of the permit to ensure proper compliance with these Zoning Regulations and any developmental and operational conditions imposed by the applicable review authority.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2412. Performance guarantee.
        The applicant and/or owner may be required to provide adequate performance security for the faithful performance of any/all conditions of approval imposed by the applicable review authority.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2413. Conditional use permit to run with the land.
        A conditional use permit granted in compliance with the provisions of this article shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site, business, service, use, or structure which was the subject of the permit application. The new owner/operator shall file for and receive a zoning clearance, and agree in writing to all applicable conditions and operating standards before reuse/reopening under the new ownership. All conditional use permits shall be recorded with the office of the County’s Recorder.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2414. Revocation.
        The applicable review authority may revoke or modify a conditional use permit in compliance with Article 34 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2415. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; Article 31, Changes to an Approved Project; Article 29, Public Hearings; Article 34, Revocations and Modifications; and Article 32, Time Limits and Extensions.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 25. Minor Variances
Sec. 10-2.2501. Purpose of article.
(a)    The purpose of this article is to ensure that minor variances are only granted when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, the strict application of these Zoning Regulations denies the property of privileges enjoyed by other property located nearby and in an identical zoning district and conditions are applied which would ensure that the minor variance shall not constitute a granting of special privilege(s) inconsistent with the limitations upon other property in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located. A minor variance may be granted to secure an appropriate improvement to a parcel, to prevent unreasonable hardship (not including financial hardship), or to promote the uniformity of improvements.

(b)    The authority to grant minor variances does not extend to use regulations; flexibility in use regulations is provided in Article 24 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2502. Application.
        An application for a minor variance shall be filed in compliance with Section 10-2.1805.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2503. Applicability.
(a)    The Director may grant a minor variance application, governing only the development standards identified in Table 4-2.

 

Table 4-2

ALLOWABLE MINOR VARIANCES

 

Types of Minor Variances Allowed

Maximum Adjustment

1.  Distance. A decrease in the minimum allowed distances between detached accessory structures and main structures.

15 percent

2.  Fence heights. An increase in the maximum allowable height of a fence, hedge, or wall, in compliance with § 10-2.805 (Fences, Hedges, Walls, and Screening)

20 percent

3.  Parcel area. A decrease in the minimum required parcel area.

10 percent

4.  Parcel coverage. An increase in the maximum allowable parcel coverage.

15 percent

5.  Parcel width. A decrease in the minimum required parcel depth/width, only when the total parcel area requirements are met.

10 percent

6. Parking

 

A decrease in the number of required parking spaces, only when the total required number is 10 spaces or more. (The Director may waive only one space in cases where less than 10 spaces are required, but at least two spaces are provided.)

10 percent

A decrease in the minimum parking lot standards (e.g., aisle, driveway, and space widths).

10 percent

7.  Setback areas

 

R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zoning Districts. A decrease in the required setback/yard areas (e.g., front, rear, and side).

10 percent

All other zoning districts. A decrease in the required setback/yard areas (e.g., front, rear, and side).

20 percent

8.  Sign area. An increase in the maximum allowable sign area.

10 percent

9.  Sign height. An increase in the maximum allowed sign height.

10 percent

10.  Structure heights. An increase in the maximum allowable structure height, except for a second story addition in a residential zoning district which shall require the approval of a Variance.

10 percent

11.  Others. The Director shall also be allowed to vary other standards including minor operational/ performance standards relating to dust, glare, hours of operation, landscaping, light, noise.

15 percent

 

(b)    Any minor variance request which exceeds the prescribed limitations identified in this article shall require the filing of a variance application in compliance with Article 26 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2504. Review.
        Each application shall be analyzed to ensure that it is consistent with the purpose of this article and the City’s CEQA guidelines. Additionally, any application which may involve grading shall require the submittal of preliminary grading plans for review and recommendation by the City Engineer and approval by the Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2505. Hearings and notice.
        A public hearing shall not be required for a Director’s decision on a minor variance. However, a notice of the Director’s pending decision on a minor variance shall be mailed at least five (5) days before the Director’s scheduled decision to the adjoining property owner(s) likely to be most affected by the application, as determined by the Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2506. Findings and decision.
        The Director shall record the decision in writing and shall recite the findings upon which the decision is based, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65906 or as this section may be amended/replaced from time to time). The Director may defer action and refer the application to the Commission. The Director may approve an application in whole or in part, with conditions, only if all of the following findings are made:

(a)    There are special circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape, size, surroundings, or topography so that the strict application of these Zoning Regulations denies the property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning district classification;

(b)    Granting the minor variance:

(1)    Is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and zoning district and unavailable to the property for which the minor variance is sought;

(2)    Would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located;

(3)    Does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other property in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located;

(4)    Does not allow a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject parcel; and

(5)    Would not be inconsistent with the General Plan; and

(c)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of CEQA and the City’s environmental review procedures.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2507. Precedents.
        Each application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis and the granting of a prior minor variance is not admissible evidence for the granting of a new minor variance.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2508. Burden of proof.
        The burden of proof to establish the evidence in support of the findings as required by Section 10-2.2506 is the responsibility of the applicant.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2509. Minor variance expiration.
(a)    Within 180 days of minor variance approval, the variance shall be exercised in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter or the variance shall be deemed void.

(b)    If the application for the minor variance also involves the approval of a tentative map, the minor variance shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2510. Time extension.
        The Director may, upon an application being filed before expiration and for good cause, grant a one (1) time extension not to exceed 180 days, in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2511. Use of property before final decision.
        No permit shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a minor variance until and unless the same shall have become final in compliance with Section 10-2.2910.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2512. Performance guarantee.
        The applicant and/or owner may be required to provide adequate performance security for the faithful performance of any/all conditions of approval imposed by the Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2513. Revocation.
        The Director may revoke or modify a minor variance in compliance with Article 34 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2514. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; Article 31, Changes to an Approved Project; Article 29, Public Hearings; Article 34, Revocations and Modifications; and Article 32, Time Limits and Extensions.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 26. Variances
Sec. 10-2.2601. Purpose of article.
(a)    The purpose of this article is to ensure that variances are only granted when, because of special or unique circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape, size, surroundings or topography, the strict application of these Zoning Regulations denies the property of privileges enjoyed by other property located nearby and in an identical zoning district and conditions are applied which would ensure that the variance shall not constitute a granting of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other property in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located. A variance may be granted to secure an appropriate improvement to a parcel, to prevent unreasonable hardship (not including financial hardship), or to promote the uniformity of improvements.

(b)    The power to grant variances does not extend to use regulations; flexibility in use regulations is provided in Article 24 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2602. Application.
        An application for a variance shall be filed in compliance with Section 10-2.1805.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2603. Applicability.
        The Commission may grant a variance from the requirements of these Zoning Regulations for only the following:

(a)    Allow the modification of the dimensional standards for:

(1)    Distance between structures,

(2)    Parcel area (size),

(3)    Parcel coverage,

(4)    Parcel dimensions,

(5)    Setbacks, or

(6)    Structure height;

(b)    Allow the modification of sign regulations (other than prohibited signs); and

(c)    Allow the modification of the number and dimensions of parking areas, loading spaces, landscaping, or lighting requirements.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2604. Review.
        Each application shall be analyzed to ensure that it is consistent with the purpose of this article and the City’s CEQA guidelines. Additionally, any application which may involve grading shall require the submittal of preliminary grading plans for review and recommendation by the City Engineer and approval by the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2605. Hearings and notice.
        Upon receipt in proper form of a variance application and compliance with the City’s CEQA guidelines, a public hearing shall be set and notice of the hearing given in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2606. Findings and decision.
        Following a public hearing, the Commission shall record the decision in writing and shall recite the findings upon which the decision is based, in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65906 or as this section may be amended/replaced from time to time). The Commission may approve an application in whole or in part, with conditions, only if all of the following findings are made:

(a)    There are special circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape, size, surroundings, or topography so that the strict application of these Zoning Regulations denies the property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning district classification;

(b)    Granting the variance:

(1)    Is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and zoning district and unavailable to the property for which the variance is sought,

(2)    Would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located,

(3)    Does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other property in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located,

(4)    Does not allow a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject parcel, and

(5)    Would not be inconsistent with the General Plan; and

(c)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of CEQA and the City’s environmental review procedures.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2607. Precedents.
        Each application is reviewed on a case-by-case basis and the granting of a prior variance is not admissible evidence for the granting of a new variance.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2608. Burden of proof.
        The burden of proof to establish the evidence in support of the findings as required by Section 10-2.2606 is the responsibility of the applicant.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2609. Variance expiration.
(a)    Within 180 days of variance approval, the variance shall be exercised in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter or the variance shall be deemed void.

(b)    If the application for the variance also involves the approval of a tentative map, the variance shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2610. Time extension.
        The Commission may, upon an application being filed before expiration and for good cause, grant a one (1) time extension not to exceed 180 days, in compliance with Article 32 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2611. Use of property before final decision.
        No permit shall be issued for any use involved in an application for a variance until and unless the same shall have become final in compliance with Section 10-2.2910.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2612. Performance guarantee.
        The applicant and/or owner may be required to provide adequate performance security for the faithful performance of any/all conditions of approval imposed by the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2613. Revocation.
        The Commission may revoke or modify a variance in compliance with Article 34.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2614. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; Article 31, Changes to an Approved Project; Article 29, Public Hearings; Article 34, Revocations and Modifications; Article 32, Time Limits and Extensions.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 27. Amendments
Sec. 10-2.2701. Purpose of article.
(a)    The purpose of this article is to provide procedures for:

(1)    General Plan amendments that may include revisions to actions, goals, land use designations, policies, or text;

(2)    Zoning Map amendments that has the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to another; and

(3)    Amendments of these Zoning Regulations that may modify any procedures, provisions, requirements, or standards, applicable to the development, and/or use of property within the City.

(b)    The amendments may be approved by the Council whenever required by public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare of the City.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2702. Amendment screening.
(a)    Before the filing of a formal amendment application the applicant shall file a pre-submittal application and fee deposit with the Department. The Director shall review the submittal and prepare a report/recommendation to the Commission. Following their review the Commission shall forward a report/recommendation to the Council. The Council shall review/screen the recommendation and make a determination as to the general appropriateness of the request. The review shall identify the consistent and inconsistent issues with the proposed amendment.

(b)    A prospective applicant is strongly encouraged to request a “concept review” from the Department before filing a formal amendment application.

(c)    An applicant for an amendment which requires one (1) or more additional land use applications shall file all related applications concurrently with the amendment request in compliance.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2703. Application.
        An application for an amendment shall be filed in compliance with Section 10-2.1805.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2704. Hearings and notice.
        Upon receipt in proper form of an amendment application, or upon initiation by the Director, Commission, or Council, and following Department review and compliance with the City’s CEQA guidelines, public hearings shall be set before the Commission and Council. Notice of the hearings shall be given in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2705. Commission’s action on amendments.
        The Commission shall make a written recommendation to the Council on the proposed amendment whether to approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove, based upon the findings identified in Section 10-2.2707.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2706. Council’s action on amendments.
(a)    Upon receipt of the Commission’s recommendation, the Council may approve, approve in modified form or disapprove the proposed amendment based upon the findings identified in Section 10-2.2707

(b)    Any changes to the amendment that were not considered by the Commission shall be referred to the Commission for its recommendation, in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 65356 [General Plan amendments] and 65857 [Zoning Map and Zoning Regulations amendments]).

(c)    Failure of the Commission to report within forty (40) days (General Plan amendments) or forty-five (45) days (Zoning Map and Zoning Regulations amendments) after the referral, or a longer period set by the Council, shall be deemed a recommendation for the approval of the changes.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2707. Findings and decision.
        An amendment to the General Plan, the Zoning Map, or these Zoning Regulations, may be approved only if the following findings are made, as applicable to the type of amendment in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65800, et. seq.). It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the required findings.

(a)    Mandatory findings required for all amendments (e.g., General Plan, Zoning Map, and these Zoning Regulations):

(1)    The proposed amendment ensures and maintains internal consistency with the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan, and would not create any inconsistencies with these Zoning Regulations, in the case of an amendment of these Zoning Regulations;

(2)    The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare of the City; and

(3)    The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of CEQA and the City’s environmental review procedures.

(b)    Additional finding for Zoning Map amendments: The site(s) is/are physically suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints) for the requested zoning designation(s) and anticipated land use development(s).

(c)    Additional finding for amendments of these Zoning Regulations: The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2708. Limitation on general plan amendments.
        No mandatory element of the General Plan may be amended more than four times during any calendar year in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 65350, 65354.5, and 65358).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2709. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; and Article 29, Public Hearings.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 28. Development Agreements
Sec. 10-2.2801. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to allow for the approval of development agreements.

(a)    This article outlines the procedures and requirements for the review and consideration of development agreements upon application by, or on behalf of, property owners or other persons having a legal or equitable interest in the property proposed to be subject to the agreement. It is intended that the provisions of this article shall be fully consistent, and in full compliance, with the provisions of State law (Government Code Article 2.5 of Chapter 4 of Division 1 of Title 7, commencing with Section 65864 or as these Zoning Regulations may be amended or replaced from time to time), and shall be so construed.

(b)    In construing the provisions of any development agreement entered into in compliance with this article, those provisions shall be read to fully effectuate, and to be consistent with, the language of this article, State law (Government Code Article 2.5, cited above), and the agreement itself. Should any apparent discrepancies between the meaning of these documents arise, reference shall be made to the following documents, in the following order:

(1)    The plain terms of the development agreement itself;

(2)    The provisions of this article; and

(3)    The provisions of State law (Government Code Article 2.5, cited above).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2802. Application.
(a)    Any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property may request and apply through the Director to enter into a development agreement provided the following:

(1)    The development agreement, if approved, would be in the best interests of the City;

(2)    The status of the applicant, having a legal or equitable interest in the subject real property, is established to the satisfaction of the Director;

(3)    The application is made on forms approved, and contains all information required, by the Director and is filed with the Department in compliance with Section 10-2.1805; and

(4)    The application is accompanied by all lawfully required documents, materials, and information.

(b)    The Director is empowered to receive, review, process, and prepare, together with recommendations for Commission and Council consideration, all applications for development agreements. The Director may call upon all other City departments for timely assistance in complying with this article.

(c)    Processing fees, as established by resolution of the Council, shall be collected for an application for a development agreement made in compliance with this article. Additionally, appropriate fees shall be established and collected for periodic reviews conducted by the Director in compliance with Section 10-2.2807

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2803. Hearings and notice.
(a)    The Director, upon finding the application for a development agreement complete and in compliance with the City’s CEQA guidelines, shall set the application, together with recommendations, for a public hearing before the Commission in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall make a written recommendation to the Council that it approves conditionally approves or disapproves the application.

(b)    Upon receipt of the Commission’s recommendation, the City Clerk shall set the application and written report of the Commission for a public hearing before the Council in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter. Following conclusion of the public hearing, the Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the application.

(c)    Notice of the hearings identified in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be given in the form of a notice of intention to consider approval of a development agreement in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65867).

(d)    Should the Council approve or conditionally approve the application, it shall, as a part of its action of approval, direct the preparation of a development agreement embodying the terms and conditions of the application as approved or conditionally approved by it, as well as an ordinance authorizing execution of the development agreement by the City Manager.

(e)    The ordinance shall contain findings, and the facts supporting them, that the development agreement:

(1)    Would be in the best interests of the City;

(2)    Is consistent with the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan and these Zoning Regulations; and

(3)    Would promote the public convenience, health, interest, safety, and welfare of the City.

(f)    The ordinance may be subjected to referendum in the manner provided by State law (Government Code Section 65867.5).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2804. Contents of development agreement.
(a)    Mandatory contents. A development agreement shall contain the following provisions in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 65865.2):

(1)    Specify the duration of the agreement;

(2)    Specify the allowed uses for the subject property;

(3)    Specify the density/intensity of the allowed uses;

(4)    Describe the maximum height and size of proposed structures by clearly identifying and referring to the documents and exhibits approved;

(5)    Describe the provisions, if any, for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes;

(6)    Describe the provisions, if any, for the protection from either a future growth control ordinance or a future increase in development and/or effect fees;

(7)    Provide for a tiered amendment review procedure that may incorporate the following:

(A)   Director approval for minor modifications,

(B)   Commission approval for major modifications, and

(C)   Council approval for major amendments; and

(8)    Provide for the possibility of subsequent discovery of health and safety issues like a “compelling public necessity” (e.g., a new environmental health hazard is discovered), which would necessitate a reconsideration/amendment of the previously approved development agreement.

(b)    Permissive contents. A development agreement entered into in compliance with this article may include the following provisions:

(1)    Conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that the conditions, terms, restrictions, and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density and intensity of development specified in the agreement;

(2)    Provisions which require that construction shall be commenced within a specified time and that the project, or any single phase, be completed within a specified time;

(3)    Terms and conditions relating to applicant financing of necessary public improvements and facilities including applicant participation in benefit assessment proceedings; and

(4)    Any other terms, conditions and requirements as the Council may deem necessary and proper, including requirements for ensuring, to the satisfaction of the Director, performance of all provisions of the agreement in a timely manner by the applicant/contracting party.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2805. Execution and recordation.
(a)    The City shall not execute any development agreement until on or after the date upon which the ordinance approving the agreement becomes effective; and

(b)    A development agreement shall be recorded in the office of the County Recorder no later than ten (10) days after it is executed.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2806. Environmental review.
        The approval or conditional approval of a development agreement in compliance with this article shall be deemed a discretionary act for purposes of CEQA.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2807. Periodic review.
(a)    Every development agreement approved and executed in compliance with this article shall be subject to periodic City review during the full term of the agreement. The review schedule shall be specified in the agreement. Appropriate fees to cover the City’s costs to conduct the periodic reviews shall be collected from the applicant/contracting party in compliance with Section 10-2.2802(c).

(b)    The purpose of the periodic reviews shall be to determine whether the applicant/contracting party or its successor(s)-in-interest has complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement. The burden of proof shall be on the applicant/contracting party or its successor to demonstrate compliance, to the full satisfaction of, and in a manner prescribed by, the City.

(c)    If, as a result of periodic review in compliance with this subsection, the Council finds and determines, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the applicant/contracting party or its successor-in-interest has not complied in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the Council may order, after a noticed public hearing in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter, that the agreement be terminated or modified.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2808. Effect of development agreement.
(a)    Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the rules, regulations and official policies governing allowed uses of the land, density, design, improvement and construction standards and specifications applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement are the rules, regulations and official policies in force at the time of execution of the agreement.

(b)    Unless specifically provided by the development agreement, the agreement does not prevent the City, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property under the development agreement, nor does a development agreement prevent the City from conditionally approving or disapproving any subsequent development project application on the basis of existing or new rules, regulations and policies.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2809. Approved development agreements.
        Development agreements approved by the Council shall be on file with the City Clerk.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2810. Applicable regulations.
        All development agreements shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; and Article 29, Public Hearings.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 29. Public Hearings
Sec. 10-2.2901. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to specify procedures for hearings before the Council, Commission, and Director and appeals of any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Commission or Director.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2902. Hearing and notice.
        When an amendment, appeal, entitlement, or other matter requires a public hearing, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing in compliance with State law (Government Code Sections 65090, 65091, 65094 and 66451.3 and Public Resources Code Sections 21000, et seq.).

(a)    Notice of a public hearing shall include:

(1)    The date, time, and place of the hearing, the name of the hearing body, and the telephone number and street address of the Department where an interested person may call or visit to receive additional information;

(2)    A general explanation of the matter to be considered and a general description, in text and/or by diagram, of the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing;

(3)    A statement that persons wishing to be heard on the matter may attend and be heard; and

(4)    If a proposed negative declaration or final environmental impact report has been prepared for the project in compliance with the City’s environmental review procedures, the notice shall include a statement that the hearing body shall also consider approval of the proposed negative declaration or certification of the final environmental impact report.

(b)    Notice of a public hearing required by this article for an amendment, appeal, or entitlement shall be given as follows, as required by State law:

(1)    Mailing.

(A)   Notice shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before the hearing, through the United States mails with postage prepaid, to:

(i)     The owner(s) of the property being considered or the owner’s agent, and the applicant(s);

(ii)    Each local agency expected to provide schools, water, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide the facilities and services may be significantly affected;

(iii)   All owners of real property as shown on the County’s latest equalized assessment roll, and all occupants, within a 300-foot radius of the subject parcel; and

(iv)   Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the Director and has paid the fee established by the City’s fee resolution for the notice.

(B)   The 300-foot radius shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of the subject parcel to the exterior boundaries of the neighboring parcels, without reference to structures existing on either parcel(s) in the following manner:

(i)     Notification boundaries shall always include all parcels on both sides of interior residential streets; and

(ii)    For proposed projects fronting on major arterial streets or highways the 300-foot radius shall not include the width of the adjoining right-of-way but shall be measured entirely from the opposite side of the arterial street or highway.

(2)    If the notice is mailed as required above, the notice shall also either be:

(A)   Published at least once in a local newspaper of general circulation within the City at least ten (10) days before the hearing; or

(B)   Posted at least ten (10) days before the hearing in at least three (3) public places in the City, in compliance with the Department’s handout on public hearing requirements.

(c)    If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed is more than 1,000, the Director may choose to provide the alternative notice allowed by State law (Government Code Section 65091(a)(3)).

(d)    In addition to the types of notice required by subsections (b) and (c) above, the Director may provide additional notice with content or using a distribution method as the Director or Commission determines is necessary or desirable (e.g., use of a greater radius for notice, on the Internet).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2903. Neighborhood meeting encouraged.
(a)    A neighborhood meeting or publicly-noticed conceptual review is strongly encouraged before the scheduled public hearing to identify potential community impacts and concerns relating to the proposed project.

(b)    The appropriate procedures for the neighborhood meeting shall be defined by the Director.

(c)    Public notice of the meeting is required, in compliance with this article.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2904. Director’s investigation/written report.
        The Director shall investigate all of the pertinent facts relating to the application in order to provide the written information necessary for action in compliance with these Zoning Regulations and the General Plan. The Director shall provide the written report, containing a recommendation and the required findings, to the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2905. Hearing procedure.
(a)    Hearings shall be held at the date, time, and place for which notice has been given in compliance with this article.

(b)    The summary minutes shall be prepared and made part of the permanent case file.

(c)    Any hearing may be continued:

(1)    If a hearing cannot be completed on the scheduled day, the presiding review authority member, before the adjournment or recess of the hearing, may continue the hearing by publicly announcing the date, time and place to which the hearing will be continued.

(2)    Additional notice for the continued hearing shall not be required.

(3)    A continuance requested by the applicant or appellant shall be accompanied by a fee in compliance with the City’s fee resolution.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2906. Notice of decision—Director.
(a)    The Director shall announce and record the decision at the conclusion of the scheduled public hearing, if one is required. The decision shall contain applicable findings and any conditions of approval imposed by the Director. Following the hearing, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application.

(b)    Included within this mailing shall be a City-prepared letter for the applicant to sign, acknowledging that the applicant is in full concurrence/understanding with the final conditions of approval. The applicant shall return the signed acknowledgment within ten (10) days.

(c)    The decision of the Director shall be final unless appealed to the Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2907. Notice of decision—Commission.
(a)    The Commission shall announce and record its decision at the conclusion of the scheduled public hearing. The decision shall contain the action of the Commission, including all findings, conditions of approval, and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any effects and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the City.

(b)    Following the Commission hearing, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application.

(c)    Included within this mailing shall be a City-prepared letter for the applicant to sign, acknowledging that the applicant is in full concurrence/understanding with the final conditions of approval. The applicant shall return the signed acknowledgment within ten (10) days.

(d)    The decision of the Commission shall be final unless appealed to the Council.

(e)    The recommendation with findings of the Commission for the following applications shall be transmitted to the Council for final action:

(1)    Development agreements;

(2)    General Plan amendments;

(3)    Specific plans;

(4)    Tentative tract maps;

(5)    Zoning Map amendments; and

(6)    Amendments of these Zoning Regulations.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2908. Notice of decision—Council.
(a)    The Council shall announce and record its decision at the conclusion of the scheduled public hearing. The decision shall contain the findings of the Council and any conditions of approval and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any effects and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the City.

(b)    Following the Council hearing, a notice of the decision and any conditions of approval shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown upon the application.

(c)    Included within this mailing shall be a City-prepared letter for the applicant to sign, acknowledging that the applicant is in full concurrence/understanding with the final conditions of approval. The applicant shall return the signed acknowledgment within ten (10) days.

(d)    The decision of the Council shall be final, unless subjected to further legal action in compliance with State and Federal law.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2909. Notice of decision—Transmittal to applicant.
        The Department shall mail a copy of the notice of decision and the adopted resolution, with the applicable findings and conditions, to the applicant at the address shown on the application within ten (10) days following the final date of decision.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.2910. Effective date.
        The following agreements, amendments, entitlements, permits, and plans shall become effective in compliance with the following, subject to the satisfaction of any applicable conditions:

(a)    Home occupation permits, sign permits, temporary use permits and zoning clearances shall become effective immediately following the final date of approval.

(b)    Design review permits, conditional use permits, minor conditional use permits, minor variances, planned development permits and variances shall become effective on the 16th day following the date the decision is rendered by the applicable review authority.

(c)    General Plan amendments shall become effective immediately following the final date of approval by the Council.

(d)    Development agreements, specific plans (including amendments and repeals), Zoning Map amendments, and amendments of these Zoning Regulations shall become effective on the 30th day following the date the decision is finally rendered by the Council (second reading).

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 30. Appeals
Sec. 10-2.3001. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to provide procedures for filing of appeals of the determinations by the Department staff or Director, or the decisions of the Director or Commission.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3002. Appeal of action.
        Determinations and decisions that may be appealed and the authority to act on an appeal shall be as follows:

(a)    Any determination rendered by the Department staff may be appealed to the Commission.

(b)    Any determination or decision rendered by the Director may be appealed to the Commission.

(c)    Commission appeals.

(1)    Any decision rendered by the Commission may be appealed to the Council.

(2)    The Commission may appeal any determination rendered by the Department staff or a determination or decision rendered by the Director, by an affirmative vote of a majority of its members.

(3)    Once the vote to appeal is passed by a majority, the matter shall be set for hearing by the Director.

(d)    Council appeals.

(1)    A member of the Council may request the opportunity to discuss any decision rendered by the Department staff, Director or Commission.

(2)    The Council may appeal any determination rendered by the Department staff or a determination or decision rendered by the Director or Commission.

(3)    An affirmative vote of a majority of its members is required to appeal the Department staff’s determination or the Director’s or Commission’s decision.

(4)    Once the vote to appeal is passed by a majority, the matter shall be set for hearing by the City Clerk.

(5)    The decision of the Council shall be final and shall become effective upon adoption of the resolution by the Council.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3003. Filing appeals.
(a)    Appeals shall be in writing on a form obtained from the Department (for appeals to the Commission) or City Clerk (for appeals to the Council). The appellant shall state the specific reasons for the basis of the appeal. Appeal applications shall include the required fee, in compliance with the City’s fee resolution.

(b)    An appeal of a determination by the Department staff, or a determination or decision of the Director, shall be filed with the secretary of the Commission within fifteen (15) days following the date of the final action for which an appeal is made.

(c)    An appeal of a Commission decision shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk within fifteen (15) days following the date of the final action for which an appeal is made.

(d)    If the last day to file an appeal falls on a legal holiday recognized by the City or on a Saturday or Sunday, the following business day shall be deemed the last day to file the appeal.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3004. Appeal hearing.
(a)    Public notice of an appeal shall be given in the same manner in which the original notice was given. A hearing date shall be set within thirty (30) days of the filing of the appeal and any necessary materials.

(b)    Filing of an appeal shall delay all proceedings associated with the matter subject to the appeal (e.g., issuance of a zoning clearance, building or grading permit), pending the City’s final action on the appeal.

(c)    Joining an appeal.

(1)    Only those persons who file an appeal within the fifteen (15) day appeal period in compliance with Section 10-2.3003, shall be considered appellants of the matter under appeal.

(2)    Any person who wishes to join an appeal shall follow the same procedures for an appellant in compliance with Section 10-2.3003

(3)    A person(s) shall not be allowed to join an appeal after the end of the fifteen (15) day appeal period.

(d)    The appeal hearing shall be considered a hearing de novo and the review authority may consider any issue(s) associated with the appeal, in addition to the specific grounds for the appeal.

(1)    When reviewing an appeal the review authority may:

(A)   By resolution, affirm, affirm in part, or reverse the action, the determination, or decision that is the subject of the appeal;

(B)   Adopt additional conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary, and may even address issues or concerns that go beyond the subject of the appeal; or

(C)   Disapprove the land use entitlement approved by the previous review authority, even though the appellant only requested a modification or elimination of one (1) or more conditions of approval.

(2)    If new or different evidence is presented on appeal, the Commission or Council may, but shall not be required to, refer the matter to the Director or Commission, as applicable, for further consideration.

(e)    When reviewing an appeal the review authority shall adopt findings in support of the intended action on the appeal. The nature of the findings shall be in compliance with the findings adopted by the original review authority (e.g., design review permits, conditional use permits, planned development permits, variances).

(f)    The Director or City Clerk, as applicable to the level of review authority, shall mail a copy of the resolution to the appellant, the applicant (if not the appellant), the Commission, and the Council within fifteen (15) days after the date the decision is rendered.

(g)    Included within this mailing shall be a City prepared letter for the applicant to sign, acknowledging that the applicant is in full concurrence/understanding with the final conditions of approval. The applicant shall return the signed acknowledgment within ten (10) days.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3005. Effective date of appealed actions.
        A determination by the Department staff, or a determination or decision of the Director, appealed to the Commission shall not become final until upheld by the Commission. A decision of the Commission appealed to the Council shall not become final unless and until upheld by the Council. The Council’s decision shall be considered final.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3006. Resubmittals.
(a)    If an application is disapproved, the applicant shall not apply for the same or substantially similar discretionary entitlement for the same site for a period of twelve (12) months. The only exception to this provision shall be in cases where the Commission and/or Council has disapproved the discretionary entitlement “without prejudice.”

(b)    The Director shall determine whether the new application is for a discretionary entitlement which is the same or substantially similar to the previously approved or disapproved entitlement and for the same site. The determination of the Director may be appealed to the Commission, in compliance with this article.

(c)    The Council may waive the prohibition identified in subsection (a) above if the Council finds that, by reason of changed legal, physical, or sociological circumstances, reconsideration would be in the best interests of the City.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3007. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; and Article 29, Public Hearings.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 31. Changes to an Approved Project
Sec. 10-2.3101. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to provide procedures for obtaining City approval of requested changes to a previously approved development project.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3102. Procedures.
(a)    Application.

(1)    A development or new land use allowed through a conditional use permit, design review permit, home occupation permit, planned development permit, temporary use permit or variance shall be in substantial compliance with the approved drawings and plans, any statements (written or oral) made in support of the application, and any conditions of approval imposed by the review authority, except where changes to the project are approved in compliance with this article.

(2)    An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for the request.

(3)    Requested changes may involve changes to one (1) or more conditions imposed by the review authority or actual changes to the project (e.g., hours of operation, expansion of a use) as originally proposed by the applicant or approved by the review authority.

(4)    Changes shall be approved before implementation of the changes, and may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use.

(b)    If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the review authority shall hold a public hearing on the requested major change(s), and give notice, in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter.

(c)    The Director may authorize minor changes to an approved site plan, architecture, or the nature of the approved use if the changes:

(1)    Are consistent with all applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations and the spirit and intent of the original approval;

(2)    Do not involve a feature of the project that was:

(A)   A basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project,

(B)   A basis for conditions of approval for the project, or

(C)   A specific consideration by the review authority (e.g., the Director, Commission, or Council) in the approval of the entitlement;

(3)    Do not result in an expansion of the use.

(d)    Major changes are changes to the project that:

(1)    Would not be consistent with all applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations and the spirit and intent of the original approval;

(2)    Could involve a feature of the project that was:

(A)   A basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project,

(B)   A basis for conditions of approval for the project, or

(C)   A specific consideration by the review authority (e.g., the Director, Commission, or Council) in the approval of the entitlement.

(3)    Could result in an expansion of the use;

(4)    May only be approved by the review authority through a new entitlement application or modification, processed in compliance with these Zoning Regulations.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 32. Time Limits and Extensions
Sec. 10-2.3201. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to provide procedures for obtaining City approval of time extensions to a previously approved development project.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3202. Expiration.
(a)    Unless otherwise specified in the entitlement, all entitlements for projects not subject to the Subdivision Map Act shall comply with the following provisions:

(1)    Exercised.

(A)   To ensure continued compliance with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations, the entitlement shall be exercised within 180 days from the date of approval, or the entitlement shall expire and be deemed void, unless an extension is approved by the original review authority, in compliance with this article. Additionally, if after construction commencement work is discontinued for a minimum period of 180 days, the entitlement shall expire and be deemed void.

(B)   If the application for the entitlement also involves the approval of a tentative map, the date of construction commencement shall be consistent with the tentative map and the entitlement shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map.

(2)    Phasing.

(A)   Where the entitlement provides for development in two (2) or more phases or units in sequence, the entitlement shall not be approved until the review authority has approved the final phasing plan for the entire project site. The project applicant shall not be allowed to develop one (1) phase in compliance with the pre-existing base zoning district and then develop the remaining phases in compliance with this article, without review authority approval.

(B)   Pre-approved phases.

(i)     If a project is to be built in pre-approved phases, each subsequent phase shall have 180 days from the previous phase’s date of construction commencement to the next phase’s date of construction commencement to have occurred, unless otherwise specified in the entitlement, or the entitlement shall expire and be deemed void.

(ii)    If the application for the entitlement also involves the approval of a tentative map, the phasing shall be consistent with the tentative map and the entitlement shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map.

(3)    An approved entitlement shall be exercised before its expiration. The entitlement shall not be deemed exercised until the applicant has:

(A)   Obtained a building permit and continuous on-site construction activity including pouring of foundations, installation of utilities, or other similar substantial improvements has commenced;

(B)   Obtained a grading permit and has completed a significant amount of on-site grading, as determined by the Director;

(C)   Diligently continued the approved construction/grading activities without stopping for more than 180 days; or

(D)   Actually implemented the allowed land use, in its entirety, on the subject property in compliance with the conditions of approval, if no construction was required.

(b)    Projects subject to the Subdivision Map Act.

(1)    Approved or conditionally approved tentative maps shall expire two (2) years following the actual date of approval or conditional approval, unless an extension is approved in compliance with this article.

(A)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subparagraph (1) above, if the subdivider is required to expend monies, based on the limits identified by State law (Government Code Section 66452.6), to construct, improve, or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the property boundaries of the tentative map, the tentative map shall be extended in compliance with State law (Government Code Section 66452.6).

(B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (1) above, a tentative map on property subject to a development agreement may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement.

(C)   The maximum number of phased final maps which may be filed shall be specified by the Director.

(2)    The period of time specified above shall not include the period of time during which a development moratorium, imposed after approval of the tentative map and affecting the tentative map, is in existence. The length of the moratorium shall not exceed five (5) years.

(c)    Where the entitlement or map has expired and/or has been deemed void:

(1)    No further action is required by the City;

(2)    No further reliance may be placed on the previously approved entitlement or map;

(3)    The applicant shall have no rights previously granted under the entitlement or map;

(4)    The applicant shall file a new application and obtain all required approvals before construction can commence or an allowable use may be implemented; and

(5)    Any security provided by the applicant under the previously approved entitlement or map may be utilized by the City to provide suitable protection from any harm that may result from the terminated development.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3203. Time extensions.
(a)    Extension of the entitlement.

(1)    The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time before the expiration of the entitlement, together with the filing fee required by the City’s fee resolution. The burden of proof is on the permittee to establish, with substantial evidence, why the entitlement should be extended.

(2)    If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the Director shall provide notice, in compliance with Article 29 of this chapter.

(3)    Upon good cause shown, the extension may be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved by the Director, whose decision may be appealed to the Commission, in compliance with Article 30 of this chapter.

(4)    The maximum time that an entitlement may be extended may not exceed one (1) additional twelve (12) month period beyond the expiration date of the original approval, unless otherwise allowed by law.

(5)    An extension of the approval of an entitlement may be granted only if the Director finds that there have been no significant changes in the General Plan, these Zoning Regulations, the Municipal Code, or character of the area within which the subject property is located that would cause the approved entitlement to be injurious to the public convenience, health, safety, or general welfare.

(b)    A subdivider may request an extension by written application to the Director. Before the expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map, and upon an application by the subdivider to extend that map, the tentative approval of the map shall automatically be extended for sixty (60) days after the expiration date or until the application for the extension is finally approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved, whichever first occurs. The burden of proof is on the subdivider to establish, with substantial evidence, why the tentative map should be extended.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 33. Interpretations
Sec. 10-2.3301. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of the provisions of these Zoning Regulations and the General Plan.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3302. Rules of interpretation.
        The Director shall have the responsibility and authority to interpret the meaning and applicability of all provisions and requirements of these Zoning Regulations.

(a)    Terminology. When used in these Zoning Regulations, the words “shall,” “will,” “is to,” and “are to” are always mandatory. “Should” is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and “may” is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words “include,” “includes,” and “including” mean “including, but not limited to....”

(b)    Number of days. Whenever a number of days is specified in these Zoning Regulations, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in these Zoning Regulations, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days, unless business days are specified. Time limits will extend to the following business day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a day that the City is not open for business, except as otherwise provided for by the Subdivision Map Act.

(c)    State law requirements. Where these Zoning Regulations reference applicable provisions of State law (for example, the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public Resources Code), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable State law provisions as they may be amended from time to time.

(d)    Minimum requirements. When interpreting and applying the regulations of these Zoning Regulations, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless stated otherwise (e.g., height limits and site coverage requirements for structures, and the numbers and size of signs allowed are maximums, not minimums).

(e)    Conflicting requirements.

(1)    These Zoning Regulations and Municipal Code provisions. If conflicts occur between requirements of these Zoning Regulations, or between these Zoning Regulations and other regulations of the City, the most restrictive shall apply.

(2)    Development agreements. When conflicts occur between the requirements of these Zoning Regulations and standards adopted as part of any development agreement, the requirements of the development agreement shall apply.

(3)    Private agreements. These Zoning Regulations apply to all land uses and development regardless of whether they impose a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than a private agreement or restriction, without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The City shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3303. Procedure.
        A written request for an interpretation of the provisions of these Zoning Regulations or the General Plan may be filed, together with all required fees, with the Department in compliance with Section 10-2.1805. The request shall state the provisions of these Zoning Regulations and/or General Plan in question, and provide any information to assist in its review. The decision of the Director may be appealed to the Commission. The decision of the Commission may be appealed to the Council.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3304. Applicable regulations.
        All applications shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Section 10-2.1805, Application Filing; and Article 29, Public Hearings.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 34. Revocations and Modifications
Sec. 10-2.3401. Purpose of article.
(a)    The purpose of this article is to identify procedures for securing punitive revocation or modification of previously approved entitlements.

(b)    The City’s action to revoke an entitlement shall have the effect of terminating the entitlement and denying the privileges granted by the original approval.

(c)    Modifications.

(1)    The City’s action to modify an entitlement rather than to revoke it shall have the effect of changing the operational aspects of the entitlement.

(2)    The changes may include the operational aspects related to buffers, duration of the entitlement, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing and traffic circulation.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3402. Procedures.
        The applicable review authority may hold a public hearing to revoke or modify any land use entitlements granted in compliance with the provisions of these Zoning Regulations. Fifteen (15) days before the hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which the land use entitlement was granted. Notice shall be deemed delivered two (2) days after being mailed, first class postage paid, to the owner as shown on the current tax rolls of the County, and/or the project applicant. The only exception to this notice requirement shall be for temporary use permits, which only require a twenty-four (24) hour notice to the applicant.

(a)    A land use entitlement may be revoked or modified by the review authority (e.g., Director, Commission, or Council) which originally approved the entitlement, or the equivalent City review authority, for entitlements originally approved under the County’s authority, if any one of the following findings are made:

(1)    Circumstances under which the entitlement was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one (1) or more of the findings contained in the original entitlement can no longer be made in a positive manner, and the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare require the revocation;

(2)    The entitlement was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the application, or in the applicant’s testimony presented during the public hearing, for the entitlement;

(3)    One (1) or more of the conditions of the entitlement have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated; and

(4)    The improvement/use authorized in compliance with the entitlement:

(A)   Is in violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute of the City, State, or Federal government,

(B)   Has become detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare, or the manner of operation constitutes or is creating a nuisance, or

(C)   Has ceased operation or has been abandoned for a minimum period of 180 consecutive days. Abandonment is generally evidenced by the actual removal of structures, machinery, furniture, equipment, or other components of the use, or where there are no business receipts/records available to provide evidence that the use remains in continual operation.

(b)    A minor variance or variance may be revoked or modified by the review authority which originally approved the entitlement, or the equivalent City review authority, for entitlements originally approved under the County’s authority, if any one (1) of the following findings are made:

(1)    Circumstances under which the entitlement was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one (1) or more of the findings contained in the original entitlement can no longer be made in a positive manner, the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare require the revocation, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the minor variance or variance; or

(2)    One (1) or more of the conditions of the minor variance or variance have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the minor variance or variance.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3403. Applicable regulations.
        All revocation and modification actions shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; and Article 29, Public Hearings.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Article 35. Enforcement
Sec. 10-2.3501. Purpose of article.
        The purpose of this article is to ensure that enforcement of the provisions of these Zoning Regulations and any entitlements granted by the City shall be diligently pursued in order to provide for their effective administration, to secure compliance with any conditions of approval, to promote the City’s planning efforts and for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the City.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3502. Responsibility.
(a)    The Director shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of these Zoning Regulations and any conditions imposed on land use entitlements (e.g., conditional use permits) granted by the City and allowed under these Zoning Regulations.

(b)    Any structure or use which is established, operated, erected, moved, altered, enlarged, or maintained, contrary to the provisions of these Zoning Regulations, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties specified in the Municipal Code, and/or revocation procedures identified in the following articles:

(1)    Article 24, Conditional Use Permits and Minor Conditional Use Permits;

(2)    Article 20, Design Review Permits;

(3)    Article 21, Home Occupation Permits;

(4)    Article 25, Minor Variances;

(5)    Article 23, Planned Development Permits;

(6)    Article 22, Temporary Use Permits;

(7)    Article 26, Variances.

(c)    Any land use entitlement or license issued in conflict with these Zoning Regulations shall be deemed void.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3503. Violations.
(a)    Any person, partnership, organization, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, tenant or otherwise, violating any provision of these Zoning Regulations or any condition imposed on an entitlement, map or license or violating or failing to comply with any order made hereunder shall be guilty of an infraction or misdemeanor in compliance with Sections 1-2.01 and 1-2.02 of the Municipal Code.

(b)    Any violation of this article shall also constitute a public nuisance which may be abated in compliance with the procedures identified in Chapter 6 of Title 5 of the Municipal Code.

(c)    Any construction in violation of these Zoning Regulations or any condition imposed on a land use entitlement or license shall be subject to the issuance of a “stop work order.” Any violation of an officially issued stop work order shall constitute an infraction or misdemeanor in compliance with Sections 1-2.01 and 1-2.02 of the Municipal Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3504. Remedies are cumulative.
        All remedies identified in these Zoning Regulations for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of these Zoning Regulations shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of City, County, State, or Federal law. Should a person be found guilty and convicted of a misdemeanor for the violation of any provision of these Zoning Regulations, the conviction shall not prevent the City from pursuing any other available remedies to correct the violation.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3505. Inspections.
(a)    Every applicant seeking an entitlement or any other action in compliance with these Zoning Regulations shall allow the City official handling the application access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application, and the City official shall make the inspections as deemed necessary from time to time throughout the application process.

(b)    If the entitlement is approved, in compliance with these Zoning Regulations, the owner or applicant shall allow appropriate City officials access to the premises in order to determine continued compliance with the approved entitlement and/or any conditions imposed by the review authority.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3506. Enforcement fines.
        The City shall have the authority to impose appropriate fines on any person, firm or corporation in compliance with Section 10-2.3504 and the Municipal Code violating any provision(s) of these Zoning Regulations or any condition imposed on an entitlement. The fines shall be included in the City’s fee resolution.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3507. Additional entitlement processing fees.
        A person who establishes a land use, or alters, constructs, enlarges, erects, maintains, or moves a structure without first obtaining an entitlement required by these Zoning Regulations, shall pay the additional entitlement processing fees established by the City’s fee resolution for the correction of the violation, before being granted an entitlement for a use or structure on the site.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3508. Recovery of costs.
        The City shall recover all administrative and legal costs (e.g., staff, legal), reasonably related to the time expended in the enforcement of the provisions of the Municipal Code, including these Zoning Regulations and other related ordinances of the City, in compliance with Section 1-2.05 of the Municipal Code.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3509. Reinspection fees.
(a)    Amount and applicability of reinspection fee.

(1)    A reinspection fee shall be imposed on each person who receives a notice and order or letter of correction of any provision of the Municipal Code, adopted Building Code, or State law.

(A)   The fee amount shall be established by the City’s fee resolution.

(B)   The fee may be assessed for each inspection or re-inspection conducted when the particular violation for which an inspection or a re-inspection is scheduled is not fully abated or corrected as directed by, and within the time and manner specified in, the notice or letter.

(2)    The fee shall not apply to the original inspection to document the violations and shall not apply to the first scheduled compliance inspection made after the issuance of a notice or letter, whether or not the correction has been made.

(b)    Continuation of the original case.

(1)    If a notice or letter has been previously issued for the same violation and the property has been in compliance with the provisions of the Municipal Code, including these Zoning Regulations and other related ordinances of the City, for less than 180 days, the violation shall be deemed a continuation of the original case and all inspections or re-inspections, including the first inspection for the repeated offense, shall be charged a re-inspection fee.

(2)    This fee is intended to compensate for administrative costs for unnecessary City inspections, and not as a penalty for violating the Municipal Code, including these Zoning Regulations and other related ordinances of the City.

(3)    Any re-inspection fee imposed shall be separate and apart from any fines or penalties imposed for violation of the Municipal Code, or costs incurred by the City for the abatement of a public nuisance.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3510. Applicable regulations.
        All enforcement actions shall be subject to the applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations, including the procedures identified in the following: Article 30, Appeals; Article 29, Public Hearings; Section 1-2.01, Violations as infractions; Section 1-2.02, Violations as misdemeanors.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

ZONING REGULATIONS DEFINITIONS
Article 36. Definitions/Glossary
Sec. 10-2.3601. Purpose of article.
        This article provides definitions of terms and phrases used in these Zoning Regulations that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this article conflict with definitions in other provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall control for the purposes of these Zoning Regulations. If a word is not defined in this article or in other provisions of the Municipal Code, the Director shall determine the correct definition.

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-2.3602. Definitions of specialized terms and phrases.
        As used in these Zoning Regulations, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise.

(a)    Definitions, “A.”

(1)    Accessory retail uses. The retail sales of various products (including food service) in a store or similar facility that is located within a health care, hotel, office, or industrial complex. These uses include pharmacies, gift shops, and food service establishments within hospitals; convenience stores; and food service establishments within hotel, office and industrial complexes.

(2)    Accessory structure. A structure that is physically detached from, secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with the primary structure. For the purposes of these Zoning Regulations, accessory structures and uses include detached garages, greenhouses, artist’s studios, and workshops, and any other open air enclosures, including gazebos and detached patio covers.

(3)    Accessory use. A use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same parcel, which does not alter the principal use nor serve property other than the parcel where the principal use is located.

(4)    Affordable rent. Monthly housing expenses, including a reasonable allowance for utilities, for rental units reserved for very low or low income households, not exceeding the following calculations:

(A)   Very low income. Fifty (50%) percent of median income as defined by State law (Health and Safety Code Section 50105) and the HUD income limits.

(B)   Low income. Eighty (80%) percent of median income as defined by State law (Health and Safety Code Section 50097.5) and the HUD income limits.

(C)   Other qualifying residents. Fifty (50%) percent of the total number of proposed dwelling units are for qualifying residents as determined by Section 51.2 of the Civil Code.

(5)    Affordable sales price. A sales price at which very low and low income households can qualify for the purchase of designated dwelling units, calculated on the basis of underwriting standards of mortgage financing available for the development.

(6)    Adult business. Any commercial activity where the primary emphasis is depicting or related to sexual activity or specified anatomical areas of the human body associated with sexual activity.

(7)    Alteration. Any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a structure or a change in the external appearance of any structure, not including painting.

(8)    Alternative tower structure. Bell steeples, clock towers, light poles, man-made trees and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.

(9)    Ambulance service. A business providing emergency medical care or transportation, including the incidental storage and maintenance of vehicles.

(10)  Animal raising and keeping. The non-commercial keeping or raising of farm animals, including cattle, goats, horses, sheep, swine (including pot bellied pigs), fowl, poultry and other animals determined by the Director to not be common household pets. Does not include: birds, cats, dogs and other household pets or exotic animals.

(11)  Antenna. One (1) or more rods, panels, discs or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of radio or electromagnetic frequency signals.

(A)   Omni-directional antenna (“whip” antenna) transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a 360 degree radial pattern. For the purpose of these Zoning Regulations, an omnidirectional antenna is up to fifteen (15′) feet in height and up to seven (7″) inches in diameter.

(B)   Directional antenna (“panel” antenna) transmits and receives radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern of less than 360 degrees.

(C)   Parabolic antenna (“dish” antenna) is a bowl-shaped device for the reception and transmission of radio frequency signals in a specific directional pattern. Also referred to as a satellite dish.

(12)  Antenna. Any exterior apparatus designed for radio, telephonic, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including antennas relating to personal wireless services.

(13)  Anti-drain valve or check valve. A valve located under a sprinkler head to hold water in the system so it minimizes drainage from the lower elevation sprinkler heads.

(14)  Apartment. See “Multi-Family Dwellings.”

(15)  Application rate. The depth of water applied to a given area, usually measured in inches for each hour.

(16)  Approval. Includes both approval and approval with conditions.

(17)  Art, antique, collectible and gift sales. Retail sales uses including antique shops, art galleries and curio, gift, and souvenir shops, and the sales of collectible items including sports cards and comic books.

(18)  Assessed value. The value of a structure as shown in the records of the County Assessor.

(19)  Auto parts sales. Stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation (see “Vehicle services”). Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found under “vehicle services” or businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, which are included under “Recycling—Scrap and dismantling yards.”

(20)  Auto repair and maintenance. The repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning (including self-service and attended car washes), or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes the following categories:

(A)   Major repair/body work. Repair facilities dealing with entire vehicles. These establishments provide towing, collision repair, other body work, and painting services; and also include tire recapping establishments.

(B)   Minor maintenance/repair. Minor facilities specializing in limited aspects of repair and maintenance (e.g., muffler and radiator shops, quick-lube). Does not include automobile parking, repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site (see “Auto sales and rental” and “Recreational vehicle sales and rental”); automobile service stations, which are separately defined; or automobile dismantling yards.

(21)  Auto sales and rental. Retail establishments selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see “Auto parts sales”); bicycle and moped sales (see “General retail”); mobile home sales (see “Mobile home and RV sales”); tire recapping establishments (see “Auto repair and maintenance”); businesses dealing exclusively in used parts; or “Gas stations,” which are separately defined.

(22)  Automated teller machine (ATM). Computerized, self-service machines used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations, in compliance with these Zoning Regulations.

(23)  Available developable area. The maximum developable area less existing development on the subject parcel measured in square feet.

(b)    Definitions, “B.”

(1)    Banks and financial services. Financial institutions including:

(A)   Banks and trust companies,

(B)   Credit agencies,

(C)   Holding (but not primarily operating) companies,

(D)   Lending and thrift institutions,

(E)   Other investment companies,

(F)    Securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers,

(G)   Security and commodity exchanges,

(H)   Vehicle finance (equity) leasing companies.

        See also “Automated teller machine” above.

(2)    Bed and breakfast inns (B&Bs). Residential structures with one (1) family in permanent residence with up to five (5) bedrooms rented for overnight lodging, where meals may be provided. A Bed and Breakfast Inn with more than five (5) guest rooms is considered a hotel or motel, and is included under the definition of “Hotels and motels.” Does not include room rental.

(3)    Bonus unit. A dwelling unit (“designated dwelling unit”) within a housing development which would be reserved for sale or rent to, and affordable to, very low, or low income households, or qualifying senior residents.

(4)    Broadcast studios. Commercial and public communications uses including radio and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios, with facilities entirely within buildings. Does not include transmission and receiving apparatus (e.g., antennas and towers), which are under the definition of “Telecommunications facilities.”

(5)    Building material stores. Retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready-mix concrete operations, except where excluded by a specific zoning district. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in “Warehouses, wholesaling and distribution.”

(6)    Bulk reverse vending machine. A bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty (50) square feet, is designed to accept more than one (1) container at a time and will pay by weight instead of by container.

(7)    Business support services. Establishments primarily within buildings, providing other businesses with services including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, also includes:

(A)   Blueprinting,

(B)   Business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see “Vehicle services”),

(C)   Commercial art and design (production),

(D)   Computer-related services (rental, repair),

(E)   Copying, quick printing and blueprinting services,

(F)    Equipment rental business within buildings (rental yards are “Storage yards and sales lot”),

(G)   Film processing laboratories,

(H)   Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site,

(I)    Janitorial services,

(J)    Mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping),

(K)   Mail box services,

(L)   Other “heavy service” business services,

(M)  Outdoor advertising services,

(N)   Photocopying,

(O)   Photo finishing,

(P)    Protective services (other than office related),

(Q)   Soils and materials testing laboratories.

(c)    Definitions, “C.”

(1)    California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). State law (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000, et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur.

(2)    Car washes. Permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing services. Temporary car washes are fundraising activities, typically conducted at a service station or other automotive-related business, where volunteers wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is limited to one (1) day.

(3)    Caretaker or employee quarters. A residence that is accessory to a nonresidential primary use of the site, where needed for security, or twenty-four (24) hour care or supervision.

(4)    Child day care facilities. Facilities that provide nonmedical care and supervision of minor children for periods of less than twenty-four (24) hours. These facilities include the following, all of which are required to be licensed by the California State Department of Social Services:

(A)   Child day care center. Commercial or non-profit child day care facilities designed and approved to accommodate fifteen (15) or more children. Includes infant centers, preschools, sick-child centers, and school-age day care facilities. These may be operated in conjunction with a school or church facility, or as an independent land use;

(B)   Large family day care home. A day care facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for seven (7) to fourteen (14) children. Children under the age of ten (10) years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility;

(C)   Small family day care home. A day care facility located in a single-family residence where an occupant of the residence provides care and supervision for eight (8) or fewer children. Children under the age of ten (10) years who reside in the home count as children served by the day care facility.

(5)    Clubs, lodges, and private meeting halls. Permanent, headquarters-type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for business associations, civic, social and fraternal organizations, labor unions and similar organizations, political organizations, professional membership organizations and other membership organizations.

(6)    Collection facility. A center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of recyclable materials from the general public, which may include the following:

(A)   Reverse vending machine;

(B)   Small collection facilities which occupy an area of less than 350 square feet and may include:

(i)     A mobile unit,

(ii)    Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty (50) square feet, and

(iii)   Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures;

(C)   Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than 350 square feet and may include permanent structures.

(7)    Commission. See “Planning Commission.”

(8)    Common interest development. Any residential condominium, community apartment house, or stock cooperative.

(9)    Community centers. Multi-purpose meeting and recreational facilities typically consisting of one (1) or more meeting or multi-purpose rooms, kitchen and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for use by various groups for communal activities (e.g., meetings, parties, receptions, and dances).

(10)  Condominium. As defined by Civil Code Section 1315, a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map.

(11)  Construction equipment sales. Retail establishments selling or renting heavy construction equipment, including cranes, earth moving equipment and heavy trucks.

(12)  Contractor storage yards. Storage yards operated by or on behalf of a contractor for storage of large equipment, vehicles, or other materials commonly used in the individual contractor’s type of business; storage of scrap materials used for repair and maintenance of contractor’s own equipment; and buildings or structures for uses like offices and repair facilities.

(13)  Convenience and liquor stores. Retail stores of generally 3,500 square feet or less in gross floor area which sell alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption and/or carry a range of merchandise oriented to convenience and travelers’ shopping needs.

(14)  Convenience zone. An area within a one-half (½) mile radius of a supermarket.

(15)  County. The County of Ventura, State of California.

(16)  Creek. A natural channel that conveys water to a river and, for the purposes of these Zoning Regulations, is shown as a blue line on the latest seven and one-half (7.5) minute topographic quadrangle map published by the United States Geological Survey (USGS).

(17)  Crop production and horticulture. Commercial agricultural field and orchard uses including production of:

(A)   Field crops;

(B)   Flowers and seeds;

(C)   Fruits;

(D)   Grains;

(E)   Melons;

(F)    Ornamental crops;

(G)   Tree nuts;

(H)   Trees and sod;

(I)    Vegetables.

        Also includes associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities (e.g., mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system construction, spraying, crop processing and retail sales in the field, including sales sheds.)

(d)    Definitions, “D.”

(1)    Density bonus. As defined by State law (Government Code Sections 65915, et seq.), is an increased density of at least twenty-five (25%) percent over the maximum authorized density which is granted to an owner/developer of a housing project agreeing to construct a prescribed percentage of very low and/or low income dwelling units. When determining the number of dwelling units that are to be affordable, the number of dwelling units authorized by the density bonus shall not be included.

(2)    Density bonus housing agreement. A legally binding agreement between an owner/developer and the City to ensure that the requirements of these Zoning Regulations are satisfied. The agreement shall establish the number of bonus units, their size, location, terms, and conditions of affordability, and production schedule. The agreement shall also require proper management and maintenance of the units.

(3)    Density bonus units. Residential units which exceed the otherwise maximum residential density for the development site.

(4)    Department. The Ojai Community Development Department referred to in these Zoning Regulations as the “Department.”

(5)    Detached. Any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure.

(6)    Development. Any construction activity or alteration of the landscape, its terrain contour or vegetation, including the erection or alteration of structures. New development is any construction, or alteration of an existing structure or land use, or establishment of a land use, after the effective date of these Zoning Regulations.

(7)    Development agreement. A contract between the City and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with Article 28 of this chapter and Government Code Sections 65864, et seq. A development agreement is intended to provide assurance to the applicant that an approved project may proceed subject to the policies, rules, regulations and conditions of approval applicable to the project at the time of approval regardless of any changes to City policies, rules, and regulations after project approval. In return, the City may be assured that the applicant will provide infrastructure and/or pay fees required by a new project.

(8)    Director. The City of Ojai Community Development Director, or designee of the Director.

(9)    Drive-in and drive-thru sales. Facilities where food or other products may be purchased by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include fast-food restaurants, drive-through coffee, dairy product and photo stores.

(10)  Drive-in and drive-thru services. Facilities where services may be obtained by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include drive-up bank teller windows, dry cleaners. Does not include automatic teller machines (ATMs) or automobile service stations, or car washes, which are separately defined.

(11)  Duplex. See “Multi-family dwellings.”

(12)  Dwelling, dwelling unit, or housing unit. A room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one (1) kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one (1) household on a long-term basis.

(e)    Definitions, “E.”

(1)    Electronics, equipment, and appliance manufacturing. Establishments engaged in manufacturing machinery, apparatus, and supplies for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and use of electrical energy, including:

(A)   Appliances (e.g., stoves/ovens, refrigerators, freezers, laundry equipment, fans, vacuum cleaners and sewing machines);

(B)   Aviation instruments;

(C)   Electrical transmission and distribution equipment;

(D)   Electronic components and accessories, and semiconductors, integrated circuits, related devices;

(E)   Electronic instruments, components and equipment (e.g., calculators and computers);

(F)    Electrical welding apparatus;

(G)   Lighting and wiring equipment (e.g., lamps and fixtures, wiring devices, vehicle lighting);

(H)   Industrial apparatus;

(I)    Industrial controls;

(J)    Instruments for measurement, testing, analysis and control, associated sensors and accessories;

(K)   Miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies (e.g., batteries, x-ray apparatus and tubes, electromedical and electrotherapeutic apparatus, electrical equipment for internal combustion engines);

(L)   Motors and generators;

(M)  Optical instruments and lenses;

(N)   Photographic equipment and supplies;

(O)   Pre-recorded magnetic tape;

(P)    Radio and television receiving equipment (e.g., television and radio sets, phonograph records and surgical, medical and dental instruments, equipment, and supplies);

(Q)   Surveying and drafting instruments;

(R)   Telephone and telegraph apparatus;

(S)    Transformers, switch gear and switchboards;

(T)   Watches and clocks.

        Does not include testing laboratories (soils, materials testing) (see “Business support services”), or research and development facilities separate from manufacturing (see “Research and development”).

(2)    Emergency shelters. Facilities for the temporary shelter and feeding of indigents or disaster victims, operated by a public or non-profit agency.

(3)    Enlargement of use. The expansion of a land use activity on a site or within a structure so that the use/activity occupies more floor or site area.

(4)    Environmental impact report (EIR). An informational document used to assess the physical characteristics of an area and to determine what effects will result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with CEQA.

(5)    Equestrian facilities. Commercial horse, donkey, and mule facilities, including horse ranches, boarding stables, riding schools and academies, horse exhibition facilities (for shows or other competitive events), pack stations, and barns, stables, corrals and paddocks accessory and incidental to these uses.

(6)    Equipment sales and rental. Service establishments with outdoor storage yards, which may offer a wide variety of materials and equipment for rental.

(7)    Establishment period. The first year after installing the plant in the landscape.

(f)    Definitions, “F.”

(1)    FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.

(2)    FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.

(3)    Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors.

(4)    Floor area ratio (FAR). The floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of floor area to total lot area. FAR restrictions are used to limit the maximum floor area allowed on a site (including all structures on the site). The maximum floor area of all structures (measured from exterior wall to exterior wall) allowed on a site (including carports) shall be determined by multiplying the floor area ratio (FAR) by the total net area of the site (FAR ′ net site area = maximum allowable floor area). See Figure 5-1.

 



Figure 5-1

FLOOR AREA RATIO

 

(5)    Food and beverage manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods and beverages for human consumption, and certain related products. Includes:

(A)   Bakeries (wholesale);

(B)   Bottling plants;

(C)   Breweries;

(D)   Candy, sugar and confectionery products;

(E)   Manufacturing;

(F)    Catering services separate from stores or restaurants;

(G)   Coffee roasting;

(H)   Dairy products manufacturing;

(I)    Fats and oil product manufacturing;

(J)    Fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, related processing;

(K)   Grain mill products and by-products;

(L)   Meat, poultry, and seafood canning, curing, by-product processing;

(M)  Soft drink production;

(N)   Miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products.

        Does not include: bakeries which sell all products on-site, which are included in the definition of “General retail”; or beer brewing as part of a brew pub, bar or restaurant (see “Alcoholic beverage sales—on-site”).

(6)    Forests. Oak woodland and riparian woodland as defined and described pursuant to the City’s most current master environmental assessment.

(7)    Furniture and fixtures manufacturing, cabinet shops. Manufacturers producing wood and metal household furniture and appliances; bedsprings and mattresses; all types of office furniture and partitions, shelving, lockers and store furniture; and miscellaneous drapery hardware, window blinds and shades. Includes wood and cabinet shops, but not sawmills or planing mills. Does not include the manufacture of household appliances (“Electronics, equipment, and appliance manufacturing”).

(8)    Furniture, furnishings and equipment stores. Stores engaged primarily in selling the following products and related services, including incidental repair services:

(A)   Draperies;

(B)   Floor coverings;

(C)   Furniture;

(D)   Glass and chinaware;

(E)   Home appliances;

(F)    Home furnishings;

(G)   Home sound systems;

(H)   Interior decorating materials and services;

(I)    Large musical instruments;

(J)    Lawn furniture;

(K)   Movable spas and hot tubs;

(L)   Office furniture;

(M)  Other household electrical and gas appliances;

(N)   Outdoor furniture;

(O)   Refrigerators;

(P)    Stoves;

(Q)   Televisions.

(g)    Definitions, “G.”

(1)    Garage, or carport. Parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the provisions of Article 14 of this chapter.

(A)   A garage is an attached or detached accessory structure with a door, enclosed on at least three (3) sides.

(B)   A carport is an attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two (2) sides.

        A garage or carport complies with the requirements of these Zoning Regulations for “covered” parking spaces.

(2)    General plan. The City of Ojai General Plan, including all its elements and all amendments to the General Plan, as adopted by the City Council under the provisions of Government Code Sections 65300, et seq., and referred to in these Zoning Regulations as the “General Plan.”

(3)    Gas station. A retail business selling gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels, which may also provide services which are incidental to fuel services. These secondary services may include vehicle engine maintenance and repair, towing and trailer rental services. Does not include the storage or repair of wrecked or abandoned vehicles, vehicle painting, body or fender work or the rental of vehicle storage or parking spaces.

(4)    General retail. Stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise. These stores and lines of merchandise include:

(A)   Art galleries;

(B)   Artists’ supplies;

(C)   Bakeries (all production in support of on-site sales);

(D)   Bicycles;

(E)   Books;

(F)   Cameras and photographic supplies;

(G)   Clothing and accessories;

(H)   Collectibles (cards, coins, comics, stamps);

(I)    Department stores;

(J)    Drug and discount stores;

(K)   Dry goods;

(L)    Fabrics and sewing supplies;

(M)   Florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only—outdoor sales are “Plant nurseries”);

(N)   Furniture, home furnishings and equipment;

(O)   General stores;

(P)   Gift and souvenir shops;

(Q)   Hardware;

(R)   Hobby materials;

(S)    Jewelry;

(T)    Luggage and leather goods;

(U    Musical instruments, parts and accessories;

(V)   Newsstands;

(W)   Orthopedic supplies;

(X)   Pet supplies sales with no animals but fish;

(Y)    Religious goods;

(Z)    Small wares;

(AA) Specialty shops;

(BB) Sporting goods and equipment;

(CC) Stationery;

(DD) Toys and games;

(EE) Variety stores.

(5)    Glass product manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments producing flat glass and other glass products which are pressed, blown, or shaped from glass produced in the same establishment. Does not include artisan and craftsman type operations of a larger scale than home occupations; see “Handcraft industries and small scale manufacturing.”

(6)    Golf courses/country clubs. Golf courses and accessory facilities and uses including: clubhouses with bar and restaurant, locker and shower facilities; driving ranges; “pro shops” for on-site sales of golfing equipment; and golf cart storage and sales facilities.

(7)    Grocery store. A retail business where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store.

(8)    Gross developable area. The gross site area as reduced by the applicable open space ratio.

(9)    Gross site area. The gross area of the subject parcel measured in square feet.

(10)  Group homes. This land use consists of a dwelling unit licensed or supervised by any Federal, State, or local health/welfare agency which provides twenty-four (24) hour nonmedical care of unrelated persons who are in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual in a family-like environment. Includes: children’s homes; orphanages; rehabilitation centers; self-help group homes. Convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of “Medical services—Extended care.”

(11)  Guest house. Living quarters having no kitchen facilities located within an accessory structure located on the same parcel with a primary dwelling unit, occupied for the sole use of the members of the resident family, temporary guests or persons permanently employed on the premises.

(h)    Definitions, “H.”

(1)    Handcraft industries, small-scale manufacturing. Establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small products primarily by hand, including jewelry, pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products.

(2)    Health/fitness facilities. Fitness centers, gymnasiums, health and athletic club, including any of the following indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities.

(3)    Height. (When referring to a tower or other supporting structure.) The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if the highest point is an antenna. See Section 10-2.803 for height measurement requirements for other structures.

(4)    Home occupations. The conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or residential site, employing occupants of the dwelling, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property.

(5)    Home split. The division of an existing single-family home into two (2) dwelling units, each containing a minimum of 650 square feet of living space and meet the following criteria: (i) the existing single-family home contains a minimum of 2,000 square feet of living space, is located on a legal lot comprising at least one-half (½) acre of land and has a current Zoning District designation of R-0-1/2, R-0-1, R-0-2 or R-0-4; (ii) entails no expansion in floor area of the existing single-family home other than to accommodate a separate kitchen and/or bathroom for the second unit not exceeding ten (10%) percent of the existing floor area; (iii) results in no change in the physical appearance of the existing single-family home or otherwise complies with the provisions of Section 10-2.2003(c); and (iv) adheres with all applicable building code requirements and development standards of the underlying Zoning District.

(6)    Hotel or motel. Facilities with guest rooms or suites, provided with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging (less than thirty (30) days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway, and typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging; for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes accessory guest facilities (e.g., swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses).

(7)    Household pets. The keeping/raising of birds, cats, dogs, or other common household pets, as determined by the Director, accessory to a residential use.

(8)    Housing cost. The sum of actual or projected monthly payments for all of the following costs associated with for-sale bonus units: principal and interest on a mortgage loan, including any loan insurance fees; property taxes and assessments; fire and casualty insurance; property maintenance and repairs; homeowner association fees; and a reasonable allowance for utilities.

(9)    Housing development. Residential projects consisting of five (5) or more residential units, including single-family and multi-family dwellings for sale or rent.

(10)  Hydrozone. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a non-irrigated hydrozone.

(i)     Definitions, “I.”

(1)    Illegal building or use. A building or use that does not conform to one (1) or more of the provisions of these Zoning Regulations, and did not lawfully exist on the effective date of applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations.

(2)    Improvement. Any fixture or embellishment affixed to public or private real property (e.g., a bollard, fence, gate, landscaping, park furniture, parking facility, paving, sidewalk, street light, street sign, streetscape, structure, tree, wall, work of art) or other object constituting a physical feature of real property or any part of the feature.

(3)    Incentives. The benefit offered by the City to encourage construction of eligible projects as defined by this article. Incentives may include adjustment of development standards, expedited processing of entitlements, relaxation of otherwise applicable entitlement conditions, and provisions for mixed-use activities.

(4)    Indoor amusement and entertainment facilities. Establishments providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including:

(A)   Bowling alleys;

(B)   Dance halls and ballrooms;

(C)   Electronic game arcades;

(D)   Ice skating and rollerskating;

(E)   Pool and billiard rooms as primary uses.

        Four (4) or more electronic games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment or a premises where fifty (50%) percent or more of the floor area is occupied by amusement devices are considered an electronic game arcade as described above; three (3) or less machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site.

(5)    Infiltration rate. The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water for each unit of time (inches for each hour).

(j)     Definitions, “J.” No specialized terms beginning with the letter “j” are defined at this time.

(k)    Definitions, “K.” No definitions of specialized terms beginning with the letter “k” are used at this time.

(l)     Definitions, “L.”

(1)    Land use permit. Authority granted by the City to use a specified site for a particular purpose, including use permits, temporary use permits, variances and minor variances, planned development permits, design review permits and zoning clearances as established by Article 4 of these Zoning Regulations.

(2)    Laundries and dry cleaning plants. Service establishments engaged primarily in high volume laundry and garment services, including: laundries; garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper service; industrial laundries; carpet and upholstery cleaners. Does not include coin-operated laundries or dry cleaning pick-up stores without dry cleaning equipment; see “Personal services.”

(3)    Libraries and museums. Public or quasi-public facilities, including aquariums, arboretums, art exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums and planetariums which are generally non-commercial in nature.

(4)    Live/work units. An integrated housing unit and working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and which includes:

(A)   Complete kitchen space and sanitary facilities in compliance with the City’s building code; and

(B)   Working space reserved for and regularly used by one (1) or more occupants of the unit.

(5)    Lot area. Gross lot area is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights-of-way. The total of the area measured in a horizontal plane, within the parcel lines bounding the lot, exclusive of:

(A)   Easements for streets or driveways which are not for the exclusive use of the parcel (lot) on which the easement is located; and

(B)   The access strip required to serve a flag parcel (lot).

(6)    Lot, or parcel. A recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by the Subdivision Map Act and City ordinances, including these Zoning Regulations. Types of lots include the following. See Figure 5-2 (Lot Types).

(A)   Corner lot. A lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than 135 degrees. If the intersection angle is more than 135 degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot.

(B)   Flag lot. A lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee.

(C)   Interior lot. A lot abutting only one (1) street.

(D)   Key lot. An interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot.

(E)   Reverse corner lot. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot.

(F)    Through lot. A lot with frontage on two (2) generally parallel streets.

(G)   Lot coverage. See “Site coverage.”

(H)   Lot depth. The average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the two (2) side lot lines if there is no rear line. See Figure 5-3. The Director shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration.

(7)    Lot frontage. The boundary of a lot adjacent to a public street right-of-way.



Figure 5-2

LOT TYPES



Figure 5-3

LOT FEATURES

 

(8)    Lot line or property line. Any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot lines are as follows (see Figure 5-3):

(A)   Front lot line. On an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line with the shortest frontage. (If the street-fronting lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the Director.) On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line.

(B)   Interior lot line. Any lot line not abutting a street.

(C)   Rear lot line. A property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line.

(D)   Side lot line. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line.

(9)    Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. See Figure 5-3. The Director shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape.

(m)   Definitions, “M.”

(1)    Map Act. See “Subdivision Map Act.”

(2)    Maximum building floor area. The total square footage of building space that may be developed.

(3)    Maximum developable area. The maximum area of the site measured in square feet that may be developed with buildings, structures, parking areas, roads, utility rights-of-way and the like.

(4)    Medical services—Clinics and laboratories. Facilities primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical and other personal health services, but which are separate from hospitals, including:

(A)   Health management organizations (HMOs);

(B)   Medical and dental laboratories;

(C)   Medical, dental and psychiatric offices;

(D)   Out-patient care facilities;

(E)   Other allied health services.

        Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are included under “Offices.”

(5)    Medical services—Hospitals. Hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses and emergency heliports (see the separate definition of “Accessory retail uses”).

(6)    Metal products fabrication, machine and welding shops. Establishments engaged primarily in the assembly of metal parts, including the following uses that produce metal ductwork, tanks, towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors and gates, and similar products:

(A)   Blacksmith and welding shops;

(B)   Sheet metal shops;

(C)   Machine shops and boiler shops.

(7)    Mixed-use project. A project which combines both commercial and residential uses, where the residential component is typically located above the commercial.

 

(8)    Mobile home. A trailer, transportable in one (1) or more sections, that is certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over eight (8′) feet in width and forty (40′) feet in length, with or without a permanent foundation and not including recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory-built housing. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included under the definition of “Single-family dwellings.”

(9)    Mobile home and recreational vehicle sales. Retail establishments selling and/or renting the following new or used vehicles and products:

(A)   Boats;

(B)   Campers/camper shells;

(C)   Golf carts;

(D)   Jet skis;

(E)   Mobile homes;

(F)    Motor homes;

(G)   Motorcycles;

(H)   Snowmobiles;

(I)    Travel/recreational trailers;

(J)    Other recreational vehicles.

        May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: parts/accessory sales separate from a vehicle dealership (see “Auto parts sales”); or bicycle and moped sales (see “General retail stores”).

(10)  Mobile home park. Any site that is planned and improved to accommodate two (2) or more mobile homes used for residential purposes, or on which two (2) or more mobile home lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobile homes used for residential purposes.

(11)  Mobile recycling unit. An automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials, including bins, boxes, or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials.

(12)  Multi-family dwellings. A building or a portion of a building used and/or designed as residences for two (2) or more families living independently of each other. Includes: duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes (buildings under one (1) ownership with two (2), three (3) or four (4) dwelling units, respectively, in the same structure) and apartments (five (5) or more units under one (1) ownership in a single building); townhouse development (three (3) or more attached single-family dwellings where no unit is located over another unit); and senior citizen multi-family housing.

(n)    Definitions, “N.”

(1)    Negative declaration. A statement describing the reasoning that a proposed action will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment, in compliance with CEQA.

(2)    Nonconforming parcel. A parcel that was legally created prior to the adoption of these Zoning Regulations and which does not conform to current Municipal Code provisions/standards (e.g., access, area or width requirements) prescribed for the zoning district in which the parcel is located.

(3)    Nonconforming sign. A sign which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of these Zoning Regulations, or any amendment hereto, but which fails by reason of the adoption or amendment to conform to all of the standards and regulations of the adopted or amended provision.

 

(4)    Nonconforming structure. A structure that was legally constructed prior to the adoption of these Zoning Regulations and which does not conform to current Municipal Code provisions/standards (e.g., open space, distance between structures) prescribed for the zoning district in which the structure is located.

(5)    Nonconforming use. A use of a structure (either conforming or nonconforming) or land that was legally established and maintained prior to the adoption of these Zoning Regulations and which does not conform to current Municipal Code provisions governing allowable land uses for the zoning district in which the use is located.

(6)    Nonrestricted unit. All units within a housing development excluding the designated dwelling units.

(o)    Definitions, “O.”

(1)    Occupancy. All or a portion of a structure occupied by one (1) tenant.

(2)    Offices.

(A)   Accessory. Office facilities that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the main use.

(B)   Business, administrative, and professional. Establishments providing direct, “over-the-counter” services to consumers (e.g., insurance agencies, real estate offices, travel agencies, utility company offices), but not including “Banks and financial services,” which are separately defined. Also includes businesses providing professional services and/or engaged in the production of intellectual property. These uses include:

(i)     Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services;

(ii)    Advertising agencies;

(iii)   Architectural, engineering, planning and surveying services;

(iv)   Attorneys;

(v)    Commercial art and design services;

(vi)   Counseling services;

(vii)  Court reporting services;

(viii) Detective agencies and similar services;

(ix)   Educational, scientific and research organizations;

(x)    Employment, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services;

(xi)   Literary and talent agencies;

(xii)  Management and public relations services;

(xiii) Media postproduction services;

(xiv) Writers and artists offices.

(C)   Processing and development. Office-type facilities characterized by high employee densities, and occupied by businesses engaged in information processing, and other computer- and telecommunications-based activities. These uses include:

(i)     Airline, lodging chain, and rental car company reservation centers;

(ii)    Computer software and hardware design;

(iii)   Data processing services;

 

(iv)   Insurance claim processing;

(v)    Mail order and e-commerce transaction processing;

(vi)   Telecommunications facility design and management;

(vii)  Telemarketing.

(D)   Temporary office. A mobile home, recreational vehicle or modular unit used as a temporary office facility. Temporary offices may include construction supervision offices on a construction site or off-site construction yard; a temporary on-site real estate office for a development project; or a temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction.

(E)   Temporary real estate. The temporary use of a dwelling unit within a residential development project as a sales office for the units on the same site, which is converted to residential use at the conclusion of its office use.

(3)    Open space. Land that is kept free of buildings, structures, and paved parking areas, but specifically including restricted lands; provided, however, that previous recreational facilities (e.g., golf courses and driving ranges) shall qualify as open space at the ratio of ninety (90%) percent of their land area.

(4)    Open space ratio (OSR). The percentage of the gross site area that shall remain as open space.

(5)    Ordinary maintenance and repair. Any work for which a building permit is not required, the purpose and effect of which is to correct deterioration of or damage to a structure or any part thereof and to restore the structure to its condition before the deterioration or damage.

(6)    Outdoor dining. The use of City sidewalks and public rights-of-way for the consumption of food or beverages in conjunction with the operation of food service establishment properly licensed for this type of service under applicable State and County health regulations and which provides on-premises customer seating.

(7)    Outdoor dining permit. A permit issued by the Director of Public Works allowing the encroachment upon and use of the public right-of-way for outdoor dining purposes.

(p)    Definitions, “P.”

(1)    Parcel. See “Lot, or parcel.”

(2)    Parks and playgrounds. Public parks, play lots, playgrounds and athletic fields for non-commercial neighborhood or community use, including tennis courts.

(3)    Parking facilities, public and private. Service establishments in the business of storing operative cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and other motor vehicles for clients. Includes both day use and long-term public and commercial garages, parking lots and structures, except when accessory to a primary use. (All primary uses are considered to include any customer or public use off-street parking required by these Zoning Regulations.) Includes sites where vehicles are stored for rental or leasing. Does not include dismantling yards.

(4)    Person. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; City, County, State, or district; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof.

(5)    Personal services. Establishments providing non-medical services as a primary use, including:

(A)   Barber and beauty shops;

(B)   Clothing rental;

(C)   Dry cleaning pick-up stores with limited equipment;

(D)   Home electronics and small appliance repair;

(E)   Laundromats (self-service laundries);

(F)    Shoe repair shops;

(G)   Tailors.

        These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided.

(6)    Planning Commission. The City of Ojai Planning Commission, appointed by the Ojai City Council in compliance with Government Code Section 65101, referred to throughout these Zoning Regulations as the “Commission.”

(7)    Plant factor. A factor that when multiplied by reference evapotranspiration, estimates the amount of water used by plants. For purposes of these Zoning Regulations, the average plant factor of low water using plants ranges from 0 to 0.3, for average water using plants the range is 0.4 to 0.6, and for high water using plants the range is 0.7 to 1.0.

(8)    Plant nurseries and garden supply stores. Commercial agricultural establishments engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover or outdoors. Includes stores selling these products, nursery stock, lawn and garden supplies and commercial scale greenhouses. The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under “General retail stores.” Home greenhouses are included under “Residential accessory uses and structures.”

(9)    Pre-existing tower and antenna. A tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued before the effective date of Section 10-2.1712

(10)  Primary structure. A structure that accommodates the primary use of the site.

(11)  Primary use. The main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site during the hours during which activities occur.

(12)  Primary zoning district. The zoning district applied to a site by the Zoning Map, to which an overlay zoning district may also be applied.

(13)  Printing and publishing. Establishments engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset or electrostatic (xerographic) copying; and other establishments serving the printing trade (e.g., bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping). This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals; and establishments manufacturing business forms and binding devices. “Quick printing” services are included in the definition of “Business support services.”

(14)  Property line. The recorded boundary of a parcel of land.

(15)  Proposed project. A proposed new structure, new addition to an existing structure or area of other new site development; these do not include the alteration of any portion of an existing structure other than an addition.

(16)  Public safety facility. A facility operated by a public agency including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, and police headquarters.

(17)  Public utility facility. A structure or facility serving as a junction point for transferring electric utility services from one (1) transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service voltages, and similar facilities for water and natural gas distribution. These include any of the following that are not exempt from permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091, but not office or customer service centers (classified in “Offices”):

(A)   Corporation and maintenance yards;

(B)   Electrical substations and switching stations;

(C)   Natural gas regulating and distribution facilities;

(D)   Public water system wells, treatment plants and storage;

(E)   Telephone switching facilities.

(q)    Definitions, “Q.”

(1)    Qualifying resident. A senior citizen or other person eligible to reside in senior housing.

(r)    Definitions, “R.”

(1)    Recreational vehicle (RV). A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, originally designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:

(A)   It contains less than 320 square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms;

(B)   It contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections;

(C)   It is built on a single chassis; and

(D)   It is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a towing permit.

(2)    Religious facilities. Facilities operated by religious organizations for worship, or the promotion of religious activities, including churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, and religious schools; and accessory uses on the same site (e.g., living quarters for ministers and staff, and child day care facilities) where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for the religious facility itself. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations (e.g., full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other potentially related operations [e.g., a recreational camp]) are classified according to their respective activities.

(3)    Research and development (R&D). Indoor facilities for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and mechanical components in advance of product manufacturing, that are not associated with a manufacturing facility on the same site. Includes chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include computer software companies (see “Offices—Production”), soils and other materials testing laboratories (see “Business support services”) or medical laboratories (see “Medical services—Clinics and labs”).

(4)    Residential accessory uses and structures. Any use or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to, a residence and does not change the character of the residential use. These uses include the following detached accessory structures, and other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of property:

(A)   Garages;

(B)   Gazebos;

(C)   Greenhouses;

(D)   Storage sheds;

(E)   Studios;

(F)    Tennis and other on-site sport courts;

(G)   Workshops.

        Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles (including their incidental restoration and repair), personal recreational vehicles and other personal property, accessory to a residential use. Does not include home satellite dish and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts; see “Telecommunications facilities.”

(5)    Residential care homes. Facilities providing residential social and personal care for children, the elderly and people with limited ability for self-care, but where medical care is not a major element. Includes children’s homes; transitional houses; orphanages; rehabilitation centers; and self-help group homes. Convalescent homes, nursing homes and similar facilities providing medical care are included under the definition of “Medical services—Extended care.”

(6)    Restaurant. A retail business selling food and beverages prepared on the site, for on- or off-premises consumption. These include eating establishments where customers are served from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premises consumption, and establishments where most customers are served food at tables for on-premises consumption, but may include providing food for take-out. Also includes coffee houses.

(7)    Restricted land area.

(A)   Totally unusable lands include floodplains, streams and other water bodies, forests, steep slopes and other land or water that cannot reasonably be built upon.

(B)   Reserved lands include road right-of-way, utility rights-of-way and easements.

(C)   Partially unusable lands include slopes, areas of poor building soils, view protection areas, environmentally-sensitive areas, required setbacks and open space buffers that require environmental mitigation measures.

(8)    Reverse vending machine. An automated mechanical device which accepts at least one (1) or more types of empty beverage containers, including aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by State law. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically, provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary.

(9)    Review authority. The individual or official City body (the Director, Planning Commission, or City Council) identified by these Zoning Regulations as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove the permit applications described in Article 4 of this chapter.

(10)  Room rental. The renting of individual bedrooms within a dwelling and/or the providing of table board to two (2) or more unrelated people, whether or not meals are provided.

(s)    Definitions, “S.”

(1)    Schools. Public and private educational institutions, including:

(A)   Boarding schools;

(B)   Business, secretarial, and vocational schools;

(C)   Community colleges, colleges and universities;

(D)   Elementary, middle, and junior high schools;

(E)   Establishments providing courses by mail;

(F)    High schools;

(G)   Military academies;

(H)   Professional schools (law, medicine);

(I)    Seminaries/religious ministry training facilities.

        Also includes specialized schools offering instruction in the following:

(J)    Art;

(K)   Ballet and other dance;

 

(L)   Computers and electronics;

(M)  Drama;

(N)   Driver education;

(O)   Language;

(P)    Music.

        Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development (e.g., fitness, environmental awareness, arts, communications, and management.) Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities (see “Child day care facilities”). See also the definition of “Studios—Art, dance, music, photography” for smaller-scale facilities offering specialized instruction.

(2)    Second residential units. A second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary dwelling on the same site. A second residential unit provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation and parking, and if attached to the primary dwelling, is without interior access to the primary dwelling.

(3)    Senior citizen. Persons at least sixty-two (62) years of age; or persons at least fifty-five (55) years of age in a senior citizen housing development, in compliance with State and Federal law.

(4)    Senior citizen housing. A housing development consistent with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Sections 12900, et seq., including 12955.9 in particular), which has been “designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens,” and which otherwise qualifies as “housing for older persons” as that phrase is used in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (P.L.100-430) and implementing regulations and as that phrase is used in California Civil Code Section 51.3.

(5)    Setback. The distance by which a structure, parking area, or other development feature shall be separated from a lot line, other structure or development feature, or street centerline. Setbacks from private streets are measured from the edge of the easement. See also “Yard.” Figure 5-3 shows the location of front, side, street side, rear, and interior setbacks.

(6)    Sign. A structure, device, figure, display, message placard, or other contrivance, or any part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is designed, constructed, intended, or used to advertise, or to provide information in the nature of advertising, to direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Does not include murals, paintings and other works of art that are not intended to advertise or identify any object, person, institution, business, product, service, or event. Types of signs include the following:

(A)   Abandoned sign. A sign that no longer advertises a business, lessor, owner, individual, product, service or activity on the premises where the sign is displayed.

(B)   Animated or moving sign. A sign which uses movement, lighting, or special materials to depict action or create a special effect to imitate movement.

(C)   Awning sign. A sign, logo, or text attached or affixed to, or painted or printed on, an awning which is attached to a building.

(D)   Banner, flag or pennant. Cloth, bunting, plastic, paper or similar non-rigid material used for advertising purposes attached to a structure, staff, pole, line, framing or vehicle, not including official flags of the United States, the State of California and other States of the nation, counties, municipalities, official flags of foreign nations and nationally or internationally recognized organizations.

(E)   Bench sign. Copy painted on a portion of a bench.

(F)    Billboard. A sign which has a flat-surface space upon which sign copy may be posted, painted, or affixed, and which is designed for the rental or lease of such sign space for purposes not relating to the use of the property upon which the sign exists.

(G)   Changeable copy sign. A sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical, or electrical means.

(H)   City sign. A sign that displays information regarding or identifying a City-operated structure, park, public area, street, avenue, road, place, court, the City limits, or other City information.

(I)    Civic event sign. A temporary sign other than a commercial sign posted to advertise a civic event sponsored by a public agency, school, church, civic-fraternal organization or similar noncommercial organization.

(J)    Commercial or manufacturing property zone sign. An on-site business-related sign located on property zoned commercial, industrial, or village mixed used.

(K)   Contractor or construction sign. A sign which states the name of the developer and contractor(s) working on the site and related engineering, architectural or financial firms involved with the project.

(L)   Directory sign. A sign for listing the tenants and their suite numbers of a multiple tenant structure or center.

(M)  Double-faced sign. A sign constructed to display its message on the outer surfaces of two (2) identical and/or opposite parallel planes.

(N)   Electronic reader board sign. A sign with a fixed or changing display composed of a series of lights, but not including time and temperature displays.

(O)   Flashing sign. A sign that contains an intermittent or a sequential flashing light source.

(P)    Future tenant identification sign. A temporary sign that identifies the names of future businesses that will occupy a site or structure.

(Q)   Garage sale sign. A sign with a message advertising the resale of personal property that has been used by the resident.

(R)   Grand opening. A promotional activity not exceeding thirty (30) calendar days used by newly-established businesses, within two (2) months after initial occupancy, to inform the public of their location and services available to the community. “Grand opening” does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales by a business.

(S)    Ground mounted sign. A sign fixed in an upright position on the ground not attached to a structure other than a framework, pole or device, erected primarily to support the sign. Includes monument signs and pole signs.

(T)   Halo-lit or back-lit sign. An illuminated sign with opaque, reverse pan channel, halo-lit letters and elements with concealed light sources in which the light projects away from the viewer.

(U)   Holiday decoration sign. Temporary seasonal signs, in the nature of decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily associated with nationally-recognized holidays and which contain no advertising message.

(V)   Identification sign. A sign which serves to identify only the name, address, and lawful use of the premises upon which it is located and provides no other advertisements or product identification.

(W)  Indirectly illuminated sign. A sign whose light source is external to the sign and which casts its light onto the sign from some distance.

(X)   Internally illuminated sign. A sign whose light source is located in the interior of the sign so that the rays go through the face of the sign, or light source which is attached to the face of the sign and is perceived as a design element of the sign.

(Y)   Marquee (canopy) sign. A sign which is attached to or otherwise made a part of a permanent roof-like structure which projects beyond the building wall in the form of a large canopy to provide protection from the weather.

(Z)   Monument sign. An independent, freestanding sign which is not supported by a building, but by one or more braces, uprights, or other similar structural components, and may incorporate the design and building materials accenting the architectural theme of the structures on the same property.

(AA) Multi-tenant or multiple tenant sign. An identification sign for a commercial site with multiple tenants, at least three (3) or more, displaying the names of each tenant on a single parcel or on contiguous parcels under the same ownership and which utilize common off-street parking and access facilities.

(BB) Neon sign. A sign composed of one or more discharge lamps in which the gas contains a large proportion of neon or other similar inert gas.

(CC) Nonconforming sign. An advertising structure or sign that was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of these Zoning Regulations, but does not now completely comply with current regulations.

(DD) Off-site directional sign. A sign identifying a publicly-owned facility, emergency facility, or a temporary subdivision sign, but excluding real estate signs.

(EE) Off-site sign. A sign identifying a use, facility, service, or product which is not located, sold, or manufactured on the same premises as the sign or which identifies a use, service, or product which, although sold or manufactured on the premises, does not constitute the principal item for sale or manufactured on the premises.

(FF) On-building directory sign. A sign or a set of similarly designed individual signs placed or displayed in sequence on a structure to list all or part of the businesses within the structure or business center.

(GG) On-site sign. A sign identifying a use, facility, service, or product which is located, sold, or manufactured on the same premises as the sign or which identifies a use, service, or product by a brand name which constitutes the principal item for sale or manufactured on the premises.

(HH) Painted wall sign. A painting or mural on the wall of a building or structure.

(II) Parking lot sign. A sign, other than those described in Section 10-2.1606(u), located in a parking lot to supply information to individuals using the lot.

(JJ) Permanent sign. A sign constructed of durable materials and intended to exist for the duration of time that the use or occupant is located on the premises.

(KK) Political sign. A sign designed for the purpose of advertising support of or opposition to a candidate or proposition for a public election, or otherwise containing a politically-oriented message.

(LL) Pole sign. An elevated freestanding sign, typically supported by one or two (2) poles or columns.

(MM) Portable sign. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground.

(NN) Projecting sign. A sign other than a wall sign suspending from, or supported by, a structure and projecting outward from the structure, rather than being mounted flat on the surface of a structure.

(OO) Roof sign. A sign constructed upon or over a roof, or placed so as to extend above the edge of the roof.

(PP) Special event sign/banner. A temporary sign or banner that is intended to inform the public of a community or public event, action, purpose, or occasion (i.e., grand opening or civic event).

(QQ) Temporary sign. A sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of being viewed from a public right-of-way, parking area or neighboring property.

(RR) Under canopy sign. A sign attached to or suspended from the underside of a projecting canopy, arcade, marquee, deck, or second floor porch protruding over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way.

(SS) Vehicle sign. A sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle which is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property.

(TT) Wall sign. A sign which is attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a structure with the display surface of the sign parallel to and mounted flat on the building wall.

(UU) Window sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view or an interior sign which faces a window exposed to public view and is located within three (3′) feet of the window.

(7)    Sign area. The entire area within a perimeter defined by a continuous line composed of right angles using no more than four (4) lines which enclose the extreme limits of lettering, logo, trademark, or other graphic representation.

(8)    Sign height. The vertical distance from the uppermost point used in measuring the area of a sign to the average grade immediately below the sign, including its base or the top of the nearest curb of the street on which the sign fronts, whichever measurement is the greatest.

(9)    Single-family dwellings. A building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family. Also includes factory-built, modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the Uniform Building Code (UBC), and mobile homes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations. May include the rental of rooms within a dwelling also occupied by the property owner or a primary tenant.

(10)  Site. A parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use.

(11)  Site coverage. The percentage of total site area occupied by structures. Structure or building coverage includes the primary structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures) and architectural features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches, stairs). Structure/building coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall.

 

 



Figure 5-4

SITE COVERAGE

 

(12)  Small family day care homes. See “Child day care facilities.”

(13)  Social service centers. Public or quasi-public establishments providing social services and rehabilitation services, counseling centers, welfare offices, job counseling and training centers or vocational rehabilitation agencies, serving persons with social or personal problems requiring special services and the handicapped and the disadvantaged. Includes organizations soliciting funds to be used directly for these and related services. Also includes establishments engaged in community improvement and neighborhood development. (Does not include child day-care services [e.g., pre-schools] which are classified under “Schools—Preschool to secondary,” or “Residential care,” which are separately defined).

(14)  Steep slopes. Slopes with a grade of more than twenty-five (25%) percent.

(15)  Stone and cut stone product manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments engaged primarily in cutting, shaping, and finishing marble, granite, slate, and other stone for building and miscellaneous uses. Also includes establishments engaged primarily in buying or selling partly finished monuments and tombstones.

(16)  Storage—Outdoor. The storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use.

(17)  Storage—Personal self-service (mini-storage). A structure or group of structures containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers rented as individual storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand.

(18)  Structural clay and pottery product manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments engaged primarily in producing brick and structural clay products, including pipe, china plumbing fixtures and vitreous china articles, fine earthenware and porcelain products. Artist/craftsman uses are included in “Handcraft industries and small scale manufacturing,” and “Home occupations.”

(19)  Studios for art, dance, music, photography. Small-scale facilities, typically accommodating one (1) group of students at a time, in no more than one (1) instructional space. Larger facilities are included under the definition of “Schools—Specialized education and training.” These include facilities for individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; martial arts training studios; gymnastics instruction, and aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment.

(20)  Subdivision. The division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion of land shown on the latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes the following, as defined in Civil Code Section 1351, a condominium project; a community apartment project; a planned development; or the conversion of five (5) or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative.

(21)  Subdivision Map Act, or Map Act. Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions.

(22)  Supermarket. A full-service, self-service retail store with gross annual sales of Two Million and no/100ths ($2,000,000.00) Dollars or more, and which sells a line of dry grocery, canned goods, or non-food items and some perishable items.

(t)     Definitions, “T.”

(1)    Telecommunications facilities. Public, commercial, and private electromagnetic and photoelectric transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network and wireless communications including commercial earth stations for satellite-based communications. Includes antennas, commercial satellite dish antennas, and equipment buildings. Does not include telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections.

(2)    Textile and leather product manufacturing. Manufacturing establishments engaged in performing any of the following operations:

(A)   Coating, waterproofing, or otherwise treating fabric;

(B)   Dying and finishing fiber, yarn, fabric, and knit apparel;

(C)   Manufacture of knit apparel and other finished products from yarn;

(D)   Manufacture of felt goods, lace goods, non-woven fabrics and miscellaneous textiles;

(E)   Manufacturing of woven fabric, carpets and rugs from yarn;

(F)    Preparation of fiber and subsequent manufacturing of yarn, threads, braids, twine cordage.

(G)   Upholstery manufacturing.

(3)    Theaters and auditoriums. Indoor facilities for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, including:

(A)   Civic theaters, and facilities for “live” theater and concerts;

(B)   Exhibition and convention halls;

(C)   Motion picture theaters;

(D)   Public and semi-public auditoriums;

(E)   Similar public assembly uses.

        Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, nor indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events.

 

(4)    Tower. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers, radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures and other similar supporting structures.

(5)    Truck and freight terminals. This land use consists of transportation establishments furnishing services incidental to air, motor freight, and rail transportation including:

(A)   Freight forwarding services;

(B)   Freight terminal facilities;

(C)   Joint terminal and service facilities;

(D)   Packing, crating, inspection and weighing services;

(E)   Postal service bulk mailing distribution centers;

(F)    Transportation arrangement services;

(G)   Trucking facilities, including transfer and storage.

(u)    Definitions, “U.”

(1)    Use. The purpose for which land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied, or maintained.

(2)    Use, primary. See “Primary use.”

(v)    Definitions, “V.”

(1)    Very low and low income households. Households whose income does not exceed the very low and low income limits applicable to the County, as published and periodically updated by the State Department of Housing and Community Development in compliance with State law (Health and Safety Code Sections 50079.5 and 50105) for “for-rent” and “for-sale” housing.

(2)    Veterinarians, animal hospitals, kennels, boarding. Office and indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. Kennels and boarding operations are commercial facilities for the keeping, boarding or maintaining of five (5) or more dogs four (4) months of age or older, or five (5) or more cats, except for dogs or cats in pet shops.

(w)   Definitions, “W.”

(1)    Warehousing, wholesaling and distribution. These facilities include:

(A)   Warehousing. Facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage. Does not include: warehouse, storage or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public (see “Storage, personal storage facilities”); warehouse facilities in which the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling and distribution (see “Wholesaling and distribution”); or terminal facilities for handling freight (see “Truck and freight terminals”).

(B)   Wholesaling and distribution. Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to persons or companies. Includes establishments as:

(i)     Agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants;

(ii)    Assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products;

(iii)   Merchant wholesalers;

(iv)   Stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment.

(x)    Definitions, “X.” No definitions of specialized terms beginning with the letter “x” are used at this time.

(y)    Definitions, “Y.”

(1)    Yard. An area between a lot line and a setback, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections allowed by these Zoning Regulations. See Section 10-2.804 (Setback Measurement and Exceptions).

(A)   Front yard. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required setback.

(B)   Rear yard. An area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback.

(C)   Side yard. An area extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line and the required setback.

(z)    Definitions, “Z.”

(1)    Zoning regulations. The Ojai Zoning Regulations, Title 10, Chapter 2 of the Ojai Municipal Code, referred to herein as “these Zoning Regulations.”

(§ 3, Ord. 771, eff. February 13, 2004, as amended by § 5, Ord. 826,  eff. June 28, 2013, § 3, Ord. 856, eff. June 12, 2015, § 2, Ord. 876, eff. November 12, 2017)

Chapter 3 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Note
*       Sections 10-3.01 through 10-3.23 added by Ord. No. 209, amended by Ord. Nos. 221, 302, 331, 335 and 339, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 384. Sections 10-3.101 through 10-3.106, 10-3.201 through 10-3.216 and 10-3.301 through 10-3.315 added by Ord. No. 384, amended by Ord. Nos. 402, 453, 483, 512, 551, 567, 624 and 629, repealed by Ord. No. 637, effective January 9, 1986. Sections 10-3.101 through 10-3.113 added by Ord. No. 637 renumbered to be Sections 10-3.01 through 10-3.13.

 

Sec. 10-3.01. Purpose.
        The provisions of this chapter are intended to supplement and implement the Subdivision Map Act for the purpose of regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

 

Sec. 10-3.02. Name.
        This chapter shall be referred to as the City’s subdivision regulations.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

 

Sec. 10-3.03. Definitions.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

(a)    “Advisory Agency” shall mean a designated official or an official body charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property, or imposing or suggesting requirements or conditions thereon, or having the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove maps, or having the authority to conduct hearings relating to notices of violation as set forth in Section 66499.36 of the Subdivision Map Act.

        The Planning Commission shall constitute the Advisory Agency for divisions of real property pursuant to this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act. In such capacity, the Planning Commission shall make recommendations as to findings, requirements, conditions, approvals, and disapprovals but shall not be empowered to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove proposed subdivisions.

        The Planning Commission shall further be responsible for hearing appeals from decisions of the City Engineer and Planning Director taken in the time and manner set forth in this chapter.

(b)    “City Clerk” shall mean the City Clerk of the City of Ojai.

(c)    “Council” shall mean the City Council of the City of Ojai.

(d)    “City Engineer” shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Ojai.

(e)    “Director” shall mean the Planning Director of the City of Ojai.

(f)    “Environmental analysis” shall mean an analysis conducted pursuant to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, Sections 21000 et seq., of the Public Resources Code of the State.

(g)    “Final map” shall mean a final map showing a subdivision of five (5) or more parcels prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and in a manner to be filed in the office of the County Recorder.

(h)    “General Plan” shall mean the General Plan of the City.

(i)     “Lot.” Lot shall have the same meaning as the word “parcel,” and the two (2) words shall be synonymous.

(j)     “Lot line adjustment” shall mean any boundary line adjustment between four (4) or fewer existing adjoining lots, where the land taken from one (1) lot is added to an adjoining lot, and where a greater number of lots than originally existed is not thereby created.

(k)    “Parcel.” Parcel shall have the same meaning as the word “lot,” and the two (2) words shall be synonymous.

(l)     “Parcel map” shall mean a map showing a subdivision of less than five (5) parcels prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Subdivision Map Act and in a manner to be recorded in the office of the County Recorder.

(m)   “Subdivision Map Act” or “Act” shall mean Sections 66410, et seq., of the Government Code of the State.

(n)    “Tentative Map” shall mean a map showing the design and improvements of a proposed division of land and the existing conditions in and around it.

(o)    “Zoning regulations” shall mean the zoning regulations of the City.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986, as amended by § 2, Ord. 783, eff. November 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 10-3.04. Application.
        This chapter shall apply to all divisions of land, except those specifically exempted by Sections 66412, 66412.1, 66412.2, and 66412.5 of the Act; provided, however, lot line adjustments shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter to the extent permitted by subsection (d) of Section 66412 of the Act. In the event of divisions of land which are not subject to this chapter and the Act, a certificate of compliance shall be processed therefor in a form prescribed by the Director.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

 

Sec. 10-3.05. Responsibilities.
(a)    Advisory Agency. The Advisory Agency shall have the duty of reporting on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property and shall make recommendations to the Council as to its findings, requirements, conditions, approvals, and disapprovals but shall not be empowered to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove proposed subdivisions.

(b)    Council. The Council shall make all findings required by this chapter and the Act and shall have final jurisdiction for the approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of proposed subdivisions.

        The Council shall have final jurisdiction for hearing appeals from actions taken on tentative maps and parcel maps.

(c)    City Engineer. The City Engineer shall be responsible for:

(1)    Establishing design and construction details, standards, and specifications with the Director;

(2)    Determining whether proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of this chapter and the Act and reviewing tentative maps with the Director in order to recommend the approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative maps;

(3)    With the Director, processing and certifying final maps, reversion to acreage maps, and amended tentative maps and approving final parcel maps;

(4)    With the Director, processing and approving subdivision improvement plans, boundary line adjustments, and certificates of compliance;

(5)    Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map;

(6)    Inspecting and approving subdivision improvements;

(7)    Accepting dedications and improvements for subdivisions of less than five (5) parcels; and

(8)    Certifying the completion of private improvements not to be maintained by the City.

(d)    Director. The Director shall be responsible for:

(1)    Investigating proposed subdivisions for conformity to the General Plan, Specific Plans, and the zoning regulations and reviewing tentative maps with the City Engineer in order to recommend the approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative maps;

(2)    Conducting environmental analyses related to proposed subdivisions pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act;

(3)    Accepting tentative maps for approval and distributing tentative maps to appropriate agencies and City divisions; and

(4)    With the City Engineer processing and certifying final maps, revisions to acreage maps, and amended tentative maps and approving final parcel maps and lot line adjustments.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

 

Sec. 10-3.06. Improvements and design.
(a)    Improvements. No subdivision shall be approved unless those on-site and off-site improvements which are found by the City Engineer to be reasonably necessary to service the lots being created are constructed or guaranteed, including, but not limited to, the following improvements:

(1)    An adequate domestic water distribution system designed and constructed to service each lot proposed to be created;

(2)    An adequate fire protection system for the proposed subdivision, including the fire hydrants, hose connections, and other fire protection facilities deemed necessary by the Ventura County Fire Protection District. All fire protection facilities shall be dedicated to the proposed water purveyor;

(3)    An adequate sewage system designed and constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created;

(4)    An adequate storm water drainage system designed and constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created;

(5)    An adequate system of public street lighting;

(6)    Adequate provisions for street trees and other parkway landscaping;

(7)    An adequate public and/or private street and/or alley system designed and constructed to serve each lot proposed to be created;

(8)    Adequate systems designed and constructed to provide all necessary utilities to each lot proposed to be created, including, but not limited to, facilities for water, natural gas, electricity, cable television, and telephone services. Except as otherwise provided in this Code, all utility facilities set forth in this chapter shall be underground, and all utility facilities, including service laterals, shall be installed in the ground prior to the paving of streets. The City Engineer may authorize installations of utility facilities after street improvements are installed if the installation will not require the reconstruction or repair of the street improvements or if unusual circumstances warrant. All necessary arrangements for the installation of utilities shall be made with the operator of each proposed subdivision utility system pursuant to this section. At the time of the approval of the tentative map, the Advisory Agency or the Council may modify this requirement for all or a part of the subdivision where, due to physical conditions, this requirement would cause unreasonable hardship. This section shall not apply to utility lines which do not provide service to the area being subdivided;

(9)    An adequate traffic regulatory system, including the necessary traffic signs, street name and traffic control signs, and pavement markings and stripings;

(10)  Adequate provisions for fencing, either chain link or concrete block, where necessary for public safety, including, but not limited to, on all lot lines of the subdivision which adjoin drainage channels or are adjacent to all controlled access highways, highway rights-of-way which abut or pass through the subdivision, and on all lot lines which separate the subdivision from unimproved or commercial property; and

(11)  Any and all other improvements necessary to provide all necessary services to each lot proposed to be created.

(b)    Limitation on improvements required for subdivisions of less than five parcels. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection (a) of this section, improvements for a division of land which is not a subdivision of five (5) or more lots shall be limited to the construction of reasonable off-site and on-site improvements for the parcels being created.

(c)    Design. The design of the subdivision shall conform to generally accepted engineering standards and to such standards as required by the City Engineer and Director, including, but not limited to, plans for grading and erosion control and such other physical requirements as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or the implementation of, the General Plan, or any applicable Specific Plan, and the zoning regulations.

(d)    Improvement agreements. Prior to submitting a final map or parcel map of a proposed subdivision for approval pursuant to this chapter, the subdivider and all owners of land in the subdivision substantially interested in the subdivision shall execute an improvement agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, whereby each is bound to construct, within a reasonable time specified therein, the improvements required by this chapter. The same parties shall secure the execution of such agreement by a good and sufficient improvement security. In the event the improvements cannot be constructed by the expiration date specified in the agreement, the developer shall file a request for a time extension and pay the required fees prescribed by the Council. The Advisory Agency or the Council may deny the application for a time extension if the circumstances so warrant. No improvement will be accepted until all required fees have been paid.

(e)    Improvement plans. The subdivider shall prepare plans and specifications for the improvements required for the proposed subdivision pursuant to this chapter and the Act. The improvement plans shall be printed or drawn clearly and legibly or reproduced by a process which results in a permanent record which will permit direct reproductions. The improvement plans shall be prepared according to good engineering practices under the direction of, and shall be signed by, a registered civil engineer licensed by the State. The improvement plans shall show the complete plan, profiles, and details for all improvements to be placed in the proposed subdivision, including, but not limited to, all street work, drainage channels and structures, all underground utilities to be installed by the subdivider, including all appurtenances thereto located within the rights-of-way, retaining walls or other improvements to support cut slopes and embankment bridges if constructed in conjunction with subdivision improvements, the location of underground utilities not within the right-of-way which may control the location and elevation of storm drains and culverts, the location of fire hydrants, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, fences which may be required, gates, structures and drainage facilities necessary to control slides, other improvements which may be required to complete the work, and complete grading and erosion control plans. Subsequent to the certification of the proposed subdivision by the City Engineer, no change shall be made in the improvement plans for the subdivision without the prior approval of the City Engineer.

(f)    Commencement of improvements. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the grading of the proposed subdivision and the construction of any improvements thereon shall not begin until the City Engineer has approved the improvement plans for the proposed construction.

(g)    Cost estimates. An estimate of the cost of the improvements for the proposed subdivision shall be prepared by the subdivider and shall accompany the improvement plans each time they are submitted. The cost estimate shall include a separate item for contingencies in the amount of ten (10%) percent of the estimated actual cost. Upon consideration of the estimate submitted by the subdivider, the City Engineer shall determine the estimated cost for the improvements for the proposed subdivision.

(h)    Reimbursements for supplemental improvements. The City may require that improvements installed by a subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision shall contain supplemental size, capacity, or number for the benefit of property not within the subdivision and that such improvements be dedicated to the public. If improvements containing supplemental size, capacity, or number are installed, the City shall enter into an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements. Any such reimbursement agreement shall be funded exclusively in the manner described and contemplated in the Act.

(i)     Time for the construction of improvements for subdivisions of less than five (5) parcels and designated remainder parcels. The time for the fulfillment of construction requirements for improvements for subdivisions of less than five (5) parcels and on designated remainder parcels, as defined in Section 66424.6 of the Act, may be established by agreement between the City and the subdivider. In the absence of such an agreement, the fulfillment of such construction requirements shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development is issued by the City or within a reasonable time following the approval of the final parcel map or tract map and prior to the issuance of a permit and other grant of approval for development upon a finding by the City that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for the public health and safety or is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

 

Sec. 10-3.07. Tentative parcel maps and tract maps.
        A tentative map shall be submitted for subdivisions of five (5) parcels or more, including those subdivisions described in subsections (a) through (d) of Section 66426 of the Act and any other subdivision for which a parcel map is required by the Act. The following requirements shall apply to all applications for tentative parcel maps and tract maps:

(a)    Requirements.

(1)    Each tentative map shall be accompanied by a filing fee established by resolution of the Council. The minimum map scale shall be:

(i)     If the streets of the map do not exceed forty-two (42″) inches along any side, the scale of the map shall be one inch equals 100 feet.

(ii)    Otherwise the scale shall be one inch equals 200 feet.

(2)    Each tentative map shall contain the following information:

(i)     A sufficient legal description of the land to describe the location of the proposed subdivision;

(ii)    A vicinity or area map at a scale of one inch equals 500 feet showing the major existing circulation pattern, all proposed major streets, and the existing major watercourses and existing Ventura County Flood Control District channels within one-half (1/2) mile of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision;

(iii)   The tract number or parcel map number and the date the map was prepared;

(iv)   The name and address of the owner, together with evidence as to the ownership of the land proposed to be divided;

(v)    The name, address, and status of the subdivider, whether an individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise;

(vi)   The names and addresses of all persons owning twenty-five (25%) percent or more interest shall be indicated;

(vii)  The name and address of the registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor who prepared the map;

(viii) The appropriate acreage and boundary lines of the subdivision;

(ix)   The north point, scale, and date;

(x)    The location, width, grades, and proposed names of all streets within the boundaries of the subdivision and the approximate radii of curves;

(xi)   The proposed grading, including elevations, dimensions, locations, and extent of the proposed grading, both on-site and off-site, and a cross section view through the property to be graded demonstrating the relationship of the proposed cut as fill to the natural grade;

(xii)  The approximate grade of any street or part of a street within the subdivision;

(xiii) The location and width of alleys, easements, and all necessary off-site accesses;

(xiv) The total number of lots and lot lines and the approximate dimensions thereof;

(xv)  The approximate location of areas subject to inundation of storm water overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of all watercourses which lie within the subdivision or lie without the subdivision but impose flood hazards thereto, together with a statement that all such watercourses will be improved for fifty (50) year storm conditions prior to the construction of any facilities to be protected thereby and that the subdivider shall deed in fee to the City or to the Ventura County Flood Control District, if requested by the City, such parcels of land within or without the subdivision as are necessary for rights-of-way to accommodate the required improvement of such water courses, including provisions for the maintenance roads and safety fencing;

(xvi) The location of all existing buildings, structures, and trees;

(xvii)        The location of the existing and proposed public utilities and the name and address of all operators of such proposed public utilities;

(xviii)       The disposition to be made of all existing structures, tree rows, wells, tanks, irrigation facilities, and public utilities;

(xix) The proposed method of connecting to any existing sewer system, together with elevations;

(xx)  The contours or elevations extending 100 feet beyond the map boundary;

(xxi) Any significant adjacent topographic features which can materially affect the design of the subdivision;

(xxii)        Any significant interference with the line of sight views of structures on immediately adjoining land caused by the proposed uses of the subdivision;

(xxiii)       The proposed source of water supply;

(xxiv)       The proposed methods of storm water drainage and a preliminary flood hazard report, including information concerning the tributary water shed, both upstream and downstream;

(xxv)        The proposed street lighting system;

(xxvi)       The proposed uses of all lots, for example, single-family, multi-family, commercial, industrial, school, park, or other;

(xxvii)      The proposed street tree planting;

(xxviii)     The proposed public areas, including parks and/or playgrounds;

(xxix)       The proposed name of the subdivision;

(xxx)        The existing uses within one-half (½) mile of the proposed subdivision and the ownership immediately surrounding the subdivision; and

(xxxi)       The designation of the square foot area of each proposed lot in the subdivision.

        Any of the data required by this subsection which it is impossible or impracticable to place upon the tentative map shall be submitted in writing with the map.

(b)    Soils engineers: Geologists. The name or names of any geologist or soils engineer whose services were utilized in the preparation of the design of the tentative map shall be shown on the map.

(c)    Accompanying data and reports. The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports:

(1)    A preliminary title report showing the legal owners as of the time of filing the tentative map;

(2)    The names and addresses of all property owners within a 300 foot radius of the map boundary;

(3)    The subdivider shall submit written verification that the legal owner or owners consent to the filing of the tentative map;

(4)    The preliminary soils report prepared by a civil engineer registered in the State and based upon adequate tests and borings; and

(5)    Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the Director or City Engineer.

(d)    Submission of tentative maps. Twelve (12) copies of the tentative map shall be filed with the Director. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn, and the size of each sheet shall be at least eighteen (18″) inches by twenty-six (26″) inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. Enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. The map shall show all survey and mathematical information and data necessary to locate all monuments and to locate and retrace any and all interior and exterior boundary lines appearing thereon. Each lot shall be numbered, and each block shall be numbered or lettered. The map shall show the definite location of the division. Each serving utility shall be provided a copy of the tentative map. In addition, detailed notices of the filing of a tentative map shall be sent to all affected agencies for review and comment.

(e)    Environmental reviews. The Director, upon the receipt of a tentative map application, shall conduct an environmental analysis. If a draft environmental impact report is required, the application for tentative map approval shall not be considered completed until an environmental impact report is ready for presentation to the Advisory Agency.

(f)    Advisory Agency action. Within fifty (50) days after the filing of the complete tentative map or, if an environmental impact report has been prepared for the tentative map, within forty-five (45) days after the certification of the environmental impact report, or within such longer period of time as may be agreed to by the subdivider, the Advisory Agency shall hold a public hearing on the map, recommend the content of the findings required by this chapter and the Act, recommend approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative map, and report its actions in writing to the Council. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Advisory Agency may appeal such decision to the City Council in accordance with Section 66452.5 of the Government Code of this State.

(g)    Council action. At the next regular meeting of the Council following the filing of the Advisory Agency’s report with it, the Council shall fix the meeting date at which the tentative map will be considered by it at a public hearing, which date shall be within thirty (30) days thereafter, and the Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map within such thirty (30) day period; provided, however, if legally sufficient notice thereof has been given, the Council may hold the required public hearing at its next regular meeting following the filing of the Advisory Agency’s report, in which case the Council shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the tentative map within thirty (30) days thereafter.

(h)    Public hearings. Whenever a public hearing is to be held pursuant to this chapter, notice of the time and place thereof, including a general description of the location of the subdivision, shall be given in the manner required by Sections 65090 through 65095 of the Government Code of the State.

(i)     Findings and notices. Actions taken by the Advisory Agency and/or the Council shall comply with the provisions of Sections 66473, 66473.5, and 66474 of the Act. In addition to the findings required by said Sections 66473, 66473.5, and 66474, the Advisory Agency and/or the Council may make such additional findings deemed necessary to support its actions. Notice of such actions shall be given to the subdivider, interested persons, and any person who has requested such notice in writing.

(j)     Time limits. The time limits for acting on tentative maps and appeals, as specified in this chapter and by the Act, may be extended by the mutual consent of the subdivider and the City. A waiver of time limits may be required as a condition of accepting the application for, or processing of, tentative maps for the purpose of permitting the concurrent processing of related approvals or environmental analyses.

(k)    Term of tentative maps. An approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire thirty-six (36) months after its approval or conditional approval.

(l)     Time extensions for approved tentative maps. Requests for time extensions relating to approved tentative maps shall be submitted to the Council not less than thirty (30) days before the tentative map is due to expire. The Council shall review such requests and either approve or deny the extension. The additional period of time of all extensions shall not exceed thirty-six (36) months.

(m)   Amendments to approved tentative maps. Minor changes in a tentative map may be approved by the Advisory Agency upon an application by the subdivider provided that:

(1)    No lots are added, deleted, or substantially altered thereby;

(2)    No proposed building locations are substantially altered;

(3)    Such changes are consistent with the intent and spirit of the original tentative map approved; and

(4)    There are no resulting violations of this chapter, the Act, or other applicable laws.

        The amendment shall be indicated on the approved tentative map and certified by the Advisory Agency. Changes other than minor changes to tentative maps shall be processed according to the procedures set forth in this section. Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map approved. Minor change decisions which are objected to in writing by any interested person within fifteen (15) days after rendition shall be deemed to be recommendations only, and any request for a change shall thereafter be processed in the manner provided in this chapter and for the fee required for the initial processing of tentative maps.

(n)    Waivers of parcel maps. The Council may waive the requirement of a parcel map if the Council finds that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements of this chapter and the Act as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements imposed by this chapter and the Act.

        In any case where the requirement for a parcel map is waived by the Council, a tentative parcel map, at the discretion of the Council, may be required. A parcel map waiver may be conditioned to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(o)    Stays pending outcome of litigation. If a lawsuit has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction affecting the validity of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map, the subdivider may apply to the City within ten (10) days after the service of the initial petition or complaint upon the City for a stay of the time in which a tentative map will expire. Within forty (40) days after receiving the request, the Council shall stay the tentative map’s expiration date until the final conclusion of the action if the action affects the validity of the tentative map approval.

(p)    Consistency. No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a tentative map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the General Plan, and any applicable Specific Plan, or not permitted by the zoning regulations or other applicable provisions of this Code.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986, as amended by § 16, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Sec. 10-3.08. Final parcel maps and tract maps.
(a)    Preparation. The form and content of final parcel maps and tract maps shall be as required by the Act and this chapter. Such maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. A final parcel map shall be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the Land Surveyors Act and as required by this chapter.

(b)    Certificates and acknowledgements. Prior to filing, the certificates and acknowledgements required by the Act and this chapter shall appear on the final map and may be combined where appropriate. Such certificates and acknowledgements shall appear on the face of the map, unless the City Engineer advises the subdivider that such certificates and acknowledgements are to be made by separate instrument. If a certificate or acknowledgement is made by separate instrument, there shall appear on the final map a reference to the separately-recorded document.

(c)    Monuments. The number, type, and location of monuments shall be as set forth in the Act and this chapter and shall conform to the standards prescribed by Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code of the State. At least one exterior boundary line of the land being subdivided shall be adequately monumented or referenced before a map is recorded.

(d)    Additional information. The final parcel map and tract map shall also contain the following information:

(1)    The date of preparation, north point, and scale;

(2)    The location and names, without abbreviations, of all existing and proposed streets and alleys and adjoining streets;

(3)    The dimensions in feet and hundredths of a foot;

(4)    The dimensions of all lots or parcels;

(5)    The center line data, including bearings and distances;

(6)    The radius, tangent, arc, and central angle of all curves;

(7)    Suitable primary survey control points, including the basis of bearing;

(8)    The precise location of all permanent monuments;

(9)    Ties to and names of all adjacent subdivisions;

(10)  Ties to any City or County boundary lines involved;

(11)  The gross area and net area of all lots or parcels of one gross acre or more to the nearest one hundredth of an acre;

(12)  References to maps previously recorded relative to the property;

(13)  The monuments, shown and identified sufficiently to readily retrace the survey; and

(14)  The bearings and lengths of each lot line or parcel line, block line, and boundary line; provided, however, if several of such lines are equal, the duplication of figures may be eliminated if no ambiguity will result.

(e)    Submittal for City approval. The subdivider shall submit prints of the final map to the City Engineer and the Director for checking. The preliminary prints shall be accompanied by the following plans, reports, and documents in a form approved by the City Engineer:

(1)    Improvement plans as required by this chapter;

(2)    A preliminary soils report, based upon test borings and prepared in conformance with the requirements of Chapter 70 of the Uniform Building Code, shall be required for all final tract maps and for those parcels maps which involve commercial or industrial development. The soils report shall be prepared in the State.

        A preliminary soils report may be waived or reduced in scope by the City Engineer if the soil characteristics of the area in the vicinity of the proposed subdivision have been established by previous analyses.

        Parcel maps involving the construction of single-family dwellings shall require the preparation of a report which includes the subsurface soil classification as well as the results of an expansive index test;

(3)    A preliminary subdivision title guarantee and a title report prepared within one month prior to the submittal of the final map;

(4)    An improvement bond estimate which shall include the cost of all improvements within public rights-of-way, easements or common areas, on-site and off-site drainage improvements, and utility trench backfill as provided by the developer, except for those utility facilities installed by a utility company under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission of the State;

(5)    Deeds for easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map;

(6)    Written evidence acceptable to the City in the form of rights of entry or permanent easements across private property outside the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility;

(7)    Agreements acceptable to the City Engineer executed by all owners of all utility and other easements within the proposed rights-of-way consenting to the dedication of the road or consenting to the joint use of the rights-of-way as may be required by the City for public use and convenience of the road shall be required. Such owners shall join in the dedication and subordinate their rights to the right of the public in the road;

(8)    Traverse closures for the boundary blocks, lots, easements, street center lines, and monument lines;

(9)    Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations;

(10)  Proposed declarations of covenants, conditions, and restrictions and all other organizational documents for the subdivision in a form as prescribed by Section 1355 of the Civil Code of the State and applicable regulations of the Department of Real Estate of the State. All such documents shall be subject to review and approval by the Director and City Attorney;

(11)  Written certification from the affected water and sewer districts that adequate water and sewage facilities are or will be available to serve the proposed project and that all necessary financial arrangements have been made to insure the construction of such facilities; and

(12)  Any additional data, reports, or information as required by the City Engineer.

(f)    Council approval of final tract maps. The final tract map, together with any improvement agreements, shall be filed with the Council for approval after all required certificates on such map have been signed and, where necessary, acknowledged.

        The Council, at the meeting at which it receives the map or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, shall approve the map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Act and this chapter applicable at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map or, if the map does not so conform, disapprove the map.

(g)    City Engineer and Director approval of final parcel maps. The City Engineer and Director shall each review final parcel maps and require any corrections or additions as required by this chapter or the Act. When the map is acceptable in form to the City Engineer and the Director, and all certificates have been signed and, if necessary, acknowledged, the map shall be deemed approved by the City Engineer and the Director.

(h)    Disapproval of final parcel maps and tract maps. If a final map or tract map is disapproved for failure to meet or perform any of the requirements for conditions imposed by the Act or this chapter, such disapproval shall be accompanied by findings identifying the requirements or conditions which have not been met or performed. The approval of a final parcel map or tract map shall not be withheld when the failure of the map is the result of a technical and inadvertent error which, in the determination of the Council with respect to final tract maps, or in the determination of the City Engineer and/or Director with respect to final parcel maps, does not materially affect the validity of the map.

(1)    Any interested person dissatisfied with the decision of the City Engineer and/or Director with respect to a final parcel map may appeal such decision to the City Council. Any such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than fifteen (15) days after the effective date of the action of the City Engineer or Director. Except as otherwise provided herein, appeals taken pursuant to this subsection shall be controlled by the provisions of Section 10-2.2002(e)(5) of this Code.

(2)    The subdivider, City Engineer, Director, or any interested person may appeal from the action of the Advisory Agency. Any such appeal shall be filed with the City Clerk not later than fifteen (15) days after the effective date of the action of the Advisory Agency. Upon the filing of an appeal, a noticed public hearing before the Council shall be held expeditiously. The Council’s decision shall be final and conclusive.

(i)     Recording. After a final parcel map or tract map has been approved as provided in this section, the map shall be transmitted to the County Recorder.

(j)     Amendments and corrections. After a final parcel map or tract map has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder, the map may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map as provided in Section 66469 of the Act. In addition to the amendments authorized by said Section 66469, a recorded final map may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map if, after a notice and a public hearing as provided in Section 66541.3 of the Act, the Advisory Agency makes the findings prescribed in Section 66472.1 of the Act.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986, as amended by § 17, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Sec. 10-3.09. Dedications.
        As a condition of the approval of a final parcel map or tract map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of real property within the subdivision for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters’ rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements.

(a)    Acceptance or rejection of offers of dedication on tract maps. At the time the Council approves a final tract map, the Council may accept, subject to improvements, or reject dedications or offers of dedication. Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, an irrevocable offer of dedication shall continue in existence until it is expressly rejected by the Council. The City Clerk shall certify on the final map the action of the Council.

(b)    Acceptance or rejection of offers of dedication on parcel maps. At the time the City Engineer approves a final parcel map, he shall accept or reject the offers of dedication made by certificate on such map.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

 

Sec. 10-3.10. Reversions to acreage.
        Subdivisions consisting of four (4) or less contiguous parcels under the same ownership may revert to acreage by the filing of a parcel map in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Section 66499.20-1/4 of the Act.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

 

Sec. 10-3.11. Lot line adjustments.
        The Director shall be the decision maker for lot line adjustments, except that the Planning Commission shall be the decision maker for lot line adjustments that exceed a ten (10%) percent increase or decrease in the area of any affected parcel. The Director or the Planning Commission, as the case may be, shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove applications for lot line adjustments, subject, however, to the following:

(a)    The Director’s or Planning Commission’s, as the case may be, review and approval determination of a lot line adjustment shall be limited to a determination of whether or not the applicant has complied with the provisions of this section and that the parcels resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to the City’s General Plan, zoning regulations, and building laws; provided, however, that, if the lot line adjustment results in parcels that do not conform to the City’s existing zoning regulations, the Director or Planning Commission, as the case may be, may, in his, her or its discretion, nevertheless determine to approve the application for lot line adjustment, provided that all of the following conditions are satisfied:

(1)    The lot line adjustment shall not result in a greater number of residential developable parcels that existed prior to the adjustment. For purposes of this subsection only, a parcel shall not be deemed a residential developable parcel if the documents reflecting its approval and/or creation identify that:

(i)     The parcel is not a building site; or

(ii)    The parcel is designated for a nonresidential purpose including, but not limited to, well sites, reservoirs, and roads.

        To be deemed a residential developable parcel for purposes of this subsection, existing or proposed parcels shall satisfy all of the criteria set forth in the City’s zoning regulations and the City’s building laws.

(2)    The lot line adjustment will not increase or make more onerous any violation of the City’s existing zoning regulations.

(b)    No condition or exaction may be imposed on the approval of a lot line adjustment, except to cause the resulting parcels to conform to the City’s General Plan, zoning regulations, and building laws, or except to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructures, or easements.

(c)    No tentative map, parcel map, or final map may be required as a condition of approval; provided, however, the applicant may be required to submit as a part of his application a map or sketch setting forth the proposed lot line adjustment, all pertinent dimensions of all lots or parcels affected by the adjustment, and the locations of existing easements, utilities, and public roads and streets in the vicinity.

(d)    The applicant shall submit a deed or record of survey for recordation upon approval which sufficiently describes each lot or parcel or portion thereof affected by the adjustment.

(e)    Any interested person dissatisfied with the decision of the Director or the Planning Commission, as the case may be, with respect to the proposed lot line adjustment may appeal such decision in accordance with the procedures set forth in Title 10, Chapter 2, Article 30 of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 750, eff. July 24, 2001, as amended by § 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986, § 18, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995, and § 1, Ord. 783, eff. November 11, 2005)

 

Sec. 10-3.12. Vesting tentative maps.
(a)    This section shall be applicable beginning January 1, 1986. For the purposes of this section, a vesting tentative map shall refer to a map which meets the requirements of subsection (n) of Section 10-3.03 of this chapter and Section 66452 of the Act.

(b)    A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, and have the same contents, accompanying data, and reports, and shall be processed in the same manner as a tentative map, except as otherwise provided as follows:

(1)    At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

(2)    Whenever a provision of this chapter requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed.

(3)    If the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved, such approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the laws, policies, and standards in effect at the time the subdivider filed a completed application for a subdivision with the City.

(4)    Notwithstanding paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection, the City may conditionally approve or deny a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement for a subdivision if the City determines that proceeding with the development would (i) endanger the public health or safety; or (ii) violate State or Federal laws.

(c)    The right to proceed with the development referred to in this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in subsections (k) and (1) of Section 10-3.07 of this chapter. If the final map is approved, such rights shall last for the following periods of time:

(1)    An initial time period of twelve (12) months. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, such initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for such phase is recorded;

(2)    The initial time period set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit, or for architectural review, if such processing exceeds thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed;

(3)    A subdivider may apply to the Council for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection expires; and

(4)    If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection, the rights referred to in this section shall continue until the expiration of such permit or any extension of such permit.

(d)    Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with the zoning regulations in existence at that time, such inconsistency shall be noted on the map. The City may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditionally on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning regulations to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning regulations is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map, notwithstanding subsection (p) of Section 10-3.07 of this chapter, shall confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning regulations and the map, as approved.

(e)    This section shall apply only to residential developments until January 1, 1988, at which time this section shall apply to all subdivisions.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

 

Sec. 10-3.13. Fees.
        The Council, by resolution, shall set reasonable fees in connection with subdivision-related activities, including, but not limited to, fees for processing tentative maps, final maps, and parcel maps, fees for giving notice of public hearings, fees for copying and distributing written reports on tentative maps, and fees for processing mergers, reversions to acreage, and minor lot line adjustments.

(§ 2, Ord. 637, eff. January 9, 1986)

Chapter 4 RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (RPD) ZONE
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 4, Residential Planned Developments, consisting of Sections 10-4.00 through 10-4.10, 10-4.20, 10-4.30, 10-4.40, and 10-4.50, added by Ordinance No. 358, effective October 27, 1965, as amended by Ordinance No. 512, effective January 8, 1976, repealed by Part II, Ordinance No. 539, effective February 24, 1977.

         Chapter 4, Residential Planned Development (RPD) Zone, consisting of Section 10-4.00 through 10-4.08, codified from Part III, Ordinance No. 539, effective February 24, 1977, repealed by Ordinance No. 771, effective February 13, 2004.

Chapter 5 CONDOMINIUM CONVERSIONS
Article 1. Legislative Findings
Sec. 10-5.101. Legislative findings.
        A large number of apartments and multiple family rental dwellings throughout the State have been and are in the process of being converted to condominiums and community apartment projects. Applications have been made for conversions of apartments to condominiums within the City. It is anticipated that requests for conversions of apartments to condominiums or community apartment projects within the City will increase in the immediate future. Such increase presents a threat to the welfare of the residents of the City in the following aspects:

(a)    If condominium conversions or community apartment projects are allowed in the City without regulation, a substantial decrease in the amount of R-2 and R-3 housing will occur primarily to the detriment of young families and the elderly.

(b)    Because of the different nature of condominiums and apartments, new or different requirements and standards may be required for construction, parking, parcel maps, and notices to tenants, among other things.

(c)    The City seeks to avoid the unique problems that beset condominium conversion projects, and it further seeks to provide and insure a reasonable balance of rental and ownership housing in the City and a variety of individual choices of tenure, type, price, and location of housing and to maintain a supply of rental housing for low and moderate income persons and families.

(d)    It is the intent of the Council of the City, for the purposes of this chapter, to treat condominium and community apartment projects differently from apartments (and similar rental structures) due to the different demands these projects place upon the City and due to the differing purposes, functions, and expectations served by these types of projects.

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979)

 

Sec. 10-5.102. Intent to convert.
        The Planning Commission shall not approve a tentative map for a subdivision to be created for the conversion of residential real property into a condominium project, community apartment, or stock cooperative project, unless the Planning Commission finds all of the following:

(a)    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project has received written notification of intention to convert at least sixty (60) days prior to the filing of a tentative map. There shall be a further finding that each such tenant, and each person applying for the rental of a unit in such residential real property, has, or will have, received all applicable notices of rights required by this chapter.

(b)    Each tenant shall receive ten (10) days’ written notification that an application for a public report will be, or has been, submitted to the Planning Department and that such report will be available upon request. The written notices to tenants required by this subsection shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.

(c)    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project has been, or will be, given written notification within ten (10) days after the approval of a final map for the proposed conversion.

(d)    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project has been, or will be, given 180 days’ written notice of intention to convert prior to the termination of tenancy due to the conversion or proposed conversion. The provisions of this chapter shall not alter or abridge the rights or obligations of the parties in the performance of their covenants, including, but not limited to, the provision of services or the payment of rent.

(e)    Each of the tenants of the proposed condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project has been, or will be, given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety (90) days after the issuance of the subdivision public report referred to in subsection (b) of this section.

(f)    This section shall not diminish, limit, or expand, other than as provided in this section, the authority of the Planning Commission or the Council to approve or disapprove condominium projects.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.103. Public hearings: Notices.
        Whenever a public hearing is held pursuant to this chapter:

(a)    Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including a general description of the location of the condominium conversion, community apartment, or stock cooperative project, shall be given at least ten (10) days before the hearing.

(b)    Such notice shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated within the City.

(c)    Such notice shall also be given by United States mail to each tenant of the subject property and, in addition to notice of the time and place of the public hearing, shall include notification of the tenant’s right to appear and to be heard.

(d)    Such notice to tenants shall be given by the Planning Department and shall be deemed satisfied if the notice complies with the legal requirements for service by mail.

(e)    In addition to notice by publication, the City may collect fees from the applicant for the publication and postage expenses incurred under this section.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.104. Filing staff reports.
        Any report or recommendation on a tentative map by the staff of the Planning Department to the Planning Commission shall be in writing, and a copy thereof shall be served on the applicant and on each tenant of the subject property at least three (3) days prior to any hearing or action on such project.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.105. Notices of proposed conversions to prospective tenants.
(a)    Commencing at a date not less than sixty (60) days prior to the filing of a tentative map pursuant to this chapter, the applicant or his agent shall give notice of such filing, in the form set forth in subsection (b) of this section, to each person applying after such date for the rental of a unit of the subject property immediately prior to the acceptance of any rent or deposit from the prospective tenant by the applicant.

(b)    The notice shall be as follows:

 

To the prospective occupant(s) of: _________________________________________________

 

The owner(s) of this building, at (address), has filed or plans to file a tentative map with the City of Ojai to convert this building to a (condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project). No units may be sold in this building unless the conversion is approved by the City and until a public report is issued by the Department of Real Estate. If you become a tenant of this building, you shall be given notice of each hearing for which notice is required by Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the Ojai Municipal Code, and you have the right to appear and the right to be heard at any such hearing.

 

____________________________________________________

(Signature of owner/owner’s agent)

___________

(Date)

 

I have received this notice on _____________________________

                                                                (Date)

 

______________________________________________________

(Prospective tenant’s signature)

 

(c)    Failure by an applicant or his or her agent to give the notice required by subsection (a) of this section shall not be grounds to deny the conversion. However, if the applicant or his agent fails to give notice pursuant to this section, he or she shall pay to each prospective tenant who becomes a tenant, and who was entitled to such notice, and who does not purchase his or her unit pursuant to subsection (e) of Section 10-5.102 of this article an amount equal to the sum of the following:

(1)    Actual moving expenses incurred when moving from the subject property but not to exceed Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars; and

(2)    The first month’s rent on the tenant’s new rental unit, if any, immediately after moving from the subject property but not to exceed Five Hundred and no/100ths ($500.00) Dollars.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.106. Notices of proposed conversions to occupants.
(a)    The applicant shall give notice sixty (60) days prior to the filing of a tentative map pursuant to this chapter in the form set forth in subsection (b) of this section to each tenant of the subject property.

(b)    The notice shall be as follows:

 

To the occupant(s) of: ____________________________________

 

The owner(s) of this building, at (address), plans to file a tentative map with the City of Ojai to convert this building to a (condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project). You shall be given notice of each hearing for which notice is required pursuant to Chapter 5 of Title 10 of the Ojai Municipal Code, and you have the right to appear and the right to be heard at any such hearing.

 

_______________________________________________

(Signature of owner/owner’s agent)

 

________________________

(Date)

 

(c)    The written notice to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notice complies with the legal requirements for service by mail.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.107. Required notice of conversions.
(a)    Prior to the acceptance of any rent or deposit from a prospective tenant, the following notice shall be provided:

(b)    The notice shall be as follows:

 

To the prospective occupant(s) of: _______________________________________

 

The owner(s) of this building at (address) has received approval of a tentative map from the City of Ojai to convert this building to a (condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project) no sooner than ____________ (date). You will be notified at least 180 days prior to the actual conversion. Further, if you still reside in your unit, you will be given an exclusive right to purchase your unit.

 

____________________________________________________

(Signature of owner/owner’s agent)

 

______________

(Date)

 

I have received this notice on ________________________

                                                                (Date)

 

________________________________________________

(Prospective tenant’s signature)

 

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 10-5.201. Community apartment project.
        “Community apartment project” shall mean a project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon. For the purposes of this chapter, community apartment projects will be subject to the same restrictions and conditions as condominium projects.

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979)

 

Sec. 10-5.202. Condominium.
        “Condominium” shall mean an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on such real property, such as a residence, apartment, apartment house, office, or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979)

 

Sec. 10-5.203. Condominium conversion.
        “Condominium conversion” shall mean the conversion of apartments to condominiums or community apartment projects.

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979)

 

Sec. 10-5.204. Design.
        “Design” shall mean the arrangement of the following:

(a)    Street alignments, grades, and widths;

(b)    Drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and the grades thereof;

(c)    The location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way;

(d)    Fire roads and firebreaks;

(e)    Lot size and configuration;

(f)    Traffic access;

(g)    Grading;

(h)    Land to be dedicated or developed for park or recreational purposes;

(i)     Aesthetic elements as defined in Chapter 4 of Title 9 of this Code, incorporated in this subsection by reference; and

(j)     Such other specific requirements as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or the implementation of the Ojai General Plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.205. Improvement.
(a)    “Improvement” shall mean and refer to such street work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the applicant on the land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof.

(b)    “Improvement” shall also mean and refer to such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the applicant, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the City, or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or the implementation of the Ojai General Plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.206. Tentative map.
        “Tentative map” shall mean and refer to a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project, and the existing conditions in and around it, and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Article 3. General Provisions
Sec. 10-5.301. R-P-D, tract map, and Building Code requirements.
        All condominium conversion projects shall be subject to the Residential Planned Development standards, permits, and requirements set forth in Chapter 4 of this title. Additionally, all condominium conversion projects shall be subject to all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, Title 9 of this Code (Building Regulations), and Chapter 3 of this title (Subdivision Regulations).

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979)

 

Sec. 10-5.302. Application requirements.
        In addition to such other applications as the Planning Commission considers necessary and those requirements set forth in Section 10-5.301 of this article, no application for a condominium conversion project shall be accepted for any purpose, unless the application includes all of those matters adopted and required from time to time by resolution of the Council.

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979)

 

Sec. 10-5.303. Rights of tenants.
(See Sections 10-5.102 through 10-5.107 of Article 1 of this chapter.)

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979, as amended by § 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.304. Required findings of fact.
        In addition to the other requirements required by this article, the zoning provisions, and the Subdivision Map Act, the Planning Commission shall make the following affirmative findings prior to the approval of any condominium conversion project:

(a)    That the proposed condominium conversion project will not, either of itself, or when considered in conjunction with the trend toward condominium conversions in the community, result in:

(1)    A major displacement of tenants;

(2)    A scarcity of rental units which would preclude the reasonable mobility of tenants and tend to increase rental costs; or

(3)    The diminishment of Master Plan concepts and objectives which encourage open occupancy and promote low and moderate income housing; and

(b)    That a survey by an independent and competent firm reveals that fifty (50%) percent or more of the existing apartment tenants have not protested in writing to the City regarding the proposed conversion.

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979, as amended by § 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.305. Conditions of approval.
        Unless specifically waived by the Planning Commission, the permit for the condominium conversion project shall be subject to all of the following conditions, which conditions shall be in addition to such other conditions considered necessary by the Planning Commission to carry out the purposes and requirements of this article:

(a)    The condominium conversion project, and all individual units and common areas contained therein, shall comply with all the existing zoning and subdivision requirements, regardless of any previously approved variance therefrom; provided, however, when minor variations from Code requirements exist with respect to the conversion of an existing structure to a condominium, and full compliance with the Code requirements presents practical difficulties or will result in extreme hardship, the Planning Commission may waive the literal compliance as to such minor variations and may approve the project upon finding that it generally conforms with the spirit and purpose of the provisions of this article and other Code requirements.

(b)    The consumption of gas, electricity, and water within each dwelling unit shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for each utility. A shutoff valve for each utility shall be provided for each unit. The requirements of this subsection may be waived where the Building Official finds that such would not be practicable.

(c)    All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic appliances, which is determined by the Building Official to be a potential source of vibration or noise, shall be shock mounted, isolated from the floor and ceiling, or otherwise installed in a manner approved by the Building Official to lessen the transmission of vibration and noise.

(d)    The electrical, plumbing, mechanical, fire, and life safety systems of the structures either are, or shall be placed, in a condition of good repair and maintenance, including such alterations or repairs as are required by the Building Official.

(e)    Separate laundry facilities of sufficient size to allow for the installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided for each condominium unit; if provided in the garage, they shall not encroach into the required parking area.

(f)    Each condominium unit shall be provided with a separate two (2) car (double) garage or carport or with two (2) adjoining single car garages or carports, and one parking space per unit shall be provided for guest parking. Provisions shall be made for the restriction of parking in no parking zones.

(g)    Each dwelling unit shall have a separate hot water heater, unless there is one central circulating water heating system serving all dwelling units on the property, and such system shall provide sufficient capacity to serve all dwelling units.

(h)    All on-site and adjacent overhead utility service lines and poles shall be converted to an underground system.

(i)     At least fifty (50) square feet of developed common recreation space, exclusive of setbacks and parking areas, shall be provided per unit, but in no event less than 1,000 square feet for the total condominium conversion project.

(j)     All garbage disposals, dishwashers, water heaters, ranges, ovens, and air-conditioners determined by the Building Official to have less than two (2) years useful remaining life shall be replaced.

(k)    All dwelling units shall comply with the current requirements for energy conservation, sound transmission control, and fire detection systems.

(l)     All walls shall meet the construction and soundproofing requirements established by the City.

(m)   A report on the physical condition of the planned conversion and estimated owner payments per unit for capital improvements, repairs, and maintenance for both the common area and the individual units shall be given by the applicant to potential purchasers. The report shall be based on a structural analysis which describes the condition of the following major physical elements of the project: foundations, walls and roofs, mechanical equipment, recreation facilities, parking facilities, and any appliance.

(1)    The report shall estimate, to the best knowledge of the applicant, the approximate date when each element will require replacement. In addition, the applicant’s report shall estimate the ongoing maintenance and repair costs to the buyer of the common area, the cost of utility payments which will be billed to the buyer as an individual, and other costs necessary for normal occupancy.

(2)    Such report requirement is expressly intended to realistically apprise a potential buyer of the costs he may reasonably anticipate with respect to the purchase and maintenance of a unit in a community ownership project.

(n)    (See subsection (e) of Section 10-5.102 of Article 1 of this chapter.)

(o)    (Not used).

(p)    A structural pest report shall be completed, and a copy of such report shall be provided to the City.

(q)    A maintenance plan shall be provided which includes a statement regarding the long term management of common property, a declaration of the proposed covenants, conditions, and restrictions, and the proposed legal documents and financial arrangements of the management association.

(r)    The applicant shall provide a one-year warranty on any community held appliances, including, but not limited to, laundry machines, and a five (5) year warranty against structural deficiencies of the buildings and other property, including, but not limited to, commonly owned recreation rooms and swimming pools.

(Part 1, Ord. 570, eff. February 22, 1979, as amended by § 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-5.306. Appeals.
        An applicant or other person aggrieved by any action of the Planning Commission under this chapter may appeal such action to the Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the date of the decision of the Planning Commission. Such appeal, except where inconsistent with the provisions of this section, shall be controlled by the provisions of Section 10-2.2002(e)(5) of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 630, eff. July 11, 1985, as amended by § 19, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

Chapter 6 RESIDENTIAL GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
Note
*       Chapter 6, Growth Management Plan, consisting of Sections 10-6.01 through 10-6.802 added by Ord. No. 571, amended by Ord. Nos. 573 and 708, amended in their entirety by Ord. No. 769, effective January 9, 2004.

 

Article 1. Historical Background
Sec. 10-6.101. Enactment of Ordinance No. 571.
        Prior to March 27, 1979, the City of Ojai was experiencing rapid growth in population, housing, land development, inappropriate utilization of resources and deteriorating air quality which, if uncontrolled, would have resulted in the City being unable to meet the requirements of the Clean Air and Clean Water Acts of 1977 as well as irrevocably changing the City’s small town character and jeopardizing its spectacular natural environment.

        In order to implement the City’s General Plan, to comply with the provisions of the Clean Air Act and the Ventura County (the “County”) Air Quality Management Plan (the “AQMP”), the City did adopt Ordinance No. 571 commonly known as the Growth Management Plan (the “Former Plan”).

        The Former Plan adopted provided:

(a)    That residential development be limited using a formula that was based on the then current General Plan land use, circulation and housing elements and population forecasts.

(b)    A system of priorities to evaluate applications and permits.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.102. Enactment of Ordinance No. 573.
        In June, 1979, the Former Plan was amended to provide that the total number of allocations available would be adjusted as annexations were approved.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.103. Former Plan’s impact on growth within city.
        The Former Plan has had a substantial impact on the City’s population growth. Between 1970 and 1979, the City’s population had grown at a rate of twenty-two (22%) percent. Between 1980 and 1990, the first decade of the Former Plan, the City’s population growth declined to ten (10%) percent. Finally, during the last decade of the Former Plan, between 1990 and 2000, the population growth in the City was a total of three (3%) percent. On average during the Former Plan’s tenure, the City’s population growth rate has averaged less than one (1%) percent per annum (refer to Table 1). However, when adjusted for annexations and housing projects constructed within the City which are not subject to the Former Plan’s provisions, e.g., senior and affordable housing developments, the actual growth in the City’s population during the last twenty (20) years has averaged one-half (½%) percent.

 

Table 1: Population Growth for City

(January 1978—April 2000)

 

Year

Total Population

% Pop. Increase

Persons per Household

1/1/78

6,294

 

 

1/1/79

6,368

 

 

1/1/80

6,427

0.918

 

4/1/80

6,816 (Adj. for 1980 Census)

5.707

2.501

1/1/81

6,973

2.251

2.471

1/1/82

7,099

1.774

2.461

1/1/83

7,260 (Whispering Oaks Counted)

2.217

2.480

1/1/84

7,360

1.358

2.516

1/1/85

7,440

1.075

2.505

1/1/86

7,472

0.428

2.492

1/1/87

7,482

0.133

2.481

1/1/88

7,578

1.266

2.475

1/1/89

7,617

0.512

2.494

1/1/90

7,641

0.314

2.481

4/1/90

7,613 (Adj. for 1990 Census)

(-0.367)

2.474

1/1/91

7,614

0.013

2.467

1/1/92

7,722

1.398

2.496

1/1/93

7,773

0.656

2.515

1/1/94

7,851

0.993

2.531

1/1/95

8,026

2.180

2.567

1/1/96

8,040

.1741

2.560

1/1/97

8,098

0.716

2.566

1/1/98

8,181 (Montgomery Oaks Counted)

1.014

2.589

1/1/99

8,243

0.752

2.606

1/1/00

8,258

0.181

2.687

4/1/00

7,862 (Adj. for 2000 Census)

(-0.55)

2.481

 

Population increase in first ten (10) years (1980—1990) = 11.69% ÷ 10 = 1.17% per year.

Population increase in second ten (10) years (1990—2000) = 3.27% ÷ 10 =.327% per year.

Population increase (1980—2000) 15.34% ÷ 20 years =.767% per year.

 

Plan exemptions:

Annexations: 346

Affordable Housing: Whispering Oaks, 251; Montgomery Oaks, 54.

 

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.104. County Air Quality Management Plan.
(a)    Introduction. Although the Federal Clean Air Act has significantly improved our nation’s air quality, many areas still have serious air quality problems. Ozone, the main constituent of smog, is the most serious and widespread air pollution problem in the country.

        Ozone is a colorless and highly reactive gas. It is not emitted directly into the air, but is formed in the lower atmosphere by chemical reactions involving reactive organic compounds (ROC) and nitrogen oxides (NOx) in the presence of sunlight. These “ozone precursor” pollutants come from such varied sources as gasoline vapors, fuel combustion, chemical solvents and household products such as hair sprays, deodorants and cleaners. Ozone reaches peak levels by mid-afternoon and, along with ozone precursors, is usually carried inland by sea breezes. Thus, inland areas such as the City and the Ojai Valley often have the highest ozone levels and the most days which exceed the Federal and State ozone standards. The smoggiest days tend to occur from May through October (smog season) when stable atmospheric conditions and high temperatures produce conditions conducive to ozone formation.

        In the United States, 100,000,000 people live in areas that do not meet the Federal clean air standards for ozone. Further, 150,000,000 people live in areas not in compliance with at least one Federal clean air standard. Ozone reacts with lung tissue, irritating and inflaming the lungs. It may cause chest pains, shortness of breath, coughing, nausea, throat irritation and increased susceptibility to respiratory infections. Scientific evidence indicates that long-term, repeated exposure to ozone can permanently scar lung tissue, thereby reducing breathing ability. Ozone-sensitive groups include children, athletes, pregnant women, the elderly and people with respiratory problems.

        The national economic loss from air pollution is estimated to be Seventy-five Billion and no/100ths ($75,000,000,000.00) Dollars per year. Ten to twelve (10%—12%) percent of our national health care costs are attributable to air pollution-related illness, and air pollution is thought to be responsible for a two (2%) percent loss in United States worker productivity. Air pollution also adversely affects agricultural crops. Nationwide, ozone is thought to reduce crop yields by five to ten (5%—10%) percent per year, costing Three Billion and no/100ths to Five Billion and no/100ths ($3,000,000,000.00—$5,000,000,000.00) Dollars per year. In California, annual ozone-induced crop damage reduces agricultural yields by up to twenty (20%) percent.

        It also damages the natural environment, ecosystems and plant and animal species.

        The County, and specifically the Ojai Valley due to its geographical characteristics, is one of the areas that has a severe ozone problem. Over the last ten (10) years, the County averaged about thirty-five (35) days per year over the Federal ozone standard and 112 days over the more stringent State standard. The City’s average was four (4) and twenty-three (23) days, respectively. During the 1970s and prior to passage of the Former Plan, first stage smog alerts were common in the City. Since 1980, however, there have been only two (2) first stage smog alerts. Both alerts occurred in 1989 during unusual weather conditions. Air quality improvements are occurring as a result of increased emission requirements for automobiles and City and County growth management. Between 1990 and 2000, the City’s population increased by only three (3%) percent. Although ozone levels have declined significantly in recent years, the City and County still experience violations of the Federal and State ozone standards.

        As the County grows, achieving and maintaining clean air will be greatly influenced by local land use decisions. Reducing vehicle trips and population growth generated by new development must be an important consideration in the land use planning process. If air quality in the Ojai Valley is to continue improving, the land use, economic development, transportation, energy and environmental policies that form the foundation of local land use plans must balance future growth with the need for clean air.

        There is no simple answer to the City’s smog problem. Its air quality is better than it was twenty (20) years ago. Nevertheless, air pollutants must be further reduced to bring the County and the City into compliance with Federal and State clean air standards.

        Clean air is important to people. People know that an area with good air quality is a better and more attractive place to live, work and visit. All City residents deserve clean air to breathe. The City Council is committed to meeting all clean air standards as soon as possible.

(b)    Federal Clean Air Act. The first comprehensive national air pollution legislation was the Federal Clean Air Act of 1970. In 1977, the Federal Clean Air Act was amended to require plans for meeting the national clean air standards “as expeditiously as practicable,” but no later than December 31, 1982. However, the Clean Air Act permitted the United States Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) to extend the attainment date of some ozone and carbon monoxide non-attainment areas to December 31, 1987. Ventura County was one of the ozone areas given an extension to December 31, 1987.

        On November 15, 1990, President George H. Bush signed the 1990 Federal Clean Air Act Amendments (“CAAA”) into law. That landmark legislation, which took nearly twelve (12) years to enact, began a new and comprehensive effort to provide all Americans with clean air. Central to the CAAA are specific dates by which all areas of the country, including the County, must meet the Federal clean air standards. To achieve that ambitious objective, the CAAA contains a vast number of new requirements. Examples of the new requirements include specific emission reduction targets, stricter motor vehicle pollution limits, additional pollution limits, additional pollution controls on industrial facilities, less polluting vehicle fuels and new permit and compliance programs. The CAAA also contains economic incentive strategies to encourage industry to curtail air polluting emissions voluntarily.

        The CAAA gives the States primary responsibility for achieving Federal clean air standards. The State Implementation Plan (“SIP”) is the principal mechanism at the State and local level for complying with the CAAA. A SIP is a document that outlines the actions and programs that a State will take to carry out its Clean Air Act responsibilities. The EPA approves all SIPs. Once approved, a SIP is legally binding under both State and Federal law. The AQMP is a component of the California SIP.

        Under the CAAA, ozone areas are classified based on the severity of each area’s respective ozone problem. These classifications are marginal, moderate, serious, severe and extreme. Marginal areas are areas closest to meeting the Federal ozone standard, where the country’s only extreme area (the greater Los Angeles area) has the worst ozone problem. Each area must not only comply with all the requirements for its own classification, but also must comply with the requirements of the lower classifications, unless otherwise specified. For example, a serious ozone area must comply with all the requirements for serious, marginal and moderate areas. This means that areas with more severe air quality problems have progressively more requirements to meet under the CAAA. Also, an area’s ozone classification determines how long the area has to attain the Federal ozone standard. Marginal areas have three (3) years; moderate areas, six (6) years; serious areas, nine (9) years; severe areas, either fifteen (15) or seventeen (17) years, depending on the magnitude of their respective ozone problem, and the only extreme area, twenty (20) years. The County, including the Ojai Valley and the City, is a severe-15 ozone non-attainment area, meaning that they must achieve the Federal one (1) hour ozone standard by 2005.

        The CAAA also provides sanctions that the EPA can, and in some cases must, impose on areas that fail to meet CAAA requirements. The CAAA authorizes two (2) types of mandatory sanctions: (1) withholding Federal highway project funds and (2) two-to-one (2:1) emission offsets for major stationary sources. There are also several types of discretionary sanctions that the EPA can impose, such as withholding grants for air quality planning.

        The EPA may impose sanctions for (1) failure to submit an SIP or a portion of an SIP; (2) disapproval of an SIP by the EPA; (3) failure to carry out the provisions in an approved SIP; and (4) failure to submit any provision required by the CAAA. If the problem is not corrected within eighteen (18) months, the EPA must impose one (1) of the two (2) mandatory sanctions. The EPA can impose both sanctions if an area fails to make a good faith effort to correct the problem. On July 22, 1994, the EPA issued its final “order of sanctions” rule. The rule stipulates that the first sanction imposed will be the two-to-one (2:1) emission offset. If the sanctionable deficiency is not corrected within six (6) months, Federal highway funds will be withheld. Although these sanctions would be imposed on the County, which has the primary responsibility for meeting Federal and State air quality standards, the City is obligated to do its part to assist in that effort.

(c)    Federal Implementation Plan. The 1982 AQMP did not show that the County would meet the Federal ozone standard by December 31, 1987, as mandated by the 1977 Clean Air Act Amendments. In response, the Citizens to Preserve the Ojai (“CPO”) sued the EPA in 1988. The lawsuit asked that the EPA disapprove the 1982 AQMP, impose a construction moratorium on new and modified major sources of ROC emissions and prepare a Federal Implementation Plan (“FIP”) to achieve the Federal ozone standard.

(d)    Previous planning efforts. The first study of air pollution in the County occurred in 1966. That study found that the County had a serious air pollution problem, citing over seventy (70) smoggy days per year. Consequently, the Ventura County Air Pollution Control District was formed in 1968 (the “District”). The District’s mission was, and continues to be, to protect public health and agriculture from the adverse effects of air pollution by identifying air pollution problems and developing a long-range comprehensive program to achieve and maintain State and Federal air quality standards.

(e)    Previous AQMPs. The 1979 AQMP, the County’s first comprehensive air quality plan, anticipated that the Federal ozone standard would be attained by 1987. That prediction was optimistic, as it soon became clear that attainment by 1987 would not occur. However, based upon air quality concerns, the City enacted Ordinance 571 and implemented the Former Plan.

        The 1982 AQMP was a refinement of the 1979 AQMP. That AQMP contained a more accurate emission inventory and additional emission control measures. The 1982 AQMP also separated the County into two (2) air sheds, the Ojai Valley Airshed and the Oxnard Plain Airshed. The 1982 AQMP was more realistic, recognizing that the Federal ozone standard would not be met by the end of 1987.

        In early 1985, the District began a comprehensive effort to update and improve the AQMP. A more accurate emission inventory was developed, new control measures were proposed and a new, more accurate air quality model was used. Although the 1987 AQMP contained new control measures to further reduce ozone precursor emissions, the 1987 AQMP concluded that the Federal ozone standard could not be made without additional emission reductions.

        The next County AQMP, the 1991 AQMP, was prepared in response to the California Clean Air Act. That AQMP, built on the 1987 AQMP, contained new and revised control measures designed to move the County further toward State and Federal clean air standards. The 1991 AQMP was adopted by the District’s Air Pollution Control Board on October 8, 1991.

(f)    1994 AQMP. The primary purpose of the County 1994 AQMP was to satisfy the planning requirements of the CAAA and to outline a strategy for meeting the Federal ozone clean air standard by 2005, while accommodating a reasonable and inevitable amount of growth. The CAAA requirements addressed by the 1994 AQMP were attainment of the Federal ozone standard by 2005, a post-1996 rate-of-progress demonstration, contingency measures, an updated 1990 baseline emissions inventory, revised 1990—1996 rate-of-progress emissions reduction calculations and revised estimates that show that motor vehicle emissions will decrease despite increases in vehicle use. The 1994 AQMP also satisfied the requirements of the California Clean Air Act to submit a triennial progress report and revisions to the 1991 AQMP by the end of 1994.

(g)    1995 AQMP revision. The purpose of the 1995 AQMP revision was to update information presented in the 1994 AQMP to reflect changes that have occurred since the plan was adopted on November 8, 1994.

        Based on the emissions control strategy proposal in the 1995 AQMP revision, the District projects attainment of the Federal one (1) hour ozone standard in 2005, as mandated by the Federal Clean Air Act. Recent information indicates that the County’s attainment of Federal one (1) hour standards for ozone by 2005 is probable. However, the District will not attain California’s more stringent health-based ambient ozone standard by 2005. In addition, Federal law has recently set a new eight (8) hour standard that will be extremely difficult for the County to attain. Accordingly, the City’s efforts to control growth in order to assist the County in meeting its clean air mandates must continue for the foreseeable future.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.105. Adoption of the County Clean Air Ordinance.
        In July, 1982, the County adopted Ordinance No. 3603, providing for a limitation on issuance of residential building permits in the Ojai Valley in order to protect air quality and implement the AQMP. The formula used by the County for limiting building permits ensures consistency with adopted AQMP housing and population estimates and forecasts for the Ojai Valley, including the City. A housing project which would cause the City to exceed these estimates and forecasts would be determined to be inconsistent with the AQMP and, therefore, also determined to have a significant cumulative adverse air quality impact.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.106. Adoption of air quality element.
        In 1993, the City adopted an air quality element to its General Plan. The element’s primary goal is to ensure a level of air quality which protects its citizens’ health, safety and welfare and meets or surpasses State and Federal air quality standards. One of the element’s policies in pursuing this goal is to manage the City’s population growth. The suggested implementing strategy for this policy is continued enforcement of City residential and commercial growth management plans.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.107. State housing legislation.
        During 1982 and 1983, the Legislature of the State adopted legislation encouraging cities to provide affordable housing opportunities to all of its citizens. The impact of such legislation is as follows:

(a)    A housing element is required as a component of each jurisdiction’s General Plan by Section 65580 of the Government Code. According to Section 65583 of the Government Code, the housing element shall consist of an identification and analysis of existing and projected housing needs and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives and scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement and development of housing. The housing element must identify adequate sites for housing, including rental housing, factory-built housing and mobile homes, and must make adequate provision for the existing and projected needs of all economic segments of the community. In addition, Government Code Section 65913.1 requires the City, consistent with its General Plan, to designate and zone sufficient vacant land to meet its projected housing needs. The City’s currently adopted and State-approved housing element for years 2000 to 2005 provides programs that will enable the City to meet these needs, while at the same time recognizing the necessity of this ordinance in order to address the environmental constraints on growth caused by the need to meet clean air standards.

(b)    The State Local Housing Element Law requires each association of governments to determine housing needs and distribution within its region. The Southern California Association of Governments has developed a Regional Housing Allocation Model which assigns “future housing unit needs for all income groups, adjusted to avoid impaction” for each jurisdiction. This allocation of regional housing needs (“RHNA”) determines housing needs that each jurisdiction must include in its housing element. (Government Code Section 65583(a)(1).) The housing element must include implementation measures to meet the determined housing needs. The City’s currently adopted housing element provides for increased housing opportunities in 2000—2005 within the City and progress toward the City’s meeting its RHNA goals. The plan exempts affordable housing from its restrictions.

(c)    Density bonuses are generally required by Government Code Section 65915 for developments which include a specified percentage (i.e., twenty-five (25%) percent) of affordable housing. This ordinance exempts those housing developments which meet the requirements for density bonuses.

(d)    Recent amendments to Government Code Section 65852.2 provide that second dwelling units must also be exempt from the provisions of any City growth management plan. Accordingly, this ordinance exempts such units from its requirements.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.108. Enactment of plan.
        By reason of the above set forth factors, the City has determined it is necessary and appropriate to enact a residential growth management plan (the “plan”) for an additional ten (10) years.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 2. Plan’s Objectives and Purposes
Sec. 10-6.201. Objectives.
        This chapter is being promulgated in accordance with the following objectives:

(a)    Preserve the quality of life in the City by maintaining these qualities:

(1)    Healthy environment (air, water quality, etc.),

(2)    Natural environment (habitat, flora and fauna),

(3)    Small town atmosphere (small scale),

(4)    Strong community identification,

(5)    Aesthetic quality,

(6)    Cultural advantages;

(b)    Protect the open space of the City;

(c)    Ensure the balanced economic development of the City by:

(1)    Encouraging compatible business,

(2)    Accommodating tourism but only to the extent it does not compromise other goals;

(d)    Ensure adequacy of City facilities and services within budget limitations;

(e)    Ensure a balance of housing types and values to accommodate a variety of families, including persons of all income levels and older persons on limited, fixed incomes.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.202. Purpose.
        The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and general welfare of present and future residents of the City against the adverse effects of poor air quality attributable to population-related emissions, including construction and traffic emissions, to preserve the small-town character of the City and to protect the City’s open space and quality of life, while, at the same time, providing affordable housing opportunities.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 3. Findings
Sec. 10-6.301. Findings.
(a)    The City has heretofore adopted a General Plan, specific plans and its official zoning ordinance, all of which regulate all uses of property in the City, including those properties which are residentially zoned.

(b)    For many years, the City experienced intense rapid fluctuating residential development which adversely affected:

(1)    Local air quality;

(2)    The capacity of the streets and local freeway system to meet traffic demands;

(3)    The capacity of schools to provide proper uncrowded facilities for the education of children;

(4)    The semi-rural character of the community;

(5)    The quality of life prevalent in the City;

(6)    The cost to residents of public services;

(7)    The availability of adequate infrastructure, including, without limitation, water, sewer and utilities;

(8)    The natural environment; and

(9)    Public health.

(c)    The City is located in a non-attainment area of the County for ozone and particulates and continues to experience days when its air contains contaminants which violate State and Federal clean air standards.

(d)    In 1979, the Former Plan was approved by the City Council of the City having the effect of enacting Chapter 6 of Title 10 of the Ojai Municipal Code. The Former Plan was intended to provide a steady annual residential growth rather than a fluctuating overly rapid rate of growth, in order that services provided by the City, the schools, the public utilities and other service agencies could be properly managed so as to avoid over-extending those facilities and in order to meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Air Act of 1977.

(e)    The Former Plan has achieved with some measure of success the purposes as described therein in that the Former Plan permitted a steady rate of residential growth within the City while at the same time established a method by which the City’s share of regional housing stock was provided and the number of days that the City’s air has exceeded State and Federal air quality standards declined.

(f)    The Former Plan expired by its own terms on March 27, 2000. The City Council has heretofore directed the City staff and its Planning Commission to study the question of whether a need exists to continue the type of regulation included in the Former Plan.

(g)    The staff has prepared a study and has submitted the same to the Planning Commission, which demonstrates that the continuation of the type of regulations set forth in the Former Plan is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare of the City.

(h)    The Planning Commission has conducted a public hearing on the matter and concluded that the plan is required to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the City and has recommended the adoption of the same for a ten (10) year period.

(i)     The Planning Commission concluded that the continuation of the regulations set forth in the plan which are consistent with the provisions of the City’s General Plan, applicable specific plans and the City’s zoning regulations is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare of the City.

(j)     It is the purpose and intent in adopting the plan to achieve a steady, rather than a fluctuating, overly-rapid rate of residential growth each year in order that the services provided by the City, school, utility and/or services agencies operating in the City could properly and effectively be staged in a manner which would not over-extend existing facilities, that the City could protect its citizens from the effect of contaminated air and that the City could preserve its rural, small-town character.

(k)    The City Council has determined, based upon studies and evidence presented at its public hearings, that continuation of a steady controlled residential growth is still necessary for the reasons set forth above.

(l)     The adoption of the plan is necessary to continue established controls over the quality, distribution and rate of growth of the City in the interest of:

(1)    Preserving the character of the community;

(2)    Protecting the natural environment and open space of the City;

(3)    Protecting the public health and quality of life in the City;

(4)    Ensuring the adequacy of City facilities, school facilities, recreation and park facilities and other public services;

(5)    Ensuring a balance of housing types and values in the City which will accommodate a variety of families, including families of low and moderate income;

(6)    Ensuring the balanced development of the City;

(7)    Preventing further significant deterioration in local air quality which, in that regard, the City hereby reaffirms and adopts as its own, the following findings of the AQMP:

(A)   There is a direct relationship between the quality of the Ojai Valley’s air and the health, safety and welfare of the Ojai Valley and City residents.

(B)   The quality of the Ojai Valley’s air has deteriorated to the point where it often fails to meet State and Federal ambient air quality standards designed to protect health, safety and welfare.

(C)   Failure to meet such State and Federal standards in the City and County results in:

(i)     Aggravation of the illness of persons suffering from asthma or chronic lung disease;

(ii)    An increase in the effort of breathing for many healthy persons;

(iii)   Impairment of the performance of persons engaged in strenuous activities;

(iv)   Significant health care costs attributable to air quality related health problems;

(v)    Air pollution damage to crops amounting to millions of dollars annually; and

(vi)   Air pollution damage to habitat and sensitive species.

(D)   There is a direct measurable relationship between population growth and emissions which contributes to the deterioration of air quality in the County and the City.

(E)   The AQMP has:

(i)     Identified certain reasonably available control measures for the control of emissions in the Ojai Valley;

(ii)    Established the maximum rate of population increase which can be accommodated therein:

(a)    Assuming the implementation of all such reasonably available control measures; and

(b)    Without precluding ultimate compliance within such area with the State and Federal ambient air quality standards.

(F)    Regulation of population growth in the Ojai Valley in accordance with the AQMP, in addition to the implementation of all other reasonably available control measures for the control of emissions, is necessary in order to ensure compliance with Federal ambient air quality standards and to protect adequately the public health, safety and welfare.

(8)    Ensuring that the traffic demands do not exceed the capacity of streets;

(9)    Ensuring that the City does not grow in a pattern that places a severe strain on State Highway 33;

(10)  Ensuring the adequacy of fire protection;

(11)  Ensuring adequate water and sanitary sewer systems.

(m)   The provisions of this chapter will augment and implement the goals and policies of the City as set forth in the City’s General Plan and City ordinances relating to the regulation of residential development.

(n)    The enactment of this chapter will permit the City to control the rate, distribution, quality and economic level of proposed residential development on a year-to-year basis and ensure compliance with the AQMP.

(o)    The City Council, based upon the evidence presented, has determined that the City’s appropriate share of the regional housing need equals 209 residential units of which 115 should be housing available to low and moderate income families and that the plan will not impact the City’s ability to accommodate its share of the regional housing need and, therefore, will not affect the supply of housing in the region.

(p)    The specific housing programs and activities which are described in the City’s housing element are consistent with the provisions of the plan and these programs and activities will continue after the enactment of this chapter. The plan exempts from its provisions projects intended for low- and moderate-income families as well as those intended for seniors and the disabled and, therefore, will have no impact on these types of housing and will, in fact, encourage the provision of housing for these groups.

(q)    The City has the necessary fiscal and environmental resources available to it to provide the services and necessary infrastructure to serve the steady annual increase in housing as contemplated by the provisions of the plan.

(r)    Based upon evidence presented at public hearings, including the studies presented to it by the staff and the Planning Commission and each member of the City Council being thoroughly familiar with the problems which arise out of rapid uncontrolled growth in any city and being aware that the City must meet certain obligations with respect to regional housing needs and in particular the provision of low and moderate income housing, the City Council, as required by the provisions of Government Code Section 65863.6, has determined that the adoption of the plan is necessary for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the City.

(s)    The plan is a project for purposes of the California Environmental Quality Act (“CEQA”). As such, the Planning Commission did review the initial study prepared for the plan, as well as the negative declaration which is the environmental document recommended for the plan by the initial study. The Planning Commission has certified that the negative declaration complies with the provisions of CEQA and has recommended to the City Council that it adopt the negative declaration.

(t)     The City Council has read and considered the initial study for the plan. The City Council does hereby find that the plan could not have a significant effect on the physical environment because (1) no specific development is envisioned by the plan; (2) there would be no direct activity which could result in the demand for new or expanded public utilities, facilities and services; and (3) the plan will restrict growth, which will have the effect of decreasing the potential future demand on existing public utilities, facilities and services.

(u)    The City Council has read and considered the negative declaration prepared for the plan and does hereby find and certify that the negative declaration has been prepared in full compliance with the provisions and requirements of CEQA.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 4. Applicability
Sec. 10-6.401. Applicability.
        This chapter shall apply to all residential development in the City, including mobile and manufactured homes, with the exception of the following:

(a)    Affordable Units that are formally dedicated for occupancy by persons and families of Lower Income, Moderate Income or Senior Citizens (at an Affordable Sales Price or Rent as such terms are defined in Section 10-2.902) within a Residential Project which is funded or subsidized pursuant to the provisions of applicable Federal, State or local laws or programs.

(b)    Second units, home splits, special needs housing (as defined and in Sections 109-2.1709(a)(3) and 10-2.3602(h)), including second units for which Second Unit Compliance Permit is issued pursuant to Section 10-2.1709(f), single-family homes developed on a single parcel of record and small dwellings with a maximum of 640 square feet built in conjunction with mixed use projects within the VMU zone district.

(c)    The replacement, alteration, repair, demolition or maintenance of dwellings or the construction or erection of structures accessory to dwellings so long as no additional dwelling units are created.

(d)    Conversion of apartments to condominiums or cooperatives in accordance with the provisions of this Code.

(e)    Residential Projects (including Non-Restricted Units) which conform to the minimum requirements set forth in Section 10-2.704(g), including inclusionary percent, target households and retention period. For purposes of this Section 10-6.401, minimum requirements of Section 10-2.704(g) shall apply to apply to all Residential Projects regardless of zone district, including properties without an SPL designation.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, § 4, Ord. 828, eff. July 11, 2013, § 3, Ord. 836, eff. February 28, 2014)

 

Article 5. Definitions
Sec. 10-6.501. Definitions.
(a)    “Allotment cycle.” The period of time starting January 1 and ending December 31 of each calendar year.

(b)    “Allotment threshold.” In any given allotment cycle, the difference between: (i) the number of unallocated allotments in the special allocation pool; and (ii) the number of dwellings units for which permits have been granted and are exempt from the allotment provisions of this chapter. As an example, and for illustrative purposes only, if the current unallocated balance of allotments in the special allocation pool is twenty (20) dwellings and the number of dwellings units for which permits have been granted for Residential Projects that are exempt from the allotment provisions of this chapter is fifteen (15), the allotment threshold is five (5) dwelling units (twenty (20) minus fifteen (15) = five (5) units).

(c)    “AQMP.” The Air Quality Management Plan for Ventura County, including all appendices thereto, as amended from time to time. The references in this article to Tables E-6 and E-7 of the AQMP are to the tables by that number appearing in Appendix E-95 of the version of the AQMP adopted November, 1995 or, in the event that such tables are amended later by the AQMP, then to the most recent version of such tables however numbered.

(d)    “City’s proportionate share.” For any given point in time, twenty-six (26%) percent of the difference between the maximum permissible number of Ojai Valley dwelling units for the current year and the second succeeding calendar year immediately following as set forth within Table E-7 of the AQMP. Twenty-six (26%) percent represents the City’s share of the total permissible dwelling units in the Ojai Valley pursuant to the AQMP. For example, if the maximum permissible number of dwelling units for the Ojai Valley for the year 2003 is 12,301 and for the year 2005 is 12,532, the difference between the two (2) is 231. Twenty-six (26%) percent of 231 is 60.06 which represents the City’s proportionate share of the maximum permissible number of new dwelling units to be constructed in the Ojai Valley for the year 2003.

(e)    “Current number of dwelling units.” As of any given point in time, the total number of housing units located within the City as determined by the California Department of Finance, Demographic Research Unit (“DOF”) as of January 1 of each year.

(f)    “Department.” Department shall mean the Community Development Department.

(g)    “Developable lot.” A lot which complies with all current State and City requirements for residential use.

(h)    “Director.” Director shall mean the Director of Community Development.

(i)     “Maximum permissible number of dwelling units.” As of any given point in time, the total number of housing units that, according to AQMP Table E-7, are forecasted to be in the Ojai Valley on January 1 of the second succeeding calendar year. For example, AQMP Table E-7 forecasts that there will be 12,532 dwelling units in the Ojai Valley on January 1, 2005. Hence, the maximum permissible number of dwelling units for any given point in time in 2003 is 12,532. The second succeeding calendar year is selected in recognition of the fact that it takes approximately one (1) year to complete a dwelling unit after the requisite permits have been issued.

(j)     “Multi-family allotment.” An allotment allocated for a developable lot in a multi-family zone.

(k)    “Ojai valley.” The “subareas” identified in Tables E-6 and E-7 of the AQMP as the “Ojai GA,” “Ojai NGA,” “Ventura River GA” and “Ventura River NGA.”

(l)     “Persons per household.” For any given point in time, the average number of persons who occupy the dwelling units located within the City as determined by the DOF.

(m)   “Population of the city.” For any given point in time, the aggregate population estimate for the City certified by the California Department of Finance pursuant to Section 11005.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

(n)    “Residential development allotment” or “allotment.” A growth management permit allocated for a developable lot located in a residential zone.

(o)    “Residential project.” As defined, with related terms, in Section 10-2.902

(p)    “Single-family allotment.” An allotment allocated for a developable lot in a single-family zone.

(q)    “Special allocation pool.” Allotments which remain unallocated at the end of each calendar year, plus allotments that are not used within one (1) year of their assignment pursuant to Section 10-6.804, and pledged for subsequent reallocation to special Residential Projects at the discretion of the City Council pursuant to Section 10-6.603(b).

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, amended by § 4, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-6.502. Limitation on issuance of residential building permits.
(a)    Notwithstanding any provision of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution of the City, no building permit may be applied for or issued for the construction or installation of an additional dwelling unit in the City if the issuance of such permit would cause the current number of dwelling units for the City to exceed the City’s proportionate share of the maximum permissible number of dwelling units for the Ojai Valley (including both the incorporated and unincorporated portions thereof).

(b)    Provided the provisions of Section 10-6.502(a) hereinabove are satisfied, no building permit may nonetheless be applied for or issued for the construction or installation of an additional dwelling unit in the City unless either a residential development allotment has been issued for that unit or an exemption has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 6. Maximum Number of Residential Allotments for the Construction Year
Sec. 10-6.601. Residential development allotments—Setting—Proration.
(a)    The number of residential development allotments assigned shall be limited as set forth herein to only allow a total population increase per year in the City equal to five-tenths (0.5) of one (1%) percent of the base year population of 8,000 or approximately forty (40) additional persons per year. The following formula shall be used, together with current figures for the population of the City and the number of persons per household obtained from the DOF as of January 1 of each year, to determine the number of allotments for the current year:

 

Allotments = Population of the City × .005 ÷ Persons per Household

 

        Exhibit “A” attached hereto and made a part hereof sets forth a projection of the total population and dwelling unit increase permitted by the provisions of this chapter.

(b)    The total allotments permitted for the first year of this chapter shall be prorated on a twelve (12) month calendar basis beginning January 1.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.602. Monitoring of population and dwelling unit growth by director.
        The Director shall monitor and determine the population and dwelling unit growth within the City’s boundaries and those areas described as the Ojai Valley in the AQMP and shall notify the City Council as to the results of such determination as part of the City Council’s annual review pursuant to Section 10-6.604.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.603. Housing mix.
(a)    Allotments shall be made without regard to type of housing (i.e., single-family or multifamily).

(b)    Beginning January 1, 2014, allotments which remain unallocated at the end of each calendar year (plus allotments that are not used within one (1) year of their assignment pursuant to Section 10-6.804) shall be placed into a special allocation pool (and accumulated from year to year). Allotments within the special allocation pool may be awarded, at the discretion of the City Council, to Residential Projects which affirmatively further goals and objectives of the General Plan and Downtown Redevelopment Project (as such terms are defined at Sections 10-2.902 and 10-6.501), including, but not limited to: (i) fostering mixed use development within the VMU zone district; (ii) revitalizing blighted and underutilized property along Ojai Avenue; (iii) promoting workforce housing and a jobs-housing balance to reduce vehicular trips; and (iv) low-impact development that affirmatively furthers the character and quality of the community.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, amended by § 4, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-6.604. Annual review.
        Population increases, actual residential construction, including residential units exempt from development control, the population per dwelling unit, progress toward attainment of air quality standards and the economic ability of the community to provide increased public services both within the City and for the Ojai Valley as of January 1 of each calendar year shall be reviewed every year by the City Council on or about June 1 of each year. Thereafter, the City Council shall determine the number of allotments and residential building permits permitted for the following calendar year. The formula for allotments for future years may be adjusted by amendments to this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 7. Residential Development Allotment Applications
Sec. 10-6.701. Residential development allotments—Applications—Form.
        Applications for allotments or requests for determination of exemption from this chapter shall be made to the Department on forms provided by the City. Applications for determination of exemption shall specify in detail the grounds for the claimed exemption and shall be accompanied by such supporting information as deemed relevant by the applicant or as required by the Director. Applications for single-family allotments shall be accompanied by such information as required by the Director. Applications for multiple-family allotments shall contain the following documents where applicable:

(a)    Proof of applicant’s ownership of applicable developable lot;

(b)    A precise plan of design for architectural review;

(c)    A public facilities plan showing:

(1)    The needed public facilities to be provided, if any, such as critical linkages in the major street system or school rooms, or

(2)    Other public facilities as identified by the General Plan, capital improvement program or special facilities plan;

(d)    A development schedule;

(e)    The names and addresses of all persons who have a ten (10%) percent or more financial interest in the proposed project;

(f)    Such other information as may be required by the Department.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.702. Residential development allotments—Applications—Fees.
        Each application for an allotment or extension thereof shall be accompanied by a processing fee as established by resolution. Such fees shall not be returnable.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 8. Director Evaluation
Sec. 10-6.801. Residential development allotments—Applications—Reviews.
        The Director shall review each application and determine whether or not the proposed development complies with all zoning provisions and conforms to the General Plan, including all elements thereof.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.802. Residential development allotments—Applications—Compliance.
        No application will be considered unless it fully complies with all zoning provisions and the General Plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.803. Assignment of allotments.
        No person may receive an allotment for more than one (1) Residential Project per year. For purposes of this section, a Residential Project consists either of: (i) a detached single family home developed on a single parcel of record; or (ii) condominiums, townhomes, multiple family dwellings and other attached housing unites developed as an integrated whole.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, amended by § 4, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-6.804. Residential development allotments—Maximum number limited.
        Except as to the allotments made from the special allocation pool pursuant to Section 10-6.603(b), no allotments shall be assigned in any one (1) year in excess of the maximum permitted by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

(Ord. No. 828, § 4, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-6.805. Residential development allotments—Applications—Public facilities.
        No application will be considered if the City sewage disposal, drainage, fire protection, water or other public facilities and services are inadequate.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.806. Request for allotments.
        The Director shall accept applications for residential allotments for a period beginning and ending with each calendar year. Residential Projects shall be eligible for the assignment of allotments provided that: (i) the application is deemed complete; (ii) the proposed project complies with General Plan and zoning provisions; and (iii) requisite public services and facilities are available pursuant to Section 10-6.805. The Director shall assign allotments in the order in which eligible applications were received. Allotments shall not become effective until requisite Entitlements are first obtained.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, § 4, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-6.807. Environmental review.
(a)    General provisions. The assignment of allotments do not constitute a project for purposes of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended, or implementing regulations of Title 14, Division 6, Chapter 3 of the California Code of Regulations (collectively, “CEQA”). Such allotments constitute a reservation rights under this chapter and may only be exercised subject to, and contingent upon, satisfying the environmental review and permit requirements specified in Sections 10-6.807(b) and 10-6.808, respectively.

(b)    Discretionary projects. All Residential Projects receiving an allotment but for which either legislative approval (e.g., zone change, ordinance amendment, etc.) or Entitlements (as defined in Section 10-2.902) are required must also comply with the requirements of CEQA. Furthermore, for Residential Projects that are subject to CEQA and the proposed number of residential dwellings exceed the allotment threshold (as defined in Section 10-6.501), shall be subject to the following additional standards in adjunct to the Ojai Initial Study Assessment Guidelines:

(1)    An initial study and requisite environmental documentation shall be prepared to determine the availability of sufficient water resources and roadway capacity to accommodate the project within safe yields and acceptable levels of service.

(2)    In the absence of conclusive evidence that adequate water resources and road capacity are available to accommodate the project, a Water and Traffic Management Plan shall be required for each such project that fully mitigates the impacts upon water and roadway capacity.

(3)    Where resource impacts cannot be mitigated through reasonable and feasible measures, the resulting impact shall be deemed to be significant and unavoidable. In such cases, the project shall either be denied or the City may override the impact, at its discretion, with overriding considerations.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, § 4, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Sec. 10-6.808. Permit requirements.
(a)    Discretionary permits. All Residential Projects for which allotments have been granted are subject to the development standards and design review requirements that apply to the underlying zone district within which such projects are located. If requisite Entitlements are not secured by the end of the calendar year following the date when the allotments were granted, such allotments shall be rescinded and placed into the special allocation pool described in Section 10-6.603(b). Extensions of time may be granted at the discretion of the Director for circumstances beyond the reasonable control of an applicant (e.g., protracted hearing process, environmental review compliance, etc.).

(b)    Building permits. All Residential Projects for which allotments have been granted and required Entitlements have been procured pursuant to Section 10-6.807, shall be approved subject to and contingent upon obtaining necessary building permits. If building permits are not secured within twelve (12) months following the date when necessary Entitlements were granted (or twelve (12) months following the date when allotments were assigned in the event that Entitlements are not required), such allotments shall be rescinded and placed into the special allocation pool described in Section 10-6.603(b). Extensions of time may be granted at the discretion of the Director for circumstances beyond the reasonable control of an applicant (e.g., protracted building plan review process, natural disasters, etc.).

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, § 4, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Article 9. Appeals to the City Council
Sec. 10-6.901. Filing—Notices.
        Any interested party may appeal the decision of the Director or the Planning Commission by filing a written notice of appeal with the appropriate fee for an appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after the notice of rejection has been mailed. Any applicant, within two (2) days after filing an appeal, shall cause to be served by personal service or by registered mail a copy of the notice of appeal to all applicants who were awarded allotments and whose allotment award may be adversely affected by the rejected applicant’s appeal to the City Council. The Director shall make available the names and addresses of such applicants. The appellant shall file an affidavit of the service of such notice with the City Clerk within five (5) days after filing the notice of appeal.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.902. Hearings—Decisions.
        The City Clerk shall place the matter on the agenda for the next regular City Council meeting. All parties served with the notice of appeal may participate in the hearing of the appeal. The City Council shall consider the appeal at such regular City Council meeting or may continue the matter at the appellant’s request. At the hearing, the City Council shall hear the appellant or the appellant’s representative and such other persons who wish to testify before the City Council in the determination of the appeal. At the close of the hearing, the City Council may affirm or modify the allotment assignment. The City Council’s decision shall be final and binding on all parties.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.903. Allotments—Effective dates.
        The allotment assignment for a building permit shall become final when the ten (10) day appeal period has expired.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 10. Review of Progress
Sec. 10-6.1001. Review—Failure of progress.
        The Director shall review, on a quarterly basis, each Residential Project which has received an allotment to determine whether satisfactory progress is being made in the processing of Entitlements and building permits. Should an applicant fail to initiate the processing of appropriate plans and permits, the Director shall report such failure to the applicant and the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission, after holding a hearing, may rescind and reassign the allotment to the next the eligible Residential Project (in the order in which application was received) for which the applicant can reasonably evidence is capable of completing the entitlement, design review and building permit process within time frame that applies to the original allotment.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, amended by § 4, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

 

Article 11. Suspension of Allotments—Constitutionality
Sec. 10-6.1101. Suspension of allotments.
        The City Council, upon a finding of emergency, may suspend or increase the assignment of allotments for a period not exceeding one (1) year by the adoption of a resolution containing findings of the facts constituting such emergency. An extension of such suspension shall also be made by a resolution containing such findings of fact.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Sec. 10-6.1102. Constitutionality.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter is held to be unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 12. Annexations
Sec. 10-6.1201. Allotments for annexed property.
        The population figures and allotment limits are based in part on the DOF population estimates, revised each January but not received by the City until later in the spring.

        In the future, annexations to the City will temporarily increase the City’s potential for population above the limits imposed by this chapter.

        Therefore, in the event of an annexation, the City Council, at the time of approval of an annexation, shall assess and determine the allotment potential of the annexed property. The City Council, at the time of approval of an annexation, shall establish procedures for the granting of allotments to owners of the annexed property independent of and in addition to the guidelines, procedures and restrictions set forth in this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004)

 

Article 13. Expiration
Sec. 10-6.1301. Expiration date.
        The provisions of this chapter shall expire on October 1, 2021.

(§ 1, Ord. 769, eff. January 8, 2004, amended by § 4, Ord. No. 828, eff. July 11, 2013)

Chapter 7 TIMESHARE FACILITY REGULATIONS
Article 1. Statement of Policy
Sec. 10-7.101. Policy statement.
        The Council finds that timeshare facilities constitute a commercial hotel use. Due to the mixed method of operation, hybrid ownership, the potential generation of large numbers of people and vehicles, and the potential impact on the tourism-related facilities in the City, special development criteria are warranted. Also, this chapter is intended to establish criteria by which timeshare facilities will function as hotels/motels. Any conversion of an existing facility to timeshare use will be required to meet the same standards as new facilities.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 10-7.201. Timeshare facility.
        “Timeshare facility,” for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean a facility in which a person receives the right in perpetuity, for life or for a specific period of time, to the recurrent, exclusive use or occupancy of a lot, parcel, unit, or portion of real property for a period of time which has been or will be allocated from the use of occupancy periods into which the facility has been divided. A timeshare use may be coupled with an estate in the real property, or it may entail a license, contract, membership, or other right of occupancy not coupled with an estate in the real property.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Sec. 10-7.202. Person.
        “Person,” for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Sec. 10-7.203. Affordable housing.
        “Affordable housing,” for the purposes of this chapter, shall mean housing which has an average monthly cost not exceeding thirty (30%) percent of a family’s income which is within eighty (80%) percent through 120% of the County’s median family income.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Article 3. Development Criteria
Sec. 10-7.301. Limits on occupancy.
        Occupancy of the same timeshare unit by a person shall be limited to a calendar month. In no instance shall a person occupy one (1) or more timeshare units in a timeshare facility for more than three (3) months. Units which do not meet such criteria shall be considered to be residential units and shall be subject to all appropriate zoning restrictions and the city’s growth management plan.

        Units in a timeshare facility shall not be used as a residence unless:

(a)    The residential use is allowed by the underlying zone designation;

(b)    The residential use was specifically allowed by the conditional use permit or residential planned development permit; and

(c)    The residential use has received all necessary approvals under the City’s growth management plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. August 9, 1983)

 

Sec. 10-7.302. Appropriate zoning.
        Timeshare facilities and conversions to timeshare use axe appropriate only in commercial (C-1 and C-R) zones with a conditional use permit and the Institutional-Recreational (I-R-3) Zone with a conditional use permit. The conversion of existing facilities to timeshare facilities would also be appropriate only in commercial (C-I and C-R) and Institutional-Recreational (I-R-3) zones. The conversion of timeshare units to residential condominium uses shall be prohibited.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983, as amended by § 1, Ord. 682, eff. August 9, 1991).

 

Sec. 10-7.303. Development standards.
        The following shall constitute the minimum development standards for timeshare facilities and the conversions of existing facilities to timeshare use. Additional requirements may be attached to a conditional use permit or residential planned development permit by the Planning/Architectural Commission if found to be necessary to assure that the development meets the intent of this chapter:

(a)    Setback, height, and lot coverage. The minimum required setbacks and minimum height and lot coverage shall be those as established in the underlying zone designation. Additional setbacks and height and lot coverage restrictions may be required by the Planning/Architectural Commission to ensure that the facility is adequately buffered from surrounding uses.

(b)    Parking. The minimum parking requirements for timeshare facilities shall be those as required by law for hotel/motel uses, plus requirements for ancillary uses (for example, restaurants and shops). Other uses which are included in the facility, but which are not ancillary uses, shall meet all requirements of this Code. Additional parking may be required by the Planning/Architectural Commission if the design of the facility and units indicates that additional parking is necessary.

(c)    Signs. The sign requirements shall be those as established by Chapter 6 of Title 9 of this Code.

(d)    Management. The management of a timeshare facility shall be in accordance with the requirements established by the State Department of Real Estate for timeshare uses. An on-site manager shall be required.

(e)    Required facilities. The Planning/Architectural Commission may require the provision of facilities, amenities, or design features usually associated with hotels/motels (for example, lobbies, check-in areas, registration desks, service closets, laundry facilities, and the like) to ensure that the timeshare facility will adequately function as a hotel/motel.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Sec. 10-7.304. Conversions to timeshare uses.
        The following standards shall apply to conversions of existing facilities to timeshare uses:

(a)    The conversion of any type of existing unit or facility to timeshare use shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit. Conversions shall be evaluated in terms of the physical suitability of the units or facilities for timeshare use. Items to be considered shall include the general maintenance and upkeep of the structures; general physical condition of the facility; age of the structures; suitability of the units for the type of occupancy proposed; availability of kitchen facilities; the age, condition, and general repair of any recreational facility; and conformance with appropriate building, safety, or fire standards. The Planning/Architectural Commission may require the upgrading of the facility to mitigate any identified deficiencies. Conversions shall also be evaluated to ensure that the conversion does not create or add to the shortage of the particular type of unit proposed to be converted in the City as a whole or in any particular area of the City.

(b)    All facilities converted to timeshare use shall meet all applicable City requirements, including building, safety, and fire standards.

(c)    The conversion of apartments to timeshare use shall be subject to the same relocation benefits as are or may be established for the conversion of apartments to condominiums.

(d)    Conversions which would significantly reduce affordable housing opportunities or reduce the number of conventional overnight accommodations for visitors shall not be allowed. The effect of the conversion on the existing affordable housing or conventional overnight accommodations shall be quantified by means of a survey performed by staff. The survey shall include a representative sample of the existing unit supply in terms of location, price, and type of unit.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Sec. 10-7.305. Information required for applications.
        In addition to any information requirements established by other applicable conditions of this Code, the following information shall also be submitted as part of any application to develop or institute a timeshare facility:

(a)    Typical floor plans for each timeshare unit;

(b)    The phasing of the construction of the timeshare use;

(c)    The type of timeshare method to be used (fee simple, leasehold, tenancy-in-common, license, membership, and the like) and how such use may be created;

(d)    The identification of timeshare intervals and the number of intervals per unit;

(e)    Identification of which units are in the timeshare program, the use of the units not included in the program, and the method whereby other units may be added, deleted, or substituted;

(f)    A description of any ancillary uses which are proposed in conjunction with the timeshare facility;

(g)    A description of the availability of the timeshare project, including ancillary uses, to the general public;

(h)    A description of the method of management of the project and indication of a contact person or party responsible for the day-to-day operation of the project;

(i)     A description of the type and operation of any other uses (residential, commercial, or recreational) which are included in the facility;

(j)     The formula, fraction or percentage, of the common expenses and any voting rights assigned to each timeshare unit and, where applicable, to each unit within the project which unit is not subject to the timeshare program;

(k)    A description of the methods to be used to guarantee the future adequacy, stability, and continuity of a satisfactory level of management and maintenance;

(l)     Any restrictions on the use, occupancy, alteration, or alienation of timeshare units;

(m)   Copies of all enabling documentation, including, but not limited to, articles of incorporation, bylaws, declarations of covenants, conditions, and restrictions, and membership or license agreements;

(n)    Copies of all State Department of Real Estate applications and permits, including any public report issued;

(o)    A description of the method to be used in collecting and transmitting the transient occupancy tax to the City;

(p)    Any other information or documentation the applicant, City staff, or Commission deems reasonably necessary to the consideration of the project, including any required environmental documents; and

(q)    Applications for the conversion of any portion of an existing facility to a timeshare facility shall include the following information, as well as the other information required by this section:

(1)    A property report describing in detail the condition and useful life of the roof, foundations, and mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and structural elements of all existing buildings and structures. Such report shall be prepared by a registered civil or structural engineer, a licensed architect, or licensed general engineering contractor;

(2)    A descriptive report containing acoustical test data which indicate the noise attenuation characteristics of the existing party walls and ceilings. The data for such report shall include a sampling of at least ten (10%) percent of the dwelling units involved, but in no case fewer than two (2) dwelling units, and shall be compiled by a person experienced in the field of acoustical testing and engineering;

(3)    If the conversion is of an apartment or condominium facility, a certified list of the names and addresses of all tenants residing in the project proposed to be converted at the time the application is filed;

(4)    A comprehensive list of all improvements, upgrading, and additional facilities proposed; and

(5)    A report describing all repairs and replacements needed, if any, to bring all structures into substantial compliance with the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Housing Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Fire Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, and any other uniform building related Codes as modified and adopted by the City.

        The information required by this section shall be reviewed by the Planning Department which will require its revision and resubmittal if found to be inadequate or incomplete. Any information or documentation not available at the time an application for timeshare facilities is first submitted, by agreement between the applicant and the City, may be submitted at a later date. Approval shall be subject to the required documentation being received, and the failure of an applicant to submit such documentation shall be grounds for disapproval.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Article 4. Public Notice
Sec. 10-7.401. Required notice.
        Public notice shall be given for all conditional use permits associated with timeshare facilities as required by this Code. In addition, for apartments and condominiums proposed to be converted to timeshare facilities, written notice shall be mailed to all tenants residing in the project proposed to be converted not less than ten (10) days prior to the Planning/Architectural Commission hearing. Such notice shall be mailed by the Planning Department and shall state the following:

(a)    The date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing;

(b)    That, should the permit be approved, tenants may be required to vacate the premises;

(c)    That, should the permit be approved, the property owner will be required to give all tenants a minimum of 120 days’ notice to vacate; however, such notice shall not restrict the exercise of lawful remedies pertaining to, but not limited to, tenants’ defaults in the payment of rent or defacing or destruction of all or a part of the rented premises; and

(d)    A description of any available relocation benefits to be provided by the project applicant.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Article 5. Findings of Fact
Sec. 10-7.501. Findings of fact necessary for approval.
        In addition to the requirements for findings of fact as established by State law or other provisions of this Code, the following findings shall be necessary for the approval of a permit for a timeshare facility:

(a)    That the proposal is in conformance with the Comprehensive General Plan; and

(b)    That there are adequate visitor-serving facilities in the City and that the project will not preclude the development of other needed tourist facilities or hotel or motel facilities.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Sec. 10-7.502. Additional findings of fact.
        The conversion of existing facilities to timeshare facilities shall require the following additional finding: that the proposed conversion will not significantly diminish the supply and availability of low and moderate income housing or of visitor-serving facilities in the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

 

Article 6. Transient Occupancy Tax
Sec. 10-7.601. Timeshare facilities subject to transient occupancy tax.
        All timeshare units shall be subject to the payment of the transient occupancy tax. Units occupied as traditional hotel/motel rentals shall have the tax levied on the rent paid. Units occupied on a timeshare basis shall have the tax levied on the basis of the equivalent rent which would be charged for that particular unit if it were to be rented as a traditional hotel/motel rental unit. The management of the timeshare facility shall provide sufficient data to the City to justify the equivalent rental rate used in calculating the transient occupancy tax.

(§ 1, Ord. 612, eff. October 13, 1983)

Chapter 8 SCHOOL FACILITIES FEES AND DEDICATIONS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 7, added by Ord. No. 634, effective November 21, 1985 was renumbered to be Chapter 8 by codifier as Chapter 7 was in use.

 

Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 10-8.101. Title.
        This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Ojai School Facilities Fee/Dedication Law.”

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.102. Authority.
        This chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7 (commencing with Section 65970) of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.103. Application.
        The provisions of this chapter shall apply to residential development in those portions of the City which lie within an attendance area of a school district with respect to which attendance area the governing board of the school district has made and filed with the Council the findings described in Section 10-8.301 of Article 3 of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.104. Regulations.
        The Council, from time to time, by resolution, may issue regulations to provide for the administration and implementation of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.105. General Plan.
        The General Plan of the City provides for the location of public schools. Where facilities are to be constructed using fees or land, or both, required to be dedicated pursuant to this chapter, they shall be consistent with the General Plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 10-8.200. Scope.
        For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as set forth in this article.

 

Sec. 10-8.201. Conditions of overcrowding.
        “Conditions of overcrowding” exist in the school or schools of an attendance area whenever the total actual or projected enrollment of such school or schools for either the current fiscal year or any one of the next succeeding four (4) fiscal years exceeds the maximum number of pupils which, in the judgment of the governing board of the school district, such school or schools could physically accommodate without a substantial reduction in the quality of the educational programs being offered or projected to be offered at such school or schools in such current or succeeding fiscal years.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.202. Decision-making body.
        “Decision-making body” shall mean the Council, Planning Commission, and such other board, commission, office, or official as may be authorized or empowered to approve, or make recommendations for the approval of, any residential development.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.203. Dwelling unit.
        “Dwelling unit” shall mean a building, or portion thereof, or a mobile home designed for residential occupation by one person or a group of two (2) or more persons living together as a domestic unit.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.204. Approve a residential development.
        To “approve a residential development” shall mean to:

(a)    Grant a building permit;

(b)    Approve or recommend the approval of a tentative map, final map, or parcel map for a subdivision of land; or

(c)    Grant or recommend the granting of a variance, conditional use permit, or planned development permit.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.204.1. Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding.
        “Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding” shall mean and include, but not be limited to, agreements between a subdivider or other developer of residential developments in the affected school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to or for the benefit of the school district, or temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.205. Residential development.
        “Residential development” shall mean:

(a)    The construction of one (1) or more non-mobile home dwelling units;

(b)    The preparation of a site for or the installation of one (1) or more mobile home dwelling units;

(c)    The subdivision of land for the purpose of such construction, preparation, or installation; and

(d)    The use of a building, or a portion of a building, as a residence or residences in a zone where such use is permitted only pursuant to a variance, conditional use permit, or planned development permit or in conjunction with or to enhance the operation of a permitted use.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Article 3. Findings of Overcrowding
Sec. 10-8.301. Findings by school districts.
        Pursuant to Sections 65970, et seq. of the Government Code of the State, the governing board of any school district operating an elementary or high school, with respect to any of its attendance areas located in whole or in part within the incorporated territory of the City, may make and file with the Council written findings that:

(a)    Conditions of overcrowding exist in the school or schools of such attendance area;

(b)    All reasonable methods for mitigating such conditions have been evaluated, and no feasible method for reducing such conditions exists; and, where applicable,

(c)    The school district does not own or lease as lessee vacant land within the attendance area sufficient to meets its anticipated needs over the next five (5) years for land on which to place additional classrooms and related facilities.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.302. Cancellation of findings.
        The findings filed pursuant to Section 10-8.301 of this article shall be deemed to be cancelled on the fifth (5th) August 1 next following the date on which they were filed with the Council or on the first August 1 next following the filing of a report pursuant to Section 10-8.502 of Article 5 of this chapter stating that the conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist in the attendance area as of the commencement of the next fall term or on the date on which new findings respecting the same attendance area are filed, whichever date shall first occur.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.303. Contents of findings and support data.
        The findings filed pursuant to Section 10-8.301 of this article, at the time they are so filed, shall either contain or have attached to them the following:

(a)    A precise description of the geographic boundaries of the attendance area to which the findings relate;

(b)    A list of the mitigation measures evaluated by the governing board of the school district and a statement of the reasons why such measures were found to be infeasible;

(c)    A summary of the evidence upon which such findings were based; and

(d)    Such other information as may be required by regulations adopted by the Council pursuant to this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.304. Concurrence by the Council.
        After the receipt of findings complying with Sections 10-8.301 and 10-8.303 of this article, the Council, after a legally-noticed public hearing, by resolution, shall either concur in or reject such findings. Such findings may be rejected only if the Council determines that such findings are not supported by the weight of the evidence. At any time after the Council has concurred in or rejected such findings, the Council may reopen the issue and, if it determines in the light of its reexamination of the evidence or its examination of new evidence that its decision is not supported by the weight of the evidence, the Council may reverse such decision.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.305. School district schedules.
        Together with the findings filed pursuant to Section 10-8.301 of this article, the governing board of the school district shall also file with the Council a schedule specifying how the school district will use the fees and land received by it pursuant to this chapter to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the time when such facilities will be available. In the event the school district cannot meet the schedule, its governing board shall file modifications with the Council, together with a statement of the reasons for the modifications.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.306. Findings by the Council.
        If the Council concurs with the findings filed pursuant to Section 10-8.301 of this article, the Council, by resolution, shall then find that the facilities and land use specified in the schedule filed pursuant to Section 10-8.305 of this article either are or are not consistent with the General Plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Article 4. Prerequisites for Development Approval
Sec. 10-8.401. Findings by decision-making bodies.
        Within any attendance area for which there is (i) a finding, concurred in by the Council, of conditions of overcrowding, (ii) a schedule filed pursuant to Section 10-8.305 of Article 3 of this chapter, and (iii) a finding made pursuant to Section 10-8.306 of Article 3 of this chapter of consistency with the General Plan, no decision-making body shall approve a residential development unless such decision-making body first makes one of the following findings:

(a)    That the school district has entered into an agreement with the applicant or some other person which agreement provides a feasible means for mitigating any aggravation of such conditions of overcrowding which would otherwise be caused by the residential development;

(b)    Where the application is for a building permit, that the applicant has paid the facilities fee set forth in Section 10-8.402 of this article and, where applicable, the land fee set forth in Section 10-8.403 of this article;

(c)    Where the application is for an approval which does not include the granting of a building permit, that such approval is conditioned upon the dedication of land (if any) required of the applicant pursuant to Section 10-8.404 of this article, and further, that the map, variance, or permit so approved contains notice that the issuance of any building permit for residential development of the property shall be subject to the payment of such fees as may be required by this chapter; or

(d)    That there are specific, overriding physical, economic, social, or environmental factors which justify the approval of the residential development without requiring the payment of fees or the dedication of land which would otherwise be required pursuant to this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.402. Facilities fees.
        The amount of facilities fee to be paid by an applicant for a building permit for a residential development shall be the dollar amount equal to “X” in the following formula:

 

        X=   AC ÷ B

 

        Where:

        “A” = the total estimated cost in dollars to the school district of renting, furnishing, and equipping for a five (5) year period a relocatable classroom and related facilities pursuant to a lease which does not include an option to purchase but which does obligate the lessor, at no additional cost to the school district, to prepare a site owned by the school district, install the facilities thereon, and remove the facilities therefrom upon the termination or expiration of the lease;

        “B” = the maximum number of pupils which can reasonably be accommodated by such relocatable classroom and related facilities at any given time; and

        “C” = the estimated maximum number of pupils which, in either the current fiscal year or any one of the next succeeding four (4) fiscal years, will reside in the dwelling unit or units authorized by the permit and will enroll in the school or schools serving the attendance area in which such dwelling unit or units will be located.

 

        The specific number values to be assigned to “A” and “B” and the maximum number of pupils which it is estimated will reside in each of the various types of dwelling units referred to in “C” in the formula set forth in this section shall be determined by resolution of the Council from time to time on the basis of evidence submitted to it by school districts and other interested parties. Facilities fees shall be paid directly to the school district.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.403. Land fees.
        A land fee shall be exacted only in an attendance area with respect to which the findings by the governing board of the school district made pursuant to Section 10-8.301 of Article 3 of this chapter include the findings described in subsection (c) of said Section 10-8.301. The amount of the land fee to be paid by an applicant for a building permit for a residential development shall be the dollar amount equal to “Y” in the following formula:

 

        Y = DEC

 

        Where:

        “D” = the estimated fraction of an acre of land per pupil reasonably necessary to accommodate relocatable classrooms and related facilities;

        “E” = the estimated average fair market value per acre of those specific lands which the school district is considering for possible acquisition within the next five (5) years for the purposes of accommodating classrooms and related facilities; and

        “C” = the number value assigned to “C” for the purposes of Section 10-8.402 of this article.

 

        The specific number values to be assigned to “D” and “E” in the formula set forth in this section shall be determined by resolution of the Council from time to time on the basis of evidence submitted to it by school districts and other interested parties. Land fees shall be paid directly to the school district.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.404. Dedication of land.
        Subject to the provisions of this section, the decision-making body may condition the approval of any residential development which is a subdivision of land upon the dedication of land to the school district. Such a condition shall be imposed only if the school district has consented to the particular dedication in question. No dedication of land may be required as a condition of the approval of any residential development, other than a subdivision of land, or as a condition of the approval of a tentative map, final map, or parcel map for the subdivision of land into fifty (50) or less parcels. The amount and location of the land to be dedicated shall bear a reasonable relationship and be limited to the need for interim school facilities caused by the residential development. If a dedication of land is required as a condition of the approval of a particular subdivision, any fee which would otherwise be required pursuant to this article for building permits relating to the subdivision, which permits are issued within five (5) years next following the filing for recordation of such subdivision, shall be excused in an amount equal to the fair market value of the dedicated land as of the date on which the subdivision was filed for recordation. The fair market value of the dedicated land shall be determined in the following manner:

(a)    By mutual agreement of the school district and the applicant for the approval of the subdivision; or, if they are unable to agree,

(b)    By an appraisal at the school district’s expense, prepared by a qualified real estate appraiser selected by the school district; or, at the option of the applicant for the approval of the residential development,

(c)    By taking the average of two (2) appraisals, one of which is at the school district’s expense, and is prepared by a qualified real estate appraiser selected by the school district, and the other of which is at the applicant’s expense, and is prepared by a qualified real estate appraiser selected by the applicant.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.405. Exemptions.
        A building permit for the following residential developments, if otherwise proper, shall be issued without requiring the payment of fees or the dedication of land which would otherwise be required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter:

(a)    The replacement or remodeling of a lawfully constructed residential dwelling unit which was lawfully occupied as a residential dwelling unit at some time within the one-year period immediately preceding the date on which the application for the permit is accepted;

(b)    Approved senior citizen housing, facilities for the physically handicapped, and low-income projects; and

(c)    Second units as defined by subsection (b) of Section 10-2.2014 of Article 20 of Chapter 2 of this title.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Article 5. Use of Fees and Land
Sec. 10-8.501. Limitations on uses.
        All fees and land received by a school district pursuant to this chapter shall be used by the school district only for the purpose of providing interim elementary or high school classroom and related facilities.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

 

Sec. 10-8.502. Accounting of uses.
        Any school district receiving fees or land pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for such fees and the disposition of such land and shall file a report with the Council on the balance in such account at the end of the previous fiscal year and on the facilities leased, purchased, or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall identify those attendance areas in which conditions of overcrowding will exist and those attendance areas in which conditions of overcrowding will not exist as of the commencement of the next fall term. Such report shall be filed by August 1 of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the Council.

(§ 1, Ord. 634, eff. November 21, 1985)

Chapter 9 IMPACT FEES
Article 1. General Provisions
Sec. 10-9.101. Short title.
        This chapter shall be known and cited as “Impact Fees.”

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.102. Applicability.
        This chapter applies to all impact fees imposed by the City as a condition of development approval for the purpose of financing capital improvements, the need for which is attributable to such development, including, but not limited to, drainage fees imposed pursuant to Chapter 10 of Title 9 of the Ojai Municipal Code, as amended.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.103. Exemptions.
        The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

(a)    Taxes or special assessments levied by the City;

(b)    Fees for processing development applications or approvals;

(c)    Fees for enforcement of or inspections pursuant to regulatory ordinances;

(d)    Fees collected under development agreements adopted pursuant to Government Code §§ 65864, et seq.; or

(e)    Fees imposed pursuant to a reimbursement agreement by and between the City and a property owner or developer for that portion of the cost of a capital improvement paid by the property owner or developer which exceeds the need for the capital improvement created by the development.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Article 2. Definitions
Sec. 10-9.201. Scope.
        For purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, words and phrases are defined as set forth in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.202. Benefit area.
        “Benefit area” means the geographic area within which impact fees are collected and expended for a particular type of capital improvement serving development projects within such area.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.203. Calculate.
        “Calculate” means the determination of the amount of impact fees to be collected based on the need for capital improvements related to a particular development project.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.204. Capital improvement.
        “Capital improvement” means land and/or facilities for the storage, treatment or distribution of water; for the collection, treatment, reclamation or disposal of sewage; for the collection and disposal of storm waters or for flood control purposes; for the generation of electricity or the distribution of gas or electricity; for purposes of transportation and transit, including, but not limited to, streets and supporting improvements, roads, overpasses, bridges and related facilities; for parks and recreational improvements; for public safety, including for police and fire services; for public buildings, including public libraries; or for any other capital project identified in the City’s adopted capital improvements plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.205. Capital improvements plan.
        “Capital improvements plan” means the five (5) year plan for capital improvements included in the proposed budget adopted annually by the City Council. The capital improvements plan describes the approximate location, size, time of availability and estimated cost of capital improvements and appropriates money for such capital improvement projects.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.206. Collection.
        “Collection” means the point at which the impact fee due is actually paid by the applicant to the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.207. Commitment.
        “Commitment” means earmarking of impact fees to fund or partially fund capital improvements serving new development projects.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.208. Development project.
        “Development project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of development and includes a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction but not a permit to operate.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.209. Dwelling unit.
        “Dwelling unit” means one (1) or more habitable rooms which are occupied or which are intended or designed to be occupied by one family with facilities for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and includes a mobile home.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.210. Impact fee.
        “Impact fee” means any monetary exaction imposed as a condition of or in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of capital improvements related to the development project.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.211. Impose.
        “Impose” means the determination that a particular development project is subject to the collection of impact fees and the attachment of such determination to a particular development project as a condition of development approval.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.212. Non-residential development project.
        “Non-residential development project” means all developments other than a residential development project.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.213. Residential development project.
        “Residential development project” means the development of any property for use as a dwelling unit or dwelling units.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Article 3. Impact Fee Procedures
Sec. 10-9.301. Hearing required.
        Prior to the establishment or increase of any impact fee, the City Council shall hold a public hearing at which oral or written presentations can be made, as a part of a properly noticed meeting.

        Notice of the time and place of the meeting, including a general explanation of the matter to be considered, shall be published in accordance with state law.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.302. Effective date.
        An ordinance or resolution establishing a new fee or increasing an existing impact fee shall take effect no sooner than sixty (60) days following the final action by the City on the ordinance or resolution.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.303. Imposition, calculation and collection of impact fees.
        Impact fees shall be imposed, calculated and collected in the following manner:

(a)    Impact fees shall be imposed as a condition of approval of all development projects. No tentative or final subdivision map, parcel map, grading permit, building permit, final inspection or certificate of occupancy shall be approved unless the provisions of this section have been fulfilled.

(b)    Impact fees shall be imposed by affixing the following language to the development approval:

        “Approval of this Development Project is conditioned upon payment of all applicable Impact Fees and connection fees in the manner provided in Chapter 9 of Title 10 of the Ojai Municipal Code.”

(c)    Impact fees shall be calculated and collected for those development projects requiring subdivision approval at the time of approval of the final parcel or subdivision map and for all other types of development projects at the time of issuance of a building permit. The calculation of impact fees due shall be based on the impact fee schedule set forth in the ordinance or resolution establishing or implementing such fees in effect at the time of application for a building permit.

(d)    No building permit shall be issued until all impact fees due for the development project have been paid.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.304. Impact fee accounts.
(a)    There is hereby established an impact fee account for each benefit area for each type of capital improvement for which an impact fee is imposed, calculated and collected. In the event that an account has previously been established pursuant to separate ordinance for deposit of impact fee proceeds, such account shall be deemed an impact fee account under this section and shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(b)    All impact fees collected within the benefit area shall be deposited in the impact fee account which shall be interest-bearing which interest shall be considered funds of the account.

(c)    The funds of the account shall be expended within the benefit area and shall be used exclusively for capital improvements for which the impact fees were collected.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.305. Use of impact fee proceeds.
(a)    Impact fees shall be expended only for the type of capital improvement for which they were imposed, calculated and collected and shall be expended or committed in accordance with the time limits and procedures established in this chapter. Impact fees may be used to pay the principal sum and interest and other finance costs on bonds, notes or other obligations issued by or on behalf of the city to finance such capital improvements.

(b)    Impact fees shall not be expended to maintain, repair or operate capital improvements.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.306. Time limit on expenditures.
        The City shall expend or commit impact fees deposited in the impact fee account within five (5) years from the date of deposit into the fund.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.307. Refunds.
(a)    Once each fiscal year, the City shall make findings identifying all unexpended or uncommitted impact fees in each impact fee account.

(b)    Except as described in subsection (c) of this section, upon application of the property owner, the City shall refund the portions of any impact fee which have been on deposit over five (5) years and which are unexpended or uncommitted. Refunds shall be made to the then current record owner or owners of the development project or projects on a prorated basis, together with accrued interest.

(c)    With respect to impact fees unexpended or uncommitted within five (5) years of deposit in an impact fee account, the city may make findings to identify the purpose to which the impact fee is to be put and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the impact fee and the purpose for which it was charged. If the City makes such findings, the impact fees shall be exempt from the refund requirement.

(d)    If the City finds that the administrative costs of refunding the unexpended or uncommitted impact fees exceed the amount to be refunded, the City Council, after a public hearing, notice of which has been published in accordance with state law and posted in three (3) prominent places within the area of each development project subject to a refund, may determine that the revenues shall be allocated for other capital improvements of the type for which the impact fees were collected and which serve the development projects.

(e)    The City may refund the unexpended or uncommitted portions of impact fees by direct payment, by offsetting such refunds against other impact fees due for development projects on the property or by other means subject to agreement by the property owner.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.308. Audits.
        The applicant or project owner may request an audit of any impact fee imposed by the City in order to determine whether the amount of the impact fee levied by the City exceeds the amount reasonably necessary to finance capital improvements, the need for which is attributable to new development projects. After such request, the City Council may retain an independent auditor to conduct an audit to determine whether the impact fee is reasonable. Any costs incurred by the City in having an audit conducted by an independent auditor shall be recovered from the person who requested the audit. If an audit is requested, the City may require a deposit equal to the estimated cost of the audit.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.309. Appeals.
(a)    The property owner or applicant may appeal to the City Council any decision of a City official with respect to the imposition or calculation of an impact fee or the amount of any refund due. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant to demonstrate that the imposition of the impact fee or amount of the impact fee or refund was not calculated according to the procedures established herein.

(b)    An appellant protesting the imposition of an impact fee must file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days following the final decision on the imposition of the impact fee or refund.

(c)    An appellant protesting the calculation of an impact fee or the determination of applicability and calculation of a refund must file a notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) calendar days following the final decision on the calculation of the impact fee or on the applicability or calculation of a refund. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other sufficient surety satisfactory to the City Attorney in an amount equal to the impact fee calculated by the City official to be due, the development application shall be processed. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the collection of the impact fee which is due unless a bond or other sufficient surety has been filed.

(d)    Failure to appeal within the time limits set forth herein shall be deemed a waiver of the right to appeal.

(e)    Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside or annul the reasonableness, legality or validity of the imposition of an impact fee must be filed and service of process effected within ninety (90) days after the date of imposition.

(f)    Any judicial action or proceeding to attack, review, set aside or annul the calculation of an impact fee or the determination of applicability and calculation of a refund must be preceded or accompanied by a valid protest within ninety (90) days after the date of calculation. A valid protest must meet both of the following requirements:

(1)    Tendering the required payment in full or providing satisfactory assurance of payment;

(2)    Serving written notice on the City including:

(i)     A statement that the required payment is/has been tendered under protest,

(ii)    A statement informing the City of the factual elements of the dispute over the calculation of the impact fee or the determination of applicability and calculation of a refund,

(iii)   A statement informing the City of the legal theory forming the basis for the protest.

(g)    Only a party who files a valid protest may file a judicial action to attack, review, set aside, void or annual a decision on the calculation of an impact fee or the applicability and calculation of a refund. Such judicial action must be filed and service of process effected within 180 days after the date of calculation.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.310. Exceptions.
        Petitions for exceptions to the application of this chapter shall be made in accordance with procedures established by resolution of the City Council. If the City Council grants an exception in the amount of the impact fee due for a development project under this section, it shall cause to be appropriated from other City funds an amount equal to said reduction in the impact fee due and such funds shall be allocated to the account for the benefit area in which the subject property is located.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.311. Amendment procedures.
        At least once every year prior to City Council adoption of the annual budget and capital improvements plan, the City Manager shall prepare a report to the City Council on the subject of impact fees and shall incorporate:

(a)    Recommendations on amendments, if appropriate, to this chapter, to ordinances imposing impact fees or to resolutions establishing impact fee amounts;

(b)    Proposed changes to the capital improvements plan identifying capital improvements to be funded by impact fees;

(c)    Proposed changes to the boundaries of benefit areas; and

(d)    Proposed changes to impact fee rates or schedules.

        Based upon the report and such other factors as the City Council deems relevant and applicable, the City Council may amend this chapter, specific ordinances imposing impact fees and resolutions establishing impact fee rates or schedules. Changes to the impact fee rates or schedules, to the boundaries of benefit areas, or to the list of capital improvements to be funded by impact fees may be made by resolution. Nothing herein precludes the City Council or limits its discretion to amend this chapter, ordinances imposing impact fees or resolutions establishing impact fee rates or schedules at such other times as may be deemed necessary.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.312. Conflicts.
        In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any other ordinance or resolution establishing or amending impact fees, the provisions of this chapter shall govern.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

 

Sec. 10-9.313. Severability.
        If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the final decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one (1) or more sections, subsections, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

(§ 1, Ord. 664, eff. October 12, 1989)

Chapter 10 SPECIFIC PLAN FEES
Article 1. Applicability
Sec. 10-10.101. Applicability.
        This chapter shall apply to all development in the City within the boundaries of an adopted Specific Plan, except:

(a)    The replacement, alteration, repair, demolition or maintenance of buildings or structures;

(b)    The construction, erection or use of accessory buildings or structures to a principal residential use;

(c)    Additions to or expansions of existing principal uses, provided that such additions or expansions do not add dwelling units nor for non-residential uses involve the construction or erection of a separate structure and further provided that such addition or expansion does not exceed, in square footage, twenty-five (25%) percent of the existing principal commercial use or structure.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-10.102. Definition of development.
        For purposes of this chapter, development shall mean and include tentative, final or parcel map approval; site plan approval; rezoning; conditional use permit; planned development; and building permit issuance.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-10.103. Multiple development approvals.
        In the case of development requiring multiple development approvals, the Specific Plan fee requirement shall be applicable only once, to any particular property; provided, however, that if any development approval lapses and is not extended by the city and a development approval application must be refiled, a supplemental Specific Plan fee may be imposed by the City.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-10.104. Exceptions.
        Petitions for exceptions to the application of this chapter shall be made in accordance with procedures to be established by resolution of the City Council. Any application for an exception shall, at a minimum, specify the subject property, the development approval being sought, and the reasons for the exception, including any relevant supporting documentation.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 2. Imposition, Calculation, Collection and Use of Specific Plan Fees
Sec. 10-10.201. Imposition.
        Specific Plan shall be imposed as a condition of development approval in accordance with the applicable schedule attached hereto and adopted by resolution of the City Council. No development shall be approved in the City within a Specific Plan boundary unless the provisions of this chapter have been fulfilled.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-10.202. Calculation and collection.
        Specific Plan fees shall be calculated and collected for all development in accordance with the applicable Specific Plan fee schedule attached hereto, and adopted by resolution of the City Council, and as may be amended from time to time. Specific Plan fees shall be collected at the following time: upon the filing by the applicant for development approval of a development application which triggers the applicability of the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970 (CEQA), whether such development application is ultimately determined to require an environmental impact report, a Negative Declaration or is determined to be exempt from CEQA review.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-10.203. Use of specific plan fees.
        Specific plan fees are intended to reimburse the City for costs associated with the preparation, adoption and administration of the Specific Plan, including costs incurred pursuant to CEQA. Therefore, all Specific Plan fees collected, unless otherwise designated, shall be placed in the City’s general fund for general City use.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 3. Annual Review and Amendments.
Sec. 10-10.301. Annual review.
        At least once every year prior to City Council adoption of the annual budget, staff shall prepare a report to the City Council on the subject of Specific Plan fees which report shall include the following for each Specific Plan area:

(a)    Itemization of costs incurred by the City in the preparation, adoption and administration of the Specific Plan, including costs incurred pursuant to CEQA;

(b)    Itemization of Specific Plan fees collected in the preceding budget year and cumulatively; and

(c)    Additions to (by annexation or otherwise) and deletions of land from the Specific Plan area.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-10.302. Amendments.
        Based upon the annual report and such other factors as the City deems relevant and applicable, the City Council may amend this chapter or the Specific Plan fee schedule resolution attached hereto. Nothing herein precludes the City Council or limits its discretion to amend this chapter or the Specific Plan fee schedule resolution attached hereto at such other times as may be deemed necessary. All such amendments shall be consistent with the authorization contained in Government Code Section 65456.

(§ 1, Ord. 680, eff. August 9, 1991)

Chapter 11 COMMERCIAL GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN
Article 1. Applicability
Sec. 10-11.101. Applicability.
(a)    This chapter shall apply to all commercial development in the City, except:

(1)    Commercial development permitted as of right, as a conditional use or as an accessory use in zoning districts other than the B-P, C-1 and C-R zoning districts;

(2)    The replacement, alteration, repair, demolition, or maintenance of commercial buildings or the construction or erection of structures accessory to existing commercial buildings, subject to the requirements of Section 10-2.202(b); and

(3)    Additions to and expansions to existing principal commercial uses or structures, provided that such addition or expansion does not involve the construction or erection of a separate structure and further provided that such addition or expansion does not exceed, in square footage, twenty-five (25%) percent of the existing principal commercial use or structure.

(b)    For purposes of this chapter, “commercial development” means and includes office and retail commercial uses and developments.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.102. Development allotments required.
        No commercial development subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken, and no building permit shall be issued in the City, unless a development allotment has been obtained therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 2. Number of Allotments for the Construction Year and Reservation of Allotments for Future Years
Sec. 10-11.201. Development allotments: Setting: Review.
        Commercial development allotments shall be limited as set forth herein to allow a total increase per year of not less than 1.2 percent of the base year population (estimated January 1, 1989) of 8,000 persons and not greater than two (2%) percent of the base year population at the rate of 18.75 square feet of office development per capita and 31.25 square feet of retail commercial development per capita. In order to accomplish this, the construction of office and retail commercial development in the City shall be within the range shown on Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, which by this reference is made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this section, provided that each year’s allotment is to be distributed proportionately among the two (2) semi-annual application periods.

        Actual construction, including commercial development exempt from development control, shall be reviewed after the first two (2) years of this commercial growth management plan, and allotments for future years may be adjusted by amendments to this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 3. Development Allotment Applications
Sec. 10-11.301. Development allotments: Applications: Form.
        Applications for development allotments shall be made to the Department of Planning and Building on forms provided by the City. Applications for commercial development allotments shall contain the following documents where applicable:

(a)    A site utilization map, including:

(1)    A vicinity map to show the relationship of the surrounding areas and the City; and

(2)    A site use layout map showing the extent, location, and type of proposed commercial use or uses, the nature and extent of open space, and the nature and extent of any other uses proposed.

        The site use layout map is of major importance, the vicinity map be shown as a small inset map;

(b)    A public facilities plan showing:

(1)    The needed public facilities to be provided, if any, such as critical linkages in the major street system and school rooms; or

(2)    Other vital public facilities as identified by the General Plan, capital improvement program, or special facilities plans;

(c)    A development schedule showing:

(1)    The proposed calendar schedule of development, including phasing, if any; and

(2)    All applicable processes, such as environmental assessments, tentative and final subdivision maps, prezoning or rezoning, annexations, site design reviews, and similar matters;

(d)    The names and addresses of all persons who have ten (10%) percent or more financial interest in the proposed project;

(e)    A precise plan, in accordance with Section 9-4.09 et seq., and supplementary provisions applicable to specific zoning districts, if required by the applicable zoning district regulations; and

(f)    Such other information as may be required by the Department of Planning and Building.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.302. Development allotments: Applications: Fees.
        Each application shall be accompanied by a processing fee as may be established by resolution of the City Council. Such fees shall be non-refundable.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 4. Planning Director Evaluation
Sec. 10-11.401. Development allotments: Applications: Reviews.
        The Planning Director shall review each application and determine whether or not the proposed development conforms to the General Plan, including all elements thereof and any applicable and adopted Specific Plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.402. Development allotments: Applications: Compliance.
        No application will be considered unless it fully complies with all applicable zoning provisions, the General Plan and all elements thereof and any applicable and adopted Specific Plan.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.403. Development allotments: Applications: Number limited.
        No person may receive or participate in receiving more than the maximum office and retail commercial development allotment per year, except as provided in this article.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.404. Development Allotments: Applications: Excess Allocation.
        No commercial development allotment will be permitted in any one year in excess of the maximum permitted by this chapter unless the Planning Director determines (a) that the commercial development project cannot reasonably be divided into phases and staged over a multi-year time period; (b) that the project is clearly preferential, based on the development evaluation, to all other commercial development projects for which allotments are being sought at that time; and (c) that the commercial development project will not exceed the maximum combined office and retail commercial allotment for the three (3) year period beginning with the year in which the allotment is sought.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.405. Development allotments: Applications: Public facilities.
        No application will be considered if the City sewage disposal, drainage, and other public facilities, including transportation, are inadequate to accommodate the development at defined service level standards pursuant to applicable General and Specific Plans.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.406. Development allotments: Applications: Commercial development evaluations.
(a)    The Planning Director shall accept applications for commercial development allotments for each semi-annual application period.

(b)    The Planning Director, within sixty (60) days of the final date for submission of applications in any given semi-annual period, shall evaluate each application and report his findings, in writing, to the Planning Commission, which may grant or reject the application. If the Planning Commission determines that a proposed development does not conform to the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, the zoning district regulations, or other criteria set forth in this chapter, the application shall be rejected. In granting or rejecting an application, the Planning Commission shall base its decision upon the criteria set forth in this section for preference because of the project’s location, the project’s design, and the project’s impact on the surrounding area.

(c)    Preferences as to project location shall be given applicants whose projects contain one (1) or more of the following:

(1)    Construction on a vacant lot in the downtown area as defined in the General Plan;

(2)    Construction on a vacant lot adjacent to or in close proximity of the downtown area as defined in the General Plan;

(3)    Construction on a vacant lot adjacent to existing commercial development on all sides;

(4)    Redevelopment of an existing commercial use or structure;

(d)    Preferences as to a project’s design shall be given those applicants whose proposed projects contain one (1) or more of the following:

(1)    (i)     Excellence of site planning and/or architectural design in harmony with enhancement of the area;

(ii)    Building height, mass, scale orientation, configuration and proposed materials, color, and vegetation compatible with the general character of the area;

(iii)   Avoidance of site overcrowding with buildings;

(iv)   Providing for ample landscaping and off-street parking;

(v)    Minimum interference with natural topography;

(vi)   Unobstructed vistas;

(vii)  Minimum interference with traffic flows and capacity of adjacent thoroughfares;

(viii) Minimum number of driveway access points or joint access with existing adjacent uses;

(ix)   Provision of transportation mitigation measures to minimize impacts on the level of service of adjacent thoroughfares;

(x)    Minimum number of new trips generated;

(2)    (i)     Functional pedestrian and bicycle circulation;

(ii)    Minimum impact of parking and lighting on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way;

(iii)   Noise reduction;

(iv)   Ample provisions for the maintenance of the premises;

(v)    Ample provisions for general storage;

(vi)   Ample provisions for general lighting; and

(vii)  Ample provisions for security;

(3)    Projects which promote jobs/housing balance, such as mixed use developments; and

(4)    (i)     Proposed performance methods assuring high standards of design and construction and satisfactory completion of the developer’s commitment; or

(ii)    Consideration of the developer’s previous performances; and

(iii)   Thoroughness and readiness of the project.

(e)    Preference as to a project’s impact on the surrounding area shall be given applicants whose projects:

(1)    Are compatible with existing adjacent uses;

(2)    Will not increase the need for major off-site public improvements, which can be served by an existing street system and will not cause any local, collector or arterial street to operate below its specified service level;

(3)    Do not require right-of-way, access, or utility easements for their construction;

(4)    Are not in or near known hazardous flood, fire, earthquake, or slide areas; and

(5)    Will not require more than two (2′) foot cuts or fills and/or will not cause scars in the natural topography.

(f)    The Planning Commission shall review all commercial development allotment applications. After evaluating each proposed development giving due preference for the criteria set forth in subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section, the Planning Commission shall award allocations of allotments. Projects containing the highest number of items of preference shall have first priority. However, the Planning Commission shall award no more allocations than authorized by this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.407. Building permits.
        Applicants awarded commercial allotments shall follow the procedure for obtaining building permits set forth in the Ojai Municipal Code. Any project not forwarded for further processing during an allocation period, upon a request, shall be reviewed again during the next semi-annual period and comparatively ranked with new applications.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.408. Rejection.
        Applicants whose applications are rejected shall be given notice of such rejection within ten (10) days after the allotments are awarded by the Planning Commission. Notice shall be given by the Planning Director by mail to the applicant at his address as shown in the application.

        All applicants requesting that their application remain on file for the next two (2) application periods shall notify the Planning Director in writing within ten (10) days after receiving their notice of rejection. Failure to notify the Planning Director of such request will cause the existing application to expire. All expired applications filed for the succeeding application period shall be accompanied by an additional application fee.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 5. Appeals to the City Council
Sec. 10-11.501. Filing: Notices.
        An applicant or other aggrieved person may appeal the decision of the Planning Director or the Planning Commission to the City Council by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days after notice of rejection has been mailed. The appellant, within two (2) days after filing an appeal, shall cause to be served by personal service or by registered or certified mail a copy of his or her notice of appeal to all applicants who were awarded allotments and whose allotment award may be adversely affected by the appeal to the Council. The Planning Commission shall make available the names and addresses of such applications. The appellant shall file an affidavit of the service of such notice with the City Clerk within five (5) days after filing the notice of appeal. Except where inconsistent with the provision of this section, all such appeals shall be controlled by the provisions of Section 10-2.2002(e) (5) of this Code.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991, as amended by § 21, Ord. 708, eff. April 27, 1995)

 

Sec. 10-11.502. Hearings: Decisions.
        The City Clerk shall place the appeal on the next agenda for a regular City Council meeting. All parties served with the notice of appeal may participate in the hearing of the appeal. The City Council shall consider the appeal at such regular City Council meeting or may continue the matter at the appellant’s request. At the hearing, the City Council shall hear the appellant or his representative and such other persons who wish to testify before the City Council in the determination of the appeal. At the close of the hearing, the City Council may affirm or modify the allotment award. The City Council’s decision shall be final and binding on all parties.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Sec. 10-11.503. Allotments: Effective dates.
        The allotment award for a building permit shall become final when the ten (10) day appeal period has expired.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 6. Exceptions
Sec. 10-11.601. Council exceptions.
        Any application claiming that the decision of the Planning Director or Planning Commission is unfair or causes excessive hardship to him or her may apply to the City Council without fee to approve an exception to this chapter. The City Council, in its discretion, may grant or deny such application with such conditions and modifications as it considers reasonable to carry out the purposes of this chapter. In exercising such discretion, the City Council shall be guided by the following standards and considerations:

(a)    The magnitude of the proposed development and its effect upon the problems relating to growth management within the City.

(b)    The stage of preparation of the applicant’s proposed development and the timing of the application and prior approvals;

(c)    The degree of certainty that applicants will be granted an allotment within the near future; and

(d)    The hardship upon the applicant if the application is denied.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 7. Review of Progress
Sec. 10-11.701. Review: Failure to progress.
        The Planning Director shall review, on a monthly basis, each proposed development which has received a development allotment to determine whether satisfactory progress is being made with the processing of the appropriate plans with the Planning Department. Should a developer fail to comply with the development schedule submitted with his application, or should he fail to initiate the processing of the appropriate plans, the Planning Director shall report such failure to the applicant and to the City Council. The City Council, after holding a hearing, may rescind all or part of the development and shall consider the award of such allotment to the next highest rated applicant from the same category who has qualified for such allotment and who is capable of commencing his project in the construction year under consideration. If no development is eligible for such award, the allotment shall be considered in the establishment of the following year’s allotments.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 8. Suspension/Increase of Allocations
Sec. 10-11.801. Suspension of allocations.
        The City Council, upon a finding of emergency, may suspend or increase the award of allocations for a period not exceeding one year by the adoption of a resolution containing findings of the facts constituting such emergency. An extension of such suspension shall also be made by a resolution containing such findings of fact.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

 

Article 9. Annexations
Sec. 10-11.901. Allotments for annexed property.
        The commercial development figures and the square footage allotments for commercial development in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter, which by this reference is made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this section, are based on the City’s corporate limits as of January 1, 1989.

        In the future, annexations to the City may increase the City’s potential for commercial development above the limits imposed by this chapter.

        In the event of an annexation after the adoption or amendment of this chapter, the City Council, at the time of the annexation, shall assess and determine the commercial allotment potential of the annexed property. The City Council, at the time of annexation, shall establish procedures for the development and granting of allotments to owners of the annexed property independent of and in addition to the guidelines, procedures, and restrictions set forth in this chapter.

(§ 1, Ord. 686, eff. August 9, 1991)

Chapter 12 RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 12 entitled “Residential Density Bonus,” consisting of Section 10-12.01 as added by Ordinance No. 688, effective November 7, 1991, repealed by Ordinance No. 771, effective February 13, 2004.

Chapter 13 IN LIEU PARKING FACILITIES FEE
Sec. 10-13.01. Establishment, purpose and use of in lieu parking facilities fee.
(a)    The City Council hereby creates and establishes an in lieu parking facilities fee for the purpose of mitigating unfavorable impacts attributed to new development in the City. Specifically, this fee shall be used to pay the cost of providing new off-street parking facilities within the downtown area to the extent that developers are, for any reason, unable to comply with Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title requiring a specified number of off-street parking spaces for various buildings and uses. This fee is based on a formula designed to insure that developers pay their fair share for off-street parking facilities required to serve the increased traffic caused by new development.

(b)    Such off-street parking facilities are identified in the City’s Ten (10) Year Public Parking Program. This plan may be amended from time to time.

(c)    The fees hereunder are “impact fees” and shall be collected, administered and expended according to Article 10, Chapter 9 of this Code concerning Impact Fees.

(§ 1, Ord. 692, eff. August 22, 1992)

 

Sec. 10-13.02. Definitions.
        For purposes of this section, unless otherwise apparent from the context, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them herein.

(a)    “Costs of off-street parking facilities or spaces” means any costs related to acquisition, construction, repair and financing of such off-street public parking facilities or spaces but does not include costs of routine maintenance.

(b)    “Downtown” or “downtown area” means that area of the City as defined and delineated at pages 2 and 3 of the study.

(c)    “New development” means any nonresidential development, redevelopment, rehabilitation or conversion or other development project which results in the requirement that off-street parking spaces be provided pursuant to Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title or any non-residential use for which a building permit must be obtained and which prior thereto had been subject to a waiver of the requirements of Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title.

(d)    “The study” means that certain document commissioned by the City and prepared by Kaku Associates, Inc. dated May of 1991, as amended, Titled “A PARKING ANALYSIS FOR DOWNTOWN OJAI.”

(e)    “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation or association.

(§ 1, Ord. 692, eff. August 22, 1992)

 

Sec. 10-13.03. Relationship between the off-street parking facilities fee’s use and commercial development.
        The City Council finds, as set forth herein, that there is a reasonable between the off-street parking facilities fee’s use and new development:

(a)    The City Council is committed to maintaining the same level of off-street public parking facilities relative to the demand for such parking in the downtown area of the City which existed at the date of the study.

(b)    Based upon the analysis provided in the study, the City Council finds that future new development will directly cause an increase in the need for off-street public parking facilities.

(c)    In some cases, future new development may be unable to provide on-site, the number of off-street parking facilities required by Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title.

(d)    The fees collected under this section shall be used to construct off-street parking facilities or spaces not provided by a new development as required by Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title.

(§ 1, Ord. 692, eff. August 22, 1992)

 

Sec. 10-13.04. Relationship between the need for off-street parking facilities and commercial development.
        The City Council finds, as set forth herein, that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for off-street parking facilities and new development.

(a)    The City Council is committed to maintaining off-street parking facilities in a quantity relative to the demand for such parking in the downtown area of the City which existed at the date of the study.

(b)    Based upon the analysis provided in the study, the City Council finds that future new development will directly cause an increase in the need for off-street public parking facilities.

(c)    In some cases, future new development may be unable to provide on-site, the off-street parking facilities required by Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title.

(d)    To the extent that a new development is unable to provide on-site, the off-street parking required by Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title, the City, in order to mitigate the impact of such new development, shall be required to construct such facilities.

(§ 1, Ord. 692, eff. August 22, 1992)

 

Sec. 10-13.05. Fee for new development.
        The City Council has determined through the study that new development creates the need for increased off-street parking facilities. Based upon the calculations contained in the study, the City Council finds that new development creates the need for off-street parking spaces as required by Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title and, to the extent the developer is unable, for any reason, to provide such parking on-site, the cost to the City to provide each off-street parking space, in lieu thereof, is Three Thousand One Hundred Forty and no/100ths ($3,140.00) Dollars.

(§ 1, Ord. 692, eff. August 22, 1992)

 

Sec. 10-13.06. Payment of fee.
        Any person applying for a building permit for any new development shall be assessed and shall pay, prior to the issuance of such permit, an in-lieu parking facilities fee in the amount of Three Thousand One Hundred Forty and no/100ths ($3,140.00) Dollars for each off-street parking space required by Section 10-2.2006 of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title, which the new development is unable to provide. No person shall be granted a waiver pursuant to Sections 10-2.2006(e) and 10-2.2016(c)(4) of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title without the payment of such fee. For sufficient cause shown, the Council may waive the fee required by this section, pursuant to Section 10-2.2009(d) of Chapter 2, Article 20 of this title.

(§ 1, Ord. 692, eff. August 22, 1992)

 

Sec. 10-13.07. Adjustment of fees.
        The cost attributable to providing one parking space set forth herein shall be adjusted as of July 1st of each year to reflect changes in the cost of construction of off-street parking spaces as determined by the Construction Cost Index for Los Angeles from January of the previous year to January of the current year as reported in the Engineering News Record.

(§ 1, Ord. 692, eff. August 22, 1992)

Chapter 14 WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES
Sec. 10-14.010. Purpose.
(a)    The purpose of this chapter is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve the aesthetic character of the Ojai community, and to reasonably regulate the development and operation of wireless communication facilities within the City to the extent permitted under State and Federal law.

(b)    This chapter establishes clear guidelines and standards and an orderly process for expedited permit application review intended to facilitate the orderly deployment of wireless transmission equipment to provide advanced communication services to the City, its residents, businesses, and community at large.

(c)    The regulations in this City are specifically not intended to, and shall not be interpreted or applied to: (1) prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services; (2) unreasonably discriminate among functionally equivalent service providers; or (3) regulate wireless communications facilities and wireless transmission equipment on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such emissions comply with the standards established by the Federal Communications Commission hereinafter also referred to as “FCC”.

(d)    This chapter shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, applicable State laws, and administrative and court decisions and determinations relating to same.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.020. Definitions.
(a)    “Base station” means the equipment and non-tower supporting structure at a fixed location that enable FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network.

(b)    “Collocation” means the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

(c)    “Director” means the City of Ojai Community Development Director, or designee of the Director.

(d)    “Equipment cabinet” means any transmission or other equipment other than an antenna housed within a protective case. An equipment cabinet may be indoors or outdoors, large or small, movable or immovable. Any equipment case with a heat sink or other cooling mechanism for the equipment inside qualifies as an equipment cabinet.

(e)    “Non-tower support structure” means any structure (whether built for wireless purposes or not) that supports wireless transmission equipment under a valid permit at the time the applicant submits its application.

(f)    “Stealth facility” means a wireless communication facility designed and constructed to be integrated into a building or other structure, or placed on or within a building or other structure, so that no portion of any equipment cabinet, transmission equipment, or any other apparatus associated with facility’s function is visible from publicly accessible areas.

(g)    “Transmission equipment” means any equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas and other relevant equipment associated with and necessary to their operation, including coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply.

(h)    “Wireless” means any FCC-authorized wireless communications service.

(i)     “Wireless communication facility” or “wireless facility” or “facility” means any facility that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves, including, but not limited to, commercial wireless communications antennas and other types of transmission equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, towers or similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment cabinets and connectors, pedestals, meters, tunnels, vaults, splice box, surface location marker, equipment, equipment buildings, parking areas and other accessory development. The term also means any facility or transmission equipment used to provide any FCC-authorized wireless communications service including, but not limited to, personal wireless services defined by the Telecommunications Act of 1996 and licensed by the FCC, including, but not limited to, the types commonly known as cellular, personal communications services (“PCS”), specialized mobile radio (“SMR”), enhanced specialized mobile radio (“ESMR”), paging, ground based repeaters for satellite radio services, micro-cell antennas, distributed antenna systems (“DAS”) and similar systems.

(j)     “Wireless tower” means any structure built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.030. Applicable facilities.
        This section applies to all wireless facilities and transmission equipment as follows:

(a)    New facilities. All permit applications received after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must comply with this chapter.

(b)    Changes to existing facilities. All permit applications which in any manner whatsoever seek approval to modify a previously approved facility received after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must comply with this chapter.

(c)    Exemptions. This section shall not apply to:

(1)    The City of Ojai municipal wireless communications facilities.

(2)    Amateur radios. This section shall not govern any amateur radio facility that is under seventy (70) feet in height and is owned and operated by a Federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas.

 

(3)    Over-the-air receiving devices. This section shall not govern any over-the-air receiving devices, as defined by the FCC at 47 C.F.R. Section 1.4000, with a maximum diameter of one meter (thirty-nine (39) inches) for residential installations, and two (2) meters (seventy-eight (78) inches) for nonresidential installations, and designed, installed, and maintained in compliance with the FCC and the California Public Utilities Commission (hereinafter referred to as the “CPUC”) regulations.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.040. Application procedures in general.
(a)    Permits. All new facilities and collocations or modifications to existing facilities shall require a permit in accordance with this chapter.

(1)    Conditional use permit and design review permit. All new facilities, and collocations or modifications to existing facilities that do not meet the findings of approval for a design review permit in Section 10-14.060(d) through (f), shall be subject to the approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with Article 24 of Chapter 2 and subject to the approval of a design review permit in compliance with Article 20 of Chapter 2.

(2)    Design review permit. All collocations or modifications to existing facilities that meet the findings of approval for a design review permit in Section 10-14.060(d) through (f), shall be subject to a design review permit in compliance with Article 20 of Chapter 2.

(3)    Other required permits and approvals. In addition to any conditional use permit or design review permit required under this section, an applicant must also apply for and obtain any separate permit or approval required for such telecommunication facility under the City’s municipal code, including, but not limited to, building, electrical, and encroachment.

(b)    Permit submittal. All permit applications shall be submitted by the applicant, in-person, at a prior-scheduled appointment with City staff with all departments that require a permit or other approval for the proposed project. The City shall endeavor to make appointment times available within five (5) business days of request. The applicant should be prepared to discuss the proposed change and answer questions from staff members to help facilitate the expedited review by all appropriate departments. No permit application may be submitted in any other manner, and the acceptance of a permit application or any partial permit application shall not constitute a waiver of the requirements under this section. Applicants may submit supplemental information to a submitted permit application without an appointment. The Director may waive the required appointment in a signed writing, with notice to the City Manager.

(c)    Incomplete application notices. In the event that City staff determines that a permit application does not contain all the required materials, City staff may issue an incomplete notice consistent with this subsection:

(1)    City staff may toll the time for review only when it issues an incomplete notice within the first thirty (30) days after a permit application is submitted, and only when the incomplete notice specifies the incomplete or missing information and the publicly available information source that requires that missing or incomplete information. City staff may issue an incomplete notice after the first thirty (30) days, but it will not toll the time for review.

(2)    After an applicant responds to an incomplete notice, City staff may toll the time for review when it issues a subsequent incomplete notice within ten (10) days after the applicant’s response (even when the first thirty (30) day period has elapsed); provided, however, that the subsequent incomplete notice cannot toll the time for review based on an issue not cited in the first incomplete notice.

 

(d)    Public notice of applications submitted shall be made following procedures proposed by the City Manager and approved by Council, in addition to posting notice of completed applications on the City’s website and at City Hall.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.050. Regulations for facilities subject to a conditional use permit.
(a)    Conditional use permit application materials.

(1)    Application fee. An application fee as the City may establish from time to time to reimburse the City for its costs to review the permit application.

(2)    Independent consultant deposit. An independent consultant deposit, if required, as the Director may establish from time to time to reimburse the City for its costs to retain one or more independent consultants to review the design review permit application.

(3)    Site plans. Complete and accurate construction-quality plans drawn to scale, prepared, signed and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, land surveyor and/or architect, including: (i) plan views and all four (4) elevations before and after the proposed construction with all height and width measurements called out; (ii) a depiction of all proposed transmission equipment; (iii) a depiction of all proposed utility runs and points of contact; and (iv) a depiction of the leased or licensed area with all rights-of-way and/or easements for access and utilities in plan view.

(4)    Visual analysis. A visual analysis that includes: (i) scaled visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four (4) angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view angle; (ii) a color and finished material palette for proposed screening materials; and (iii) a photograph of a completed facility of the same or similar design and in roughly the same setting as the proposed wireless communication facility, or a statement that no such completed facility exists.

(5)    Statement of Purpose. A clear and complete written Statement of Purpose shall minimally include: (i) a description of the technical objective to be achieved; (ii) a to-scale map that identifies the proposed site location and the targeted service area to be benefitted by the proposed project; (iii) the estimated number of users in the targeted service area; and (iv) full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites.

(6)    Design justification. A clear and complete written analysis that explains how the proposed design complies with the applicable design standards under this chapter to the maximum extent feasible. A complete Design Justification must identify all applicable design standards under this chapter and provide a factually detailed reason why the proposed design either complies or cannot feasibly comply.

(7)    Alternative sites analysis. A clear and complete written alternative sites analysis that shows at least five (5) technically feasible and potentially available alternative sites considered, together with a factually detailed and meaningful comparative analysis between each alternative candidate and the proposed site that explains the substantive reasons why the applicant rejected the alternative candidate. A complete alternative sites analysis may include less than five (5) alternative sites so long as the applicant provides a factually detailed written rationale for why it could not identify at least five (5) technically feasible and potentially available alternative sites.

(8)    Radio frequency emissions compliance report. A written report, prepared by a qualified engineer, which assesses whether the proposed wireless communication facility demonstrates planned compliance with the uncontrolled/general population exposure limits established by the FCC. The report shall also include a cumulative analysis that accounts for all emissions from all wireless communications facilities located on or adjacent to the proposed site, identifies the total exposure from all facilities, and demonstrates planned compliance with all maximum permissible exposure limits established by the FCC. The report shall include a detailed description of all mitigation measures required under the FCC.

(9)    Structural analysis. A structural analysis, prepared, signed and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, which assesses whether the proposed wireless communication facility demonstrates planned compliance with all applicable building codes.

(10)  Noise study. A noise study, prepared, signed and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, for the proposed wireless communications facility and all associated equipment, which shall include without limitation all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators. The noise study shall include without limitation the manufacturers’ specifications for all noise-emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed equipment relative to all adjacent property lines.

(11)  Collocation consent. A written statement, signed by a person with the legal authority to bind the applicant and the project owner, which indicates whether the applicant is willing to allow other transmission equipment owned by others to collocate with the proposed wireless communication facility whenever technically and economically feasible and aesthetically desirable.

(12)  Other published materials. All other information and/or materials that the City may, from time to time, make publicly available and designate as part of the application requirements.

(b)    Guidelines and standards in general.

(1)    Location guidelines.

(A)   Collocation preference. Applicants shall collocate with existing facilities to the extent feasible.

(B)   Preferred locations. To minimize aesthetic and visual impacts and to the maximum extent feasible, all new telecommunication facilities shall be located according to the following preferences, ordered from most-preferred to least-preferred:

(i)     Parcels owned or controlled by the City;

(ii)    Parcels owned or controlled by other governmental entities;

(iii)   Parcels principally used as a golf course;

(iv)   Parcels or rights-of-way in agricultural zones;

(v)    Parcels or rights-of-way in industrial zones;

(vi)   Parcels or rights-of-way in commercial zones;

(vii)  Parcels or rights-of-way in open space zones; and

(viii) Parcels or rights-of-way in residential zones.

(C)   Exception for facilities proposed based on proximity to residential uses. Notwithstanding the preferences listed in subsection (b)(1)(B), a proposed facility that is not a stealth facility within five hundred (500) feet from a residential use measured from the nearest point of the proposed facility to the property line of the parcel inclusive of the residential use shall be defined as a least preferred location. Notwithstanding the preferences listed in subsection (b)(1)(B), a proposed facility that is a stealth facility within three hundred (300) feet from a residential use measured from the nearest point of the proposed facility to the property line of the parcel inclusive of the residential use shall be defined as a least preferred location.

(D)   Most strongly disfavored locations. No facility shall be permitted or constructed in a location where it would:

(i)     Extend above a ridgeline;

(ii)    Materially and adversely impact a scenic viewshed;

(iii)   Require the removal or relocation of a protected tree; or

(iv)   Be on the same parcel as a landmark property.

(2)    Stealth and concealment techniques. All new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities shall include appropriate stealth and concealment techniques given the proposed location, design, visual environment, and nearby uses and/or structures. All ground-mounted outdoor transmission equipment and associated enclosures or shelters shall be screened with concrete walls meeting the requirements of Section 10-2.805(f)(2) not less than six (6) feet above ground. No barbed wire, razor wire, or other such similar fences shall be permitted; chain link fences may be permitted only when completely concealed from public view. All wires, cables, and any other connections shall be completely concealed from public view to the maximum extent feasible. Stealth and concealment techniques do not include incorporating faux-tree designs of a kind substantially different than the surrounding live trees.

(3)    Landscaping. All facilities shall include a landscaped buffer at least four (4) feet wide outside the perimeter of the ground-mounted equipment. All landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with Chapter 2, Article 12 of this title. The Planning Commission may increase, reduce, or waive the required landscaping when it finds that a different requirement would better serve the public interest.

(4)    Height. All new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities shall comply with the applicable zone height limit as specified in Chapter 2 of this title.

(5)    Setbacks. All new facilities and substantial changes to existing facilities shall comply with the applicable setback requirements as specified in Chapter 2 of this title.

(6)    Lights. Unless otherwise required under Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”) regulations, applicants shall install only timed or motion-sensitive lights and design all lights associated with the wireless communication facility in accordance with Chapter 2, Article 16.5 of this title.

(7)    Noise. At no time shall transmission equipment or any other associated equipment (including but not limited to heating and air conditioning units) at any wireless communication facility emit noise that exceeds the applicable limit(s) established in Title 5, Chapter 11 of this Code.

(8)    Signage. No facilities may bear any signage or advertisement(s) other than signage required by law or expressly permitted/required by the City.

(9)    Code compliance. All facilities shall at all times comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local building codes, electrical codes, fire codes, and any other code related to public health and safety.

(c)    Guidelines and standards specific to wireless towers.

(1)    To minimize aesthetic and visual impacts, all new wireless towers shall be designed in accordance with the preferred designs, ordered from most-preferred to least-preferred, as follows:

(A)   New freestanding architectural feature (e.g., faux clock tower, water tank, flagpole, etc.);

(B)   Public art installation; and

(C)   False tree compatible with surrounding foliage and natural environment.

(2)    All wireless towers shall be designed and situated in a manner that utilizes existing natural or man-made features (including, but not limited to, topography, vegetation, buildings, or other structures) to visually conceal the wireless tower to the maximum extent feasible.

(3)    All tower-mounted transmission equipment shall be mounted as close as possible to the tower so as to reduce the overall visual profile to the maximum extent feasible.

(d)    Guidelines and standards specific to base stations.

(1)    All transmission equipment shall be concealed within existing architectural features to the maximum extent feasible.

(2)    All new architectural features proposed to conceal the transmission equipment shall be designed to mimic the existing underlying structure, shall be proportional to the existing underlying structure, and shall use materials in similar quality, finish, color, and texture as the existing underlying structure.

(3)    All transmission equipment shall be mounted at the lowest height and set back from the roofline to maximum extent feasible.

(e)    Guidelines and standards specific to facilities in the public right-of-way.

(1)    Preferred locations. Facilities shall be located as far from residential uses as feasible, and on arterial and collector streets to the extent feasible. Facilities in the rights-of-way shall maintain at least a two hundred (200) foot setback from other facilities, except when collocated or on opposite sides of the same street.

(2)    Undergrounded equipment. All non-antenna equipment shall be installed underground to the maximum extent feasible. All vents, exhausts and similar features for undergrounded equipment shall be flush to grade to the maximum extent feasible; all above-grade vents, exhausts or similar features shall be designed to blend with the environment to maximum extent feasible.

(3)    Pole-mounted or tower-mounted equipment. All pole-mounted and tower-mounted transmission equipment shall be mounted as close as possible to the tower so as to reduce the overall visual profile to the maximum extent feasible. All pole-mounted and tower-mounted transmission equipment shall be painted with flat, non-reflective colors that blend with the visual environment. No portion of the antenna or transmission equipment mounted on a pole may be less than sixteen (16) feet above any road surface unless certain equipment must be placed lower in order to comply with California Public Utilities Commission General Order 95.

(f)    Applicable criteria for conditional use permit approval. In addition to all the guidelines and standards contained in this section, the Planning Commission may specifically consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit, although the Planning Commission may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria if the Planning Commission concludes that the goals of this chapter are better served by the waiver:

(1)    Height of the proposed facility;

(2)    Proximity of the facility to residential structures and residential district boundaries;

(3)    Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties;

(4)    Surrounding topography;

(5)    Surrounding tree coverage and foliage;

(6)    Design of the facility, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness;

(7)    Proposed ingress and egress;

(8)    Availability of existing facilities for collocation and/or other existing structures; and

(9)    Alternative sites listed by applicant.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.060. Regulations for facilities subject to a design review permit.
(a)    Purpose and intent.

(1)    Under Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, State and local governments “may not deny, and shall approve” any “eligible facilities request” so long as it does not “substantially change the physical dimensions of the existing wireless tower or base station.” See 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a) (2013). A permit application subject to Section 6409(a) is referred to as a “covered request.”

(2)    On December 17, 2014, the FCC adopted a report and order that interpreted Section 6409(a) to limit local discretion over wireless permit applications that qualified under the statute as a covered request. Among other things, the FCC specifically limited the kinds of information localities could solicit in permit applications, defined “substantially change the physical dimensions” to include objective thresholds under a cumulative limit, and enacted a rule that “deemed-granted” any covered request when the local reviewing authority fails to act within sixty (60) days after the application is submitted. The FCC codified its rules to interpret Section 6409(a) at 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001 et seq.

(3)    The purpose of this subsection is to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare. This chapter does so by setting forth standards and processes taken from Section 6409(a) and the FCC’s rules for the submittal, review, and action upon a permit application.

(4)    This subsection shall be interpreted and applied so as to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, and the applicable FCC and court decisions and determinations relating to same.

(5)    In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction issues a final ruling invalidating Section 6409, then all proposed modifications to existing facilities subject to this section must be approved by a conditional use permit under Section 10-14.050.

(b)    Time for review. Federal regulations provide that the City must approve or deny on a design review permit application, and all other required permits and approvals, within sixty (60) days after the applicant submits the permit application, unless tolled due to an incomplete notice or a mutual agreement to extend the time. Under Federal regulations, failure to act upon a design review permit, and all other required permits and approvals, within sixty (60) days will result in a “deemed-granted” permit.

(c)    Design review permit application materials.

(1)    Application fee. An application fee as the City may establish from time to time to reimburse the City for its costs to review the permit application.

(2)    Independent consultant deposit. An independent consultant deposit, if required, as the Director may establish from time to time to reimburse the City for its costs to retain an independent consultant review the design review permit application.

(3)    Site plans. Complete and accurate construction-quality plans drawn to scale, including: (i) plan views and all four (4) elevations before and after the proposed change with all height and width measurements called out; (ii) a depiction of all existing and proposed transmission equipment; (iii) a depiction of all existing and proposed utility runs and points of contact; and (iv) a depiction of the leased or licensed area with all rights-of-way and/or easements for access and utilities in plan view. For wireless towers, the plans must include scaled plan views and all four (4) elevations that depict the physical dimensions of the wireless tower as it existed on February 22, 2012 or the date of the original facility, whichever is later. For base stations, the plans must include scaled plan views and all four (4) elevations that depict the physical dimensions of the base station as originally constructed.

(4)    Visual analysis. A visual analysis that includes: (i) scaled visual simulations that show unobstructed before-and-after construction daytime and clear-weather views from at least four (4) angles, together with a map that shows the location of each view angle; (ii) a color and finished material palette for proposed screening materials; and (iii) a photograph of a completed facility of the same design and in roughly the same setting as the proposed wireless communication facility.

(5)    Narrative. A written narrative that explains in explicit factual detail why the applicant believes that Section 6409(a) governs the proposed change permit request. The narrative should identify each required finding of approval under the applicable section of this chapter for the proposed change and explain what facts allow the Director to affirmatively make each finding.

(6)    Prior permits. True and correct copies of all previously issued permits, together with all conditions of approval, together with a written statement from the applicant that certifies the proposal will not violate any applicable permit or condition of approval.

(7)    Radio frequency emissions compliance report. A written report, prepared by a qualified engineer, which assesses whether the proposed wireless communication facility demonstrates planned compliance with the uncontrolled/general population exposure limits established by the FCC. The report shall also include a cumulative analysis that accounts for all emissions from all wireless communications facilities located on or adjacent to the proposed site, identifies the total exposure from all facilities, and demonstrates planned compliance with the uncontrolled/general population exposure limits established by the FCC. The report shall include a detailed description of all mitigation measures required under the FCC.

(8)    Structural analysis. A structural analysis, prepared, signed and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, which assesses whether the proposed wireless communication facility demonstrates planned compliance with all applicable building codes.

(9)    Noise study. A noise study, prepared, signed and sealed by a California-licensed engineer, for the proposed wireless communications facility and all associated equipment, which shall include without limitation all environmental control units, sump pumps, temporary backup power generators, and permanent backup power generators. The noise study shall include, without limitation, the manufacturers’ specifications for all noise-emitting equipment and a depiction of the proposed equipment relative to all adjacent property lines.

(10)  Other permits and approvals. A design review permit application must include all permit applications with all required application materials for each and every separate permit or approval required for such telecommunication facility under the City’s municipal code, including, but not limited to, building, electrical, and encroachment, provided that if the City and applicant agree to any necessary time extension in writing, the applicant may elect in writing delivered to the Director to file for such permits subsequent to design review.

(11)  Other published materials. All other information and/or materials that the City may, from time to time, make publicly available and designate as part of the application requirements.

(d)    Findings for design review permit approval for wireless towers on private property. The Director must approve a design review permit application to change an existing wireless tower on private property when the Director finds all of the following.

(1)    The applicant proposes a change that involves a structure constructed with all necessary permits in good standing for the sole or primary purpose of supporting FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities;

(2)    The proposed change does not increase the height more than ten (10%) percent or one additional antenna array not more than twenty (20) feet (whichever is greater) above the height that existed on February 22, 2012;

(3)    The proposed change does not increase the width more than twenty (20) feet or the tower width at the level of the appurtenance (whichever is greater);

(4)    The proposed change does not involve more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4);

(5)    The proposed change does not involve excavation outside the lease or license area;

(6)    The proposed change does not defeat any existing concealment elements; and

(7)    The proposed change does not violate prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409(a).

(e)    Findings for design review permit approval for base stations on private property. The Director must approve a design review permit application to change an existing base station on private property when the Director finds all of the following:

(1)    The applicant proposes a change on a structure (whether built to support FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities or not) that currently supports existing wireless transmission equipment and all necessary permits for such use are in good standing;

(2)    The proposed change does not increase the height more than ten (10%) percent or ten (10) feet (whichever is greater) above the originally approved structure height;

(3)    The proposed change does not increase the width more than six (6) feet;

(4)    The proposed change does not involve more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4);

(5)    The proposed change does not involve excavation outside the lease or license area;

(6)    The proposed change does not defeat any existing concealment elements; and

(7)    The proposed change does not violate prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409(a).

(f)    Findings for design review permit approval for facilities in the public right-of-way. The Director must approve a design review permit application to change an existing wireless tower or base station in the public right-of-way when the Director finds all of the following:

(1)    The applicant proposes a change on either: (i) a structure constructed with all necessary permits in good standing for the sole or primary purpose of supporting FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities (i.e., a “wireless tower”); or (ii) a structure (whether built to support FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities or not) that currently supports existing wireless transmission equipment and all necessary permits for such use are in good standing (i.e., a “base station”);

(2)    The proposed change does not increase the height more than ten (10%) percent or ten (10) feet (whichever is greater) above the originally approved structure height;

(3)    The proposed change does not increase the width more than six (6) feet;

(4)    The proposed change does not involve more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, not to exceed four (4);

(5)    The proposed change does not involve excavation outside the proximity to the ground-mounted equipment in the public rights-of-way;

(6)    The proposed change does not defeat any existing concealment elements; and

(7)    The proposed change does not violate prior conditions of approval, except as may be preempted by Section 6409(a).

(g)    Conditions of approval specific to Section 6409(a) facilities. In addition to all other conditions of approval permitted under state and federal law that the Director may deem appropriate for a specific change, all design review permits under this chapter, whether affirmatively granted by the Director under federal directive in 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a) or deemed granted by the operation of law, shall include all the conditions of approval as follows:

(1)    No automatic renewal. Grant or acceptance of this permit shall not renew or extend the underlying permit term.

(2)    As-builts. The applicant shall submit to the Director an as-built survey and plans that detail the entire post-change support structure, all transmission equipment, and all utilities within ninety (90) days after completed construction.

(3)    Indemnification. To the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, the applicant shall at all times defend, indemnify, protect, save harmless, and exempt the City, its officers, commissioners, directors, attorneys, agents, servants, employees, and volunteers from any and all penalties, damages, or charges, excepting only punitive damages, which arise from claims, suits, demands, causes of action, and/or awards, and/or costs and expenses in connection therewith, whether compensatory or consequential, whether legal or equitable, which arise from, or are caused by, the construction, erection, installation, location, collocation, operation, maintenance, repair, modification, replacement, removal, relocation, or restoration of wireless transmission equipment within the City based on any act or omission of an applicant, its directors, officers, attorneys, site managers, agents, employees, contractors, subcontractors, independent contractors, or representatives. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the penalties, damages, or charges referenced in this condition of approval, shall include all reasonable attorneys’ fees, consultants’ fees, and expert witness’ fees as costs and expenses recoverable by the City.

(4)    Compliance with applicable laws. The applicant shall comply with all applicable provisions in this chapter, any permit issued under this chapter, and all other applicable laws and regulations. Any failure by the City to enforce compliance shall not relieve any applicant of its obligations under this chapter, any permit issued under this chapter, or all other applicable laws and regulations.

(5)    Violations. The City may revoke a design review permit granted under this chapter for any violation of the City of Ojai Municipal Code. The remedies available to the City shall be cumulative and the City may resort to any other remedy available at law or in equity and resort to any one remedy shall not cause an election precluding the use of any other remedy with respect to a violation.

(6)    No waiver of standing. The City’s grant of any design review permit pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a) shall not waive, nor be deemed to waive, the City’s right and/or standing to challenge the validity of 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a) or any related administrative or judicial order or decision, either on its face or as applied in any particular case.

(h)    Design review permit denial without prejudice.

(1)    Grounds for a denial without prejudice. The Director may issue a denial without prejudice for a design review permit when:

(A)   Based on the materials submitted by the applicant, the Director cannot make all findings required for the type of proposed change;

(B)   The proposed change would cause a violation of an objective, generally applicable law related to health and safety;

(C)   The proposed change involves the replacement of the entire support structure; or

(D)   The proposed change does not qualify for mandatory approval under 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a), as may be amended or superseded, and as may be interpreted by any order or decision by the FCC or by any court of competent jurisdiction.

(2)    Procedures for design review permit denial without prejudice. All design review permit application denials shall be in written form; the written permit denial shall include: (i) the decision date; (ii) a statement that the City denies the permit without prejudice; (iii) a short and plain statement with the basis for the denial; and (iv) that the applicant may submit the same or substantially the same permit application in the future.

(3)    Submittal after design review permit denial without prejudice. After the Director denies a design review permit application, and subject to the generally applicable permit application submittal provisions in this chapter, an applicant shall be immediately allowed to either:

(A)   Submit a new design review permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed change; or

(B)   Submit a new conditional use permit application for the same or substantially the same proposed change.

(4)    Costs to review a denied design review permit. The City shall be entitled to recover the reasonable costs for its review of any design review permit application. In the event that the Director denies a design review permit application, the City shall return any unused deposit fees within sixty (60) days after a written request from the applicant. An applicant shall not be allowed to submit a conditional use permit application or submit a design review permit application for the same or substantially the same change unless all costs for the prior-denied permit application are paid in full.

(i)     The City will provide public notice of all approved and denied design review permit applications following procedures proposed by the City Manager and approved by Council, in addition to posting notice of approved and denied design review permit applications on the City’s website and at City Hall.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.070. Independent consultant review.
(a)    Selection by Director. The Director may select and retain with the approval of the City Manager one or more independent consultants with expertise in telecommunications satisfactory to the Director and the City Manager in connection with any permit review and evaluation.

(b)    Scope. The independent consultant shall review the project aspects that involve technical or specialized knowledge and may address:

(1)    Whether the applicant submitted a complete and accurate application;

(2)    Whether the facts and materials presented in a particular application tend to support certain statements or analyses in the application;

(3)    Compliance with any applicable regulations;

(4)    Any other specific technical or specialized issues requested by the City; and/or

(5)    Presence or absence of a significant gap in service coverage, as appropriate.

(c)    Independent consultant fee deposit. The applicant shall pay the cost for any independent consultant fees, along with applicable overhead recovery, through a deposit, estimated by the Director, paid at the time the applicant submits an application. The applicant shall pay all consultant fees before the City may act on a permit application. In the event that such costs and/or fees do not exceed the deposit amount, the City shall refund any unused portion within sixty (60) days after the final building permit is released or, if no final building permit is released, within sixty (60) days after the City receives a written request from the applicant.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.080. Maintenance.
(a)    All wireless communication facilities must comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC, and any other State or Federal government agency with the authority to regulate wireless communication facilities.

(b)    The site and the wireless communication facility, including all landscaping, fencing, and related transmission equipment must be maintained in a neat and clean manner and in accordance with all approved plans.

(c)    All graffiti on wireless communication facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee within forty-eight (48) hours of notification.

(d)    A wireless communication facility located in the public right-of-way may not unreasonably interfere with the use of any City property or the public right-of-way by the City, by the general public or by other persons authorized to use or be present in or upon the public right-of-way. Unreasonable interference includes disruption to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, and interference with any other City or public utilities.

(e)    If any FCC, CPUC or other required license or approval to provide communication services is ever revoked, the permittee must inform the Director of the revocation within ten (10) days of receiving notice of such revocation.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.090. Removal of abandoned facilities.
(a)    Any facility whose permit has expired or whose permit has been terminated by the City or that is not operated for a continuous period of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be deemed abandoned, and the owner of the facility shall remove the facility within ninety (90) days of receipt of notice from the Director notifying the owner of the abandonment.

(b)    If the facility is not removed within the ninety (90) day period, the Director may remove the facility at the permittee’s, facility owner’s, or landowner’s expense pursuant to the City’s abatement procedures.

(c)    If there are two (2) or more users of the permitted facility, this provision shall not become effective until all applicable permits have expired or have terminated or all users cease using the wireless tower.

(d)    As a condition of approval for permit issuance, the applicant shall provide a separate demolition bond for the duration of the permit, and in the form and manner of surety as determined by the Director and approved as to form by the City Attorney, with provision for inspection and city removal of the facility in the event of failure to perform by the responsible parties as defined by this chapter.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.100. Ownership transfers.
        Upon transfer of an approved wireless communication facility or any rights under the applicable permit or approval, the permittee of the facility must within thirty (30) days of such transfer provide written notification to the director of the date of the transfer and the identity of the transferee. The Director may require submission of any supporting materials or documentation necessary to determine that the facility is in compliance with the existing permit or approval and all of its conditions including, but not limited to, statements, photographs, plans, drawings, and analysis by a qualified engineer demonstrating compliance with all applicable regulations and standards of the City, FCC, and CPUC.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.110. Permit terms; permit conditions.
(a)    Each permit issued, except permitted uses pursuant to this chapter, shall be issued for a period of ten (10) years, but may be reduced for public safety reasons or substantial land use reasons pursuant to California Government Code Section 65964(b). The City may establish a build-out period for a wireless telecommunication facility. At the end of the specified permit term, the permit shall automatically expire unless a written request for renewal is submitted by the applicant, prior to expiration, to the director of community development. Upon the expiration of any required permits for the facility, it shall be removed in accordance with the requirement of Section 10-14.090 of this chapter.

(b)    If a request for renewal of the required permit(s) is received, the permit shall remain in effect until a decision on the renewal is made. The renewal request shall be reviewed in a similar manner as the original approval. The review is to insure that the facility is still in operation, that it has been properly maintained, that the original conditions of approval have been adhered to and whether they are to remain the same or need to be modified, and to determine if new means exist to upgrade the facility to better meet the purpose, intent, goals and provisions of this chapter. If new means exist that will allow the redesign or relocation of the facility to better meet the purpose, intent, goals and provisions of this chapter, then the facility must be redesigned and/or relocated accordingly. Failure to comply with this requirement may be considered grounds for denial of a new permit.

(c)    The City may add conditions to any new permits as necessary to advance a governmental interest related to health, safety, or welfare, provided, however, that any condition shall comply with applicable FCC and CPUC regulations and standards, and that reasonable advance notice thereof has been provided to all affected parties. If an entitlement is not renewed, the City shall give the applicant written notice thereof together with the rationale on which the City’s decision was made. Any applicant that is dissatisfied with a decision to renew or not to renew their permit may appeal the decision in accordance with the provisions of the section(s) under which the original approval was issued.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.120. Exception from standards.
        Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, one or more specific exceptions to the standards contained within this chapter may be granted if a denial would prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of wireless telecommunications services by the applicant. As such, the City may grant special permission or exception, on such terms as the City may deem appropriate, in cases where the City determines that the grant of the special permission is necessary to comply with State and Federal law or regulations and where the applicant shows by clear and convincing evidence that no other location or combination of locations in compliance with this chapter can provide comparable communications. Prior to the issuance of an exception, the applicant shall be required to submit to the director of community development a written explanation setting forth clear and convincing evidence that the location or locations, and the design of the facility is necessary to close a significant gap in service coverage, that there is no feasible alternate location or locations, or design, that would close a significant gap or to reduce it to less than significant, and that the facility is the least intrusive means to close a significant gap or to reduce it to less than significant in service. Exceptions shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Commission and City Council. The burden is on the applicant to prove significant gaps and least intrusive means as required herein.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.130. Conflicts with other ordinances or regulations.
        In the event that any City ordinance or regulation, in whole or in part, conflicts with any provisions in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall control.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

 

Sec. 10-14.140. Severability.
        In the event that a court of competent jurisdiction holds any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this section unconstitutional, preempted, or otherwise invalid, the invalid portion shall be severed from this section and shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this section. The City hereby declares that it would have adopted each section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this section irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases in this section might be declared unconstitutional, preempted, or otherwise invalid.

(§ 3, Ord. 851, eff. April 10, 2015)

Chapter 15 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Chapter 15, Development Agreements, consisting of Sections 10-15.01 through 10-15.14, as added by Ordinance No. 740, effective September 24, 1999, repealed by Ordinance No. 771, effective February 13, 2004.

Chapter 16 REPORT OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDING RECORDS
Note
*       Editor’s note—Ord. No. 838, § 8, effective April 11, 2014, repealed Chapter 16, Sections 10-16.01—10-16.08, which pertained to the report of residential building records and derived from Ord. No. 826, § 13, eff. June 28, 2013; Ord. No. 832, eff. December 13, 2013; and Ord. No. 836, eff. February 28, 2014.

