6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 1/710
ORDINANCES PENDING CODIFICATION
Ordinances listed under this folder in the table of contents to
the left, have been passed, but have not been incorporated in
the actual code. Please contact the office of the clerk if there
are any questions concerning the ordinances listed.
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
ORDINANCE NO.19-01
ORDINANCE OF THE COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLACERVILLE AMENDING TITLE 10
(ZONING) OF THE PLACERVILLE CITY CODE TO IMPLEMENT NEW STATE LAW
REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS AND UPDATE THE CITY’S
REGULATIONS
The Council of the City of Placerville ORDAINS as follows:
SECTION 1. Section 12 (Accessory Dwelling Units) of Chapter 4 (General Regulations) of Title 10 (Zoning) of
the Placerville City Code is amended as follows:
10-4-12: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADU) (Ord. 1692, 24 Oct 2017):
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the creation of accessory dwelling units in
residential zones and to set forth criteria and regulations of those accessory dwelling units.
(B) Applicability of Regulations: The provisions of this Section shall apply to all parcels that are zoned RE,
R-1A, R1-6,000, R1-10,000, R1-20,000, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5.
(C) Permitted use: Accessory dwelling units as defined in Section 10-4-1 are a permitted use in the City’s
residential zoning districts for residential use that is consistent with the City’s general plan, the specific
zone for the parcel on which the ADU is to be located, and this Section.
(D) Development and use regulations: ADUs are subject to the following standards, restrictions and
regulations:
1. Minimum parcel area: six thousand (6,000) square feet, or as provided under Section 10-4-2(A)
[Parcel Area].
2. Primary Residence. An existing or proposed single-family residence on the parcel.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 2/710
3. Density. No more than one (1) ADU is permitted on any one parcel.
4. Subdivision. A parcel having an ADU may not be subdivided in a manner that would allow for the
primary dwelling and accessory dwelling unit to be located on separate parcels that do not meet
the minimum parcel area, width and/or depth required by the residential zoning district in which
the parcel is located.
5. Minimum Yards.
(a) An attached ADU shall comply with all minimum yard requirements for the main dwelling
established by the residential zoning district in which the parcel is located.
(b) A detached ADUs shall comply with all minimum yard requirements for the primary dwelling
established by the residential zoning district in which the parcel is located, with the exception
of a detached ADU that would not exceed the height standard per Section 10-4-3(D), may be
located on the required rear yard up to five (5) feet from the rear parcel line.
6. Floor space.
(a) Detached ADU. Maximum permissible floor space shall be 50% of the square footage of the
existing or proposed primary residence, except that the minimum shall not be less than six
hundred (600) square feet, or more than twelve hundred (1,200) square feet.
(b) Attached ADU. The total area of floor space shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
proposed or existing primary dwelling or twelve hundred (1,200) square feet.
7. Passageway. No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an ADU.
8. Building Coverage. ADU units shall count towards the total building coverage for the parcel and
the entire building coverage of all buildings may not exceed the permitted building coverage
established by the residential zoning district in which the parcel is located.
9. Height. The maximum permitted height of an ADU is the same as the maximum permitted height
for the residential zoning district in which the parcel is located.
10. Parking. One (1) off-street parking space is required, except as provided in Section 11 (Parking
Exceptions) below, in addition to the required parking for the primary residence, that may be
provided in the following configurations and areas in addition to the areas allowed for the primary
residence:
(a) In tandem, meaning two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other
location on a lot, lined up behind one another; or
(b) Within required interior side yards.
11. Parking Exceptions. The off-street parking requirement of Section 10-4-12(D)(10) Parking, does
not apply to the following ADUs:
(a) ADUs located within one-half mile of public transit as determined by the Director.
(b) ADUs located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.
(c) Existing ADUs that were permitted without additional parking.
(d) When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 3/710
(e) When a car share vehicle is located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit as
determined by the Director.
(f) The ADU is part of (attached to or within) the proposed or existing primary residence.
12. Consistency. All accessory dwelling units shall comply with all applicable development
regulations for the zoning district in which the parcel is located and building code requirements set
forth in Title 4, Construction Regulations, unless otherwise specifically provided for in this
section.
13. Aesthetics. The ADU shall be similar or compatible in character to the primary residence on the
site and to the surrounding residences in terms of roof pitch, eaves, building materials, colors and
landscaping.
For residential zoned properties listed on the California Register of Historic Places, Placerville
Historic Resource Inventory, or in an adopted historic district, any exterior changes that can be
visible from the public street to the architecture of existing buildings to create an accessory
dwelling shall meet the historical criteria requirements of Section 10-4-10(B) (Secretary of Interior
Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings), and shall
comply with the requirements of City Code Sections 10-4-9 and 10-4-10.
14. Tenancy. Either the main dwelling or the ADU shall be occupied by the property owner when both
units are occupied as dwelling units. The ADU shall not be rented, occupied, or offered for rental
or occupancy for periods of less than thirty (30) days.
(E) Conversion of accessory buildings:
1. An accessory building may be eligible to convert into an ADU, subject to meeting criteria as
outlined in subsection (2) of this section and approval through the process outlined in Section 10-
4-12(F). No additional off-street parking shall be required to convert an accessory building into an
ADU.
2. Eligibility. The following criteria must be met in order to be eligible for the conversion of an
accessory building:
(a) Other supporting documentation to show the building was legally built may be substituted for
a building permit subject to review by the Director.
(b) The accessory building must be upgraded to meet the building code requirements based on the
change of occupancy at the time of the conversion.
(c) The accessory building must meet all of the development regulations of Section 10-4-12(D),
with the exception that no setback shall be required if the conversion is of an existing garage or
a portion of an existing garage, and a setback of no more than five (5) feet from the side and
rear parcel lines shall be required for an ADU that is constructed above an existing garage.
3. All or any portion of an accessory building that meets the eligibility criteria as provided in this
section may be demolished and reconstructed to meet the building code requirements based on the
change of occupancy at the time of conversion. The accessory dwelling unit that replaces the
accessory building may retain the setbacks and the footprint of the legally constructed accessory
building. The existing setbacks and footprint of the accessory building must be evidenced by valid
building permits or other supporting documentation subject to review by the Director. Nothing in
this section shall be deemed to authorize the expansion of the footprint or reduction of the setbacks
beyond that evidenced by a valid building permit or other supporting documentation subject to
review by the Director or to allow the continuation of any other nonconformity.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 4/710
(F) Application and processing requirements:
1. Submittal. The application for an accessory dwelling unit permit shall be submitted to the
Development Services Department concurrent with an application and submittal requirements for a
building permit. In addition to the standard submittal requirements for a building permit, an
application for an accessory dwelling unit permit shall include all of the following (except as noted
below):
(a) Site plan. A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the perimeter of the parcel
proposed for the accessory dwelling unit; the location and dimensioned setbacks of all existing
and proposed structures on the site; all easements, building envelopes, and special
requirements of the subdivision as shown on the Final Map and improvement plans, if any; and
average slope calculations for the site.
(b) Floor plan. A floor plan, drawn to scale, that shows the dimensions of each room, and the
resulting floor space. The use of each room shall be identified, and the size and location of all
windows and doors shall be clearly shown.
(c) Elevations. Architectural elevations of the proposed structure showing all openings, exterior
finishes, original and finish grades, stepped footing outline, and roof pitch.
(d) Materials and color board. A materials and color board for the existing or proposed residence
and the proposed ADU.
(e) Photographs. Color photographs of the site and adjacent properties, taken from each property
line of the site, to show the project site and adjacent sites. Label each photograph and reference
to a separate site plan indicating the location and direction of each photograph.
(f) Exceptions: Applications for accessory dwelling units which do not modify a building’s
exterior are not required to submit the items described in subsection (F)1(c), (F)1(d), or (F)1(e)
of this section.
(g) Fee. A fee set by the City Council for an ADU shall accompany the application.
(h) Historic Resources. For residential properties described in subsection (D-13) of this Section
involving residential historic resources, an ADU request shall also comply with the application
and submittal requirements under City Code Sections 10-4-9: Site Plan Review and 10-4-10:
Historical Building In the City.
2. Application Review and Decision.
(a) Non-Historic Residential Resources. The Director, or the duly appointed representative, shall act
on an application for an ADU permit within 120 days of submittal of a complete application for
residential properties not described in subsection (D-13) of this Section involving historic
residential resources. The ADU permit shall be issued only if the proposed ADU complies with all
development and use regulations in this Section.
(b) Historic Residential Resources. The Planning Commission shall act on an application for an ADU
for residential properties described in subsection (D-13) of this Section. The Planning Commission
shall consider all development and use regulations in this Section, and the historical criteria
requirements of Section 10-4-10(B) (Secretary of Interior Standards for Rehabilitation and
Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings), when making its decision.
3. Utility Connection Fees.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 5/710
(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), a separate new utility connection and payment of a
connection fee or capacity charge pursuant to State law and City fee schedule will be required for
any new ADU, payable at time of building permit issuance.
(b) No new or separate utility connection or related connection fee or capacity charge will be required
for ADUs that are internal conversions of existing space within a single family residence or an
accessory structure.
4. Covenant and Agreement. A covenant and agreement shall be executed by the property owner, it shall be
recorded, and shall contain the following:
(a) A statement that the property owner shall be an owner-occupant and shall reside either in the primary
residential dwelling or the ADU.
(b) The ADU shall not be sold separately from the primary residential dwelling.
(c) The ADU permit shall run with the land and the ADU permit is binding and enforceable on future
property owners.
SECTION 2. The Council finds that the adoption of this Ordinance is statutorily exempt from environmental
impact, in that it involves the adoption of an ordinance regarding second units to implement the provisions of
Section 65852.2 of the Government Code as set forth in Section 21080.17 of the Public Resources Code.
SECTION 3. Adoption. The above ordinance was introduced at a regular meeting of the City Council of the
City of Placerville on April 23, 2019, by Councilmember __________________, and it was read for the first time.
The Ordinance was read for the second time on May 14, 2019, and introduced by Councilmember
_________________, who moved its adoption. The motion was seconded by Councilmember
____________________. A poll vote was taken, which stood as follows:
Passed 5-14-2019
AYES:
NOES:
ABSENT:
ABSTAIN:
ATTEST: Mayor Mark A. Acuna
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 6/710
Regina O’Connell, City Clerk
Disclaimer:
This is provided for informational purposes only. The formatting of this ordinance may vary from
the official hard copy. In the case of any discrepancy between this ordinance and the official hard
copy, the official hard copy will prevail.
RESOLUTION NO. 8479
RESOLUTION OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF
PLACERVILLE EXTENDING THE ATTACHED INTERIM URGENCY ORDINANCE ADOPTED
ON NOVEMBER 8, 2016 FOR A PERIOD OF 10 MONTHS AND 15 DAYS PURSUANT TO
GOVERNMENT CODE § 65858.
WHEREAS, on November 8, 2016 the City Council adopted Interim Urgency Ordinance No. 1683 regulating
cultivation and prohibiting the manufacture, processing, laboratory testing, labeling, storing, wholesale and retail
distribution of nonmedical marijuana in the City of Placerville pursuant to Government Code § 65858(a); and
WHEREAS, Government Code§ 65858(a) provides for the extension of said ordinance following a public
hearing of the City Council; and
WHEREAS, at the City Council Meeting on November 8, 2016, the Council adopted findings supporting the
Interim Urgency Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the City Council finds that the same conditions exist to justify extending the ordinance for an
additional 10 months and 15 days pursuant to Government Code §65858.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the City Council of the City of Placerville hereby adopts the findings
made in the ordinance on November 8, 2016 and extends the Interim Urgency Ordinance for a period of 10 months
and 15 days pursuant to Government Code §65858.
The foregoing Resolution was introduced at a regular meeting of the City Council of the City of Placerville held on
December 13, 2016, by Council member Thomas, who moved its adoption. The motion was seconded by Vice-
Mayor Clerici. A poll vote was taken, which stood as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 7/710
AYES: Acuna, Borelli, Clerici, Thomas, Wilkins
NOES: None
ABSENT: None
ABSTAIN: None
There being a minimum 4/5 of votes “AYE”, Motion carried and was so ordered.
___________________________
Vice-Mayor John Clerici
Attest:
_______________________________
Regina O’Connell, City Clerk
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Placerville, as supplemented, contains ordinances and resolutions up to
and including ordinance 1696, passed November 6, 2018, and resolution 8479, passed December 13,
2016. Ordinances and resolutions of the City adopted after said ordinance and resolution supersede
the provisions of this City Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult
the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the Code has been amended,
superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Coeur d'Alene, Idaho
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE PROVIDING FOR THE CODIFICATION OF THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE
CITY OF PLACERVILLE, CALIFORNIA, AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE OFFICIAL
CODE OF THE CITY OF PLACERVILLE.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 8/710
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF PLACERVILLE, that:
Section 1. From and after the date of passage of this ordinance the official city code of the city of
Placerville, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., and hereby approved and accepted shall be the official
code of all ordinances of a general and permanent character of the city.
Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification, the loose leaf type of
binding together with the continuous supplemental service whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general nature, amending, altering, adding to, or deleting provisions of this official city code is identified
by the proper catchline, and following preparation by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., is inserted in the proper
place in each of the official copies. Each such insertion shall be made within thirty (30) days following
the date of adoption by the council, and each new provision shall become effective upon such insertion.
Section 3. At least three (3) copies of this city code shall at all times be on file and available for
inspection in the office of the clerk.
Passed and approved by the mayor and council this sixth day of May, 1963.
Title 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Chapter 1
CITY CODE
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the governing body this code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute
the official city code of the city of Placerville. Any reference made to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate chapter
and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself,
when reference is made to this code by title in any legal document. (1962 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all
courts and in all administrative tribunals of this state as the ordinances of the city of general and
permanent effect. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 9/710
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or
sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement
pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such amendments or
revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to Sterling Codifiers, Inc., and the said
ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this code. Each
such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this
code within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1962 Code)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is used, in describing or
referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be
included, although distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words importing the singular
number only, or the masculine gender, several matters, parties, or persons and females as well as
males and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision excluding such
construction or where the subject matter or content may be repugnant thereto. (1962 Code)
1-1-5: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the following rules shall be observed:
(A) Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order to constitute an offense, it
shall be sufficient if an intent appears to defraud any person,
(B) Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section of this code prohibits the
commission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed
act, but also the employer and all other persons concerned with or in aiding or abetting the said
person shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth1. (1962 Code)
Chapter 2
SAVING CLAUSE
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the city passed prior to the adoption of this code are hereby repealed, except
such as are referred to herein as being still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved
from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances, appropriation ordinances;
ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 10/710
granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming
or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances;
ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or
from the city; and all special ordinances. (1962 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to
the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this
code or by virtue of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in
respect of such provisions only. (1962 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance, whether such former
ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or
as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim
arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so
committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim
arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture
or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by the
consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in
the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding section shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance herein repealed, or as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm,
corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the
time of the adoption of this code. (1962 Code)
Chapter 3
DEFINITIONS
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the meaning herein
ascribed to them, unless the content makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CITY: The city of Placerville.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 11/710
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this code.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city employee by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words "of the city of Placerville".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which brings the act or omission within the
provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code which is a lesser
offense than a felony as defined by state law.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE, NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such attention to the
nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting
in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city; or
any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of,
another person or to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part
of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any act required by the
provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a city officer by title only, this shall be
construed as though followed by the words "of the city of Placerville".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint
tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.
PERSON: Includes the singular and the plural and shall also mean and include any person, firm,
corporation, association, partnership, or any other form of association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of
rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is
created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods,
merchandise, articles or things in small quantities direct to the consumer.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and
sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of
such building or land whether alone or with others.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 12/710
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be
understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to persons who
purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose
or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to
violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire an advantage. (1962 Code)
Chapter 4
PENALTY
1-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
Pursuant to its authority, the city of Placerville adopts the procedures and remedies set forth in this title
for the enforcement of this code and state codes adopted by the city. The purpose of this chapter and
chapters 4A and 4B of this title is: (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001; amd. Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
(A) To provide standards for the enforcement of this code and other applicable laws;
(B) To establish administrative sanctions for violations of this code and other applicable laws as an
alternative to criminal or civil enforcement penalties;
(C) To establish a hierarchy of administrative sanctions and a prescribed method for enforcement
through administrative hearings that are consistent with constitutional protections;
(D) To provide for administrative abatement to remedy code violations and to provide for the recovery
of costs incurred in administrative abatement as allowed for by state law; and
(E) To provide for judicial review of final administrative orders or decisions made pursuant to this title in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Code Of Civil Procedure sections 1094.5 and 1094.6.
Nothing in this chapter is intended to abridge or modify the authority of the city manager or other
designated person to enforce this code through criminal or civil penalties where such remedies are
designated by ordinance as appropriate. (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001)
1-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this title:
ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS: The sanctions set forth in this chapter for violation of this code or
other applicable laws.
ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION: Any infringement or alleged infringement of this code or other
applicable laws for which enforcement is to be handled through the administrative procedures
established in this title.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 13/710
APPLICABLE LAWS: Any provisions of this code, any state code as adopted by the city of Placerville,
design standards adopted by the city of Placerville, and those state laws enforced by the city of
Placerville which also have been designated by ordinance for enforcement pursuant to the procedures
established in this title.
CITIZEN COMPLAINT: A report of an alleged violation of this code or other applicable laws by any
person or entity. "Citizen complaint" means and includes a complaint by a city official or city employee
only to the extent such official or employee is able to demonstrate a direct effect on his/her person or
property as a result of the alleged violation.
DESIGN STANDARDS: Written design standards, design guidelines or development standards that
may be adopted by resolution or ordinance from time to time by the city council and/or planning
commission, or that may be adopted as part of the conditions of approval on any project, that govern
development of land within the city and that are on file with the city clerk.
ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY: The city manager or designated department head, building official,
code enforcement officer or police official charged with responsibility for enforcement under this title.
ENTITLEMENT: Any project approval issued by the city council, the planning commission, or any other
committee, commission or department as allowed for under procedures established by this code.
MEDIATION: A meeting held between the enforcement authority and a responsible person under the
supervision of an impartial third party to informally resolve issues relating to alleged violations of this
code or other applicable laws.
NOTICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION: The notice issued by the enforcement authority of an
alleged infringement of this code or other applicable laws.
NOTICE TO CORRECT: The notice issued by the enforcement authority for required action to achieve
compliance with this code or other applicable laws.
REASONABLE TIME(S): Between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M.,
Monday through Friday, inclusive, unless otherwise required by: a) an emergency impacting the safety
or preservation of life or property; or b) the fact that the alleged violation of this code or other applicable
laws only occurs at some other hour or on a weekend.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: Any person or entity charged with or found to have violated this code or
other applicable laws. "Responsible person" includes the parents and/or legal guardian of any person
under the age of eighteen (18) who is charged with a violation of this code or other applicable laws.
"Responsible person" shall also include the promoter, organizer or sponsor of any event who violates
any provision of this code.
STOP ORDER: A written order issued by the enforcement authority or his/her designee that any and all
work on a project, improvement or other development must cease on the terms and conditions set forth
in the order. (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001; amd. Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
1-4-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Any violation of any ordinance of this code, of any provision of any state codes adopted by the city, or
of any design standards, is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to redress as provided for in this
title. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 14/710
1-4-4: PROCEDURES FOR ENFORCEMENT:
The city of Placerville shall enforce the provisions of this code or other applicable laws through any of
the following procedures:
(A) Administrative action concerning an administrative violation as provided for in chapter 4A of this
title;
(B) Criminal action prosecuted in the name of the people of the state of California when a criminal
violation is expressly provided for by ordinance;
(C) Civil action instituted by the city attorney in the name of the city of Placerville; or
(D) Abatement as authorized by chapter 4B of this title. (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001)
1-4-5: PENALTY:
(A) Misdemeanor: Any person convicted of a violation of this code shall be fined in a sum not to exceed
one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for any one offense, and the person may be confined in the
county jail for a period of not to exceed six (6) months, or both.
(B) Infraction: Any person violating any of the following provisions or failing to comply with any of the
following provisions of this code shall be guilty of an infraction, except for those cases designated
and prosecuted as misdemeanors:
1. Title 3, chapters 3, 6, 7, 10 of this code (fire). (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001)
2. Title 4, chapters 2, 3, 4 of this code (building). (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
3. Title 5, chapter 1 of this code (business licenses).
4. Title 6, chapter 5 of this code (police).
5. Title 7, chapters 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 of this code (health).
6. Title 8, chapters 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 11, 13 of this code (streets, trees).
7. Title 10 of this code.
8. Title 9, chapters 3 and 4 of this code (parking).
Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a
second violation of the same ordinance within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred
dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 15/710
(C) Enforcement: Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this code where any duty is
prescribed to be performed or obligation imposed, or when any act of a continuing nature is
forbidden or declared to be unlawful, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless such violation is
designated as an infraction. In either case, whether a misdemeanor or an infraction, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or obligation remains unperformed or
such act continues, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code. (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001)
1-4-6: DEFAULT:
Any person in default of payment of any fine imposed shall be imprisoned in the city or county jail for a
period of one day for each thirty dollars ($30.00) of the fine; provided that the term shall not exceed the
term for which the defendant might be sentenced to imprisonment for the offense of which he has been
convicted. (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001)
1-4-7: LABOR:
Any person imprisoned under the provisions of this chapter may be put to work for the benefit of the
city for the term of his/her imprisonment. (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001)
1-4-8: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code, any license previously issued to
him by the city may be revoked by the court or by the governing body. (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001)
1-4-9: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee shall be so construed as to
make such officer or employee liable for any fine or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty,
unless the intention of the governing body to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee is
specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (Ord. 1571, 5-8-2001)
1-4-10: POWER OF CITATION:
The city manager shall have the power to designate by written order that particular officers and
employees shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of the foregoing sections. (Ord. 1571, 5-
8-2001)
Chapter 4A
ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS AND ADMINISTRATIVE
ENFORCEMENT PROCEDURES
Article I. Administrative Violations
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 16/710
1-4A-1: DESIGNATION OF ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS:
(A) The following shall be designated as administrative violations and shall be subject to enforcement
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter:
1. All violations of this code, unless otherwise excepted by ordinance; (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
2. All violations of state codes adopted by the city of Placerville; (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001; amd. Ord.
1642, 6-14-2011)
3. All violations of design standards adopted by the city council and/or the planning commission and
on file with the city clerk;
4. All violations of conditions imposed on any entitlement, permit, contract, or environmental
document issued or approved by the city of Placerville;
5. All violations of state laws enforced by the city of Placerville that have been designated for
enforcement through this chapter by ordinance.
(B) An administrative violation may only be adjudicated pursuant to the administrative enforcement
procedures established in sections 1-4A-10 through 1-4A-48 of this chapter. Each responsible
person shall have the right to request an administrative hearing and subsequent judicial review
pursuant to the procedures established in Code of Civil Procedure sections 1094.5 and 1094.6
before the city will take action to collect any administrative penalty. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-2: ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS ARE NOT EXCLUSIVE REMEDY:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to limit or prohibit the enforcement of this code or other applicable
laws through civil or criminal process where the city attorney has evaluated the criteria set forth in
sections 1-4A-5 and 1-4A-14 of this chapter, and has determined that enforcement through the
administrative enforcement procedures will not result in effective redress, where there have been
repeated administrative violations, or where the severity of the violation warrants redress through civil
or criminal action. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-3: LEVELS OF ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS:
(A) Administrative violations shall be designated by level based upon the potential monetary sanction
as follows:
1. Level A violations shall be subject to a fine of up to one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first
violation, a fine of up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same
ordinance within one year, or a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional
violation of the same ordinance within one year. Level A violations shall include all violations
designated as an infraction by this code.
2. Level B violations shall be subject to a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Level B
violations shall include all violations designated as a misdemeanor by this code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 17/710
Unless otherwise provided for by ordinance, all administrative violations will be deemed a level B
violation.
(B) At the time of issuance of a notice of administrative violation pursuant to section 1-4A-14 of this
chapter, the enforcement authority shall evaluate in writing the criteria set forth in section 1-4A-5 of
this article to determine the appropriate level of sanction and shall provide written notice to the
responsible person of the proposed level of sanction and the reasons therefor as required by
section 1-4A-14 of this chapter.
(C) Where multiple violations have occurred or are occurring, each violation of this code or other
applicable laws shall be subject to a separate sanction.
(D) The enforcement authority shall have no power or discretion to void any notice of administrative
violation until after a meeting with the enforcement authority's supervisor as provided for in section
1-4A-33 of this chapter. If a notice of administrative violation is voided, the enforcement authority
shall provide written justification for such action to the city manager. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-4: SANCTIONS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATIONS:
Any one of the following sanctions shall be available to redress infringement of this code or applicable
laws:
(A) Revocation and/or suspension of licenses or permits, conditional use permits or other entitlements
issued by the city of Placerville;
(B) The placement of requirements for corrective action on permits, licenses or entitlements issued by
the city of Placerville as a condition to avoid revocation of the permit, license or entitlement;
(C) Monetary sanctions as set forth in section 1-4A-3 of this article;
(D) The issuance of a compliance order setting forth corrective action;
(E) Requiring a responsible person to post a performance bond, irrevocable letter of credit or other
adequate security to ensure compliance with this code or other applicable laws. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-
2001)
1-4A-5: STANDARDS FOR IMPOSITION OF ADMINISTRATIVE SANCTIONS:
The following factors shall be considered in determining the appropriate sanctions for any
administrative violation:
(A) The knowledge or intent of the person/entity found to have violated this code or other applicable
laws;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 18/710
(B) The final determination of prior violations of this code or other applicable laws within twelve (12)
months of the date of the violation. Violations of a similar nature shall be given additional weight in
evaluating the appropriate sanctions as provided for in section 1-4A-3 of this article;
(C) Efforts by the person/entity found to have violated this code or other applicable laws to take
remedial action upon notice of a violation;
(D) Any financial gain realized by a responsible person as a result of an administrative violation;
(E) The extent to which the violation undermines the purpose of the ordinance violated;
(F) The number of other violations existing at the time of the issuance of the notice of administrative
violation;
(G) The costs incurred for remedial action taken by the enforcement authority;
(H) The degree and permanence of harm to health, safety and/or the environment caused by the
violation, including, but not limited to, any loss of life to person or animal;
(I) The amount it would have cost the responsible person to comply with the law. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-
2001)
Article II. Administrative Enforcement Procedures
1-4A-10: RESPONSIBILITY AND AUTHORITY:
The city manager shall have overall responsibility and authority to enforce the provisions of this code or
other applicable laws. The city manager may delegate to department heads or other appropriate
subordinates the authority to enforce any of the provisions of this code or other applicable laws which
relate to the responsibilities of their department. The city manager may also delegate to the police
department or code enforcement officer the authority to enforce any of the provisions of this code or
other applicable laws. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-11: PURPOSE OF ENFORCEMENT:
The purpose of administrative enforcement is to obtain fair and uniform compliance with the provisions
of this code and other applicable laws. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-12: GUIDELINES FOR EXERCISING ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT
AUTHORITY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 19/710
Administrative enforcement of the provisions of this code and other applicable laws shall be limited to
cases where: a) specific bona fide citizen complaints have been received, b) where the violation occurs
within the context of the city's oversight and approval of a project, or c) where the enforcement action is
a part of a plan for the uniform enforcement of a provision of this code or other applicable laws within
the city. No notice to correct or notice of administrative violation shall be issued pursuant to a citizen
complaint until the enforcement authority has conducted an independent investigation and determined
that there is good cause to believe that a violation of this code or other applicable laws has occurred.
The enforcement authority shall keep a record of all citizen complaints. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-13: NOTICE TO CORRECT AND STOP ORDER:
Whenever a violation is discovered which can be corrected and the responsible person has not been
issued a notice to correct or notice of administrative violation for the same violation within the past
twelve (12) months, the enforcement authority shall issue a notice to correct in order to notify the
responsible person of the violation and to order that the violation be corrected within a reasonable time.
Unless a different period is specifically set forth in this code, ten (10) calendar days shall be considered
a reasonable time to correct any violation. The notice to correct shall be in writing and shall set forth
the facts that constitute the violation, the specific provisions of the law which have been violated, the
specific acts required to correct the violation, the time allowed to correct the violation, and the rights to
appeal the notice to correct. If the violation is related to a permit, license or other city approval of a
project, the notice to correct may be accompanied by a stop order which orders the responsible person
to immediately stop any and all work on the project that is subject to the permit, license or approval
until the violation is corrected. The notice to correct shall be served in accordance with the provisions
of section 1-4A-17 of this article. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-14: NOTICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE VIOLATION:
A notice of administrative violation may be issued under any of the following circumstances:
(A) When the violation cannot be corrected;
(B) When the violation can be corrected, a notice to correct has been served, and the specified time
has passed without adequate correction of the violation;
(C) When a stop order has been issued and has not been complied with by the responsible person;
(D) When the same violation has been committed by the same responsible person within the past
twelve (12) months and a notice to correct or notice of administrative violation has been served on
the responsible person within that same twelve (12) month period.
The notice of administrative violation shall be in writing and shall set forth the facts constituting the
violation, the specific provisions of the law which have been violated, the proposed sanctions for the
violation as specified in section 1-4A-4 of this chapter, and the rights that the responsible person has to
appeal the notice of administrative violation. The notice of administrative violation shall be served as
provided in section 1-4A-17 of this article. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 20/710
1-4A-15: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
(A) Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce this code or other applicable laws, or
whenever there is reasonable cause to believe there exists a violation of this code or other
applicable laws in any building or upon any premises within the jurisdiction of the city, any
authorized official of the city may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or
premises at all reasonable times (as that phrase is defined in section 1-4-2 of this title) to inspect
the same or to perform any duty imposed by this code or other applicable laws.
(B) Except in emergency situations or when consent of the owner and/or occupant of the building or
premises to be inspected has been obtained, the city official shall give the owner and/or occupant, if
they can be located after reasonable effort, twenty four (24) hours' written notice of the authorized
official's intention to inspect through a notice of intention to inspect. The notice of intention to
inspect shall state that the property owner has the right to refuse entry and, that in the event such
entry is refused, inspection may be made only upon issuance of an administrative warrant or search
warrant as allowed by law by a duly authorized judge.
(C) The written notice of intention to inspect shall be served by certified mail, return receipt requested.
Where the authorized official intends to inspect within the next twenty four (24) hour period, the
written notice shall be hand delivered. The notice of intention to inspect may be left with any person
above the age of eighteen (18) who identifies himself/herself as an occupant, tenant or owner of the
premises. If no one is at the premises at the time of delivery, the notice of intention to inspect shall
be posted in two (2) conspicuous places on the premises.
(D) Prior to entering the premises, the authorized official conducting the inspection shall ascertain from
the owner and/or occupant whether the notice of intention to inspect has been received and shall
obtain permission for entry. Unless an emergency situation exists, if the owner and/or occupant
refuses entry after such a request has been made, or if no actual contact is made with the owner
and/or occupant prior to the attempt to enter, the official must seek assistance from any court of
competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-16: INFORMAL ATTEMPTS TO ENCOURAGE COMPLIANCE:
Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to preclude an enforcement authority from informally
encouraging citizens to comply with this code or other applicable laws. Informal oral or written requests
to encourage compliance are encouraged, as are attempts to informally negotiate or mediate issues
relating to compliance. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-17: SERVICE OF NOTICES:
Any notices required under this chapter, except a notice of intention to inspect pursuant to section 1-
4A-15 of this article, shall be served by personal delivery to the responsible person or by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the last known address of the responsible person. If the responsible person
is not present for personal delivery, if certified mail is refused, or if the location of a responsible person
cannot be determined after diligent efforts, notices may be posted in a conspicuous place on the
affected property for a period of ten (10) calendar days and by mailing first class to the last known
address. When there is no affected property, such alternative service shall be accomplished by
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 21/710
publication of any notices in a newspaper of general circulation that is most likely to give actual notice
to the responsible person two (2) times in a ten (10) day period and by mailing first class to the last
known address. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-18: RESPONSIBILITY OF PARENT(S) AND/OR LEGAL GUARDIAN:
Whenever the responsible person is a person under the age of eighteen (18), the enforcement
authority shall provide copies of all notices and orders specified in this title to the parent(s) and/or legal
guardian. Any administrative sanctions levied under this chapter may be levied against the juvenile and
the parent(s) and/or legal guardian of the juvenile. The parent(s) and/or legal guardian shall have the
right to a hearing and judicial review as set forth in this chapter. In addition to any other defenses that
may be raised to the administrative violation, the parent(s) or legal guardian may raise a defense that
the parent(s) or legal guardian have exercised good faith efforts to control the behavior of the minor but
have been unsuccessful in achieving such control. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-19: CONFIDENTIALITY IN CONNECTION WITH CITIZEN COMPLAINTS:
The city shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that the identity of any person making a complaint to
the city concerning a violation of this code or other applicable laws shall remain confidential. However,
no enforcement action shall be taken beyond issuance of a notice of correction unless: a) the
complaining witness agrees to be identified upon request of the responsible person, or b) the
enforcement authority has developed sufficient independent evidence to proceed with a notice of
administrative violation. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
Article III. Hearings
1-4A-30: RIGHT TO A HEARING:
Any person charged with an administrative violation who has been served with a notice to correct, stop
order or notice of administrative violation and who wishes to contest the violation or the proposed
sanction may request a hearing by filing a request for hearing within ten (10) calendar days of date of
the service of the notice to correct, stop order or notice of administrative violation. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-
2001)
1-4A-31: PRESERVATION OF STATUS QUO PENDING HEARING:
Any stop order issued pursuant to section 1-4A-13 of this chapter shall remain in effect until the time of
the hearing and any subsequent judicial review. Any additional compliance obligations that may be
imposed as the result of a notice to correct, stop order or notice of administrative violation shall also be
stayed if a timely request for hearing is filed and until a final decision after the hearing is completed,
unless an emergency situation affecting the safety or preservation of life or property exists. The
enforcement authority shall provide written justification for invoking an emergency situation exception
under this section to the responsible person within twenty four (24) hours of taking the action to correct
the emergency situation. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 22/710
1-4A-32: REQUEST FOR HEARING AND FEE; NOTICE OF DENIAL OF HEARING
BASED ON UNTIMELY APPEAL:
The request for hearing shall be filed with the city clerk on a form provided by the city clerk and shall
include reference to the notice which is being appealed, shall state all of the grounds for the appeal,
and shall be accompanied by payment of: a) an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
as security for payment of the proposed administrative sanction; and b) a hearing fee. The city clerk
shall not accept any request for hearing unless it is accompanied by the hearing fee and the required
security for administrative sanction. The amount of the hearing fee shall be established from time to
time by resolution of the city council. The amount of the security for the administrative sanction shall be
the amount of the maximum sanction specified in the notice of violation, or five hundred dollars
($500.00), whichever is less. If the city clerk determines that the request for a hearing is untimely, the
city clerk shall advise the responsible person of that determination in writing and shall mail a notice of
denial of hearing based on untimely appeal to the responsible person by first class mail. The
responsible person shall then have the right to judicial review of that determination as provided for in
sections 1-4A-60 through 1-4A-62 of this chapter. Upon a showing of good cause for the delay in filing
a request for hearing, the city clerk may refer the issue of the right to an appeal to an administrative
hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. The hearing officer shall determine whether
there was good cause for the delay in filing the request for hearing before proceeding to the merits of
the appeal. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-33: MEETING WITH ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY:
Persons charged with a violation of this code or other applicable laws are encouraged to meet with the
enforcement authority and/or the appropriate department head or his/her designee prior to requesting a
hearing to seek resolution of the matter. Such a meeting may be requested before or after the request
of hearing is filed, but a request for the meeting shall not extend the time for filing the request for
hearing. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-34: MEDIATION:
With the filing of a request for a hearing or at any time before a hearing, the enforcement authority or a
responsible person may request that an impartial mediator be appointed to help resolve the issues
relating to the charged violation and/or proposed sanctions. The purpose of the mediation shall be to
provide an opportunity for the enforcement authority and a responsible person to reach mutual
agreement upon steps to achieve compliance with this code or other applicable laws. If the
enforcement authority agrees to mediation, the city clerk shall appoint a volunteer mediator to assist in
the resolution of the dispute. The hearing may be postponed until completion of the mediation if both
parties agree to the postponement. The city will solicit members of the community to act as volunteer
mediators. Mediators will not receive compensation but shall be recognized publicly for their service to
the community. If the enforcement authority and the responsible person reach agreement on a
compliance plan, that agreement shall be placed in writing and shall be signed by the enforcement
authority, the responsible person and the mediator. If the terms of the agreement are violated, the
enforcement authority shall serve a notice of administrative violation as provided for in section 1-4A-14
of this chapter. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-35: TIMELY HEARING:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 23/710
The hearing shall be held within thirty (30) days of the filing of a request for hearing, unless both parties
agree to a postponement of the hearing or the hearing officer rules that there is good cause to
postpone the hearing. After the hearing has started, it may be continued with the consent of all parties
or upon a showing of good cause for such continuance. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-36: NOTICE OF TIME AND PLACE OF HEARING:
The city clerk shall mail to all parties written notice of the time and place of the hearing at least ten (10)
calendar days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall also include a description of the
rights of the parties in the hearing. Hearings shall be conducted in the city. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-37: HEARING OFFICER:
The city clerk shall appoint an impartial hearing officer for each hearing who may be an employee of
the city or a person whose services are acquired by contract with the hearing officer or some public or
private agency. The person appointed to conduct the hearing shall not have had within the past twelve
(12) months any responsibility for the investigation, prosecution or enforcement of the provisions of this
code or other applicable laws at issue in the hearing and shall not have had any personal involvement
in the case to be heard. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-38: EX PARTE COMMUNICATIONS:
The hearing officer shall have no communications with any party, city employee or official, or any
potential witness concerning the substance of the case. Having such communications outside the
presence of a party may be grounds for disqualification of the hearing officer from conducting the
hearing. All communications concerning the case between the hearing officer and any person shall be
revealed to the parties in the matter. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-39: RIGHTS OF THE PARTIES:
The parties to a hearing shall have the following rights:
(A) Timely and adequate notice of the time and place of the hearing, their rights during the hearing and
the issues that are to be the subject of the hearing;
(B) The right to present evidence and witnesses;
(C) The right to present argument;
(D) The right to be represented. The representative need not be an attorney;
(E) The right to open disclosure of all evidence presented to the hearing officer in the case;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 24/710
(F) The right to confront and cross examine adverse witnesses;
(G) The right to subpoena witnesses or documents;
(H) The right to a verbatim record of the hearing;
(I) The right to a decision based upon the evidence in the record of the hearing;
(J) The right to an impartial hearing officer;
(K) The right to a written decision setting forth the reasons for the decision and the evidence relied
upon. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-40: HEARING PROCEDURE:
The hearing shall be informal and the hearing officer will have an affirmative obligation to seek the truth
concerning the issues in the hearing. The hearing officer may ask questions of any witness and may
establish the procedure for the presentation of evidence. The hearing officer may, on his or her own
motion, call or subpoena a witness. The hearing officer may order the exclusion of witnesses during the
testimony of other witnesses. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-41: HEARING OPEN TO THE PUBLIC:
All hearings provided under this chapter shall be open to the public and press. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-42: OATH:
All testimony shall be given under oath. Hearing officers have the authority to administer such oaths.
(Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-43: QUANTUM AND BURDEN OF PROOF:
All facts must be established by a preponderance of the evidence. The enforcement authority will have
the burden to prove that a violation occurred and that the proposed sanction is appropriate. The
enforcement authority shall be required to present its case first. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-44: RULES OF EVIDENCE:
The rules of evidence adopted by state or federal law shall not apply. All relevant evidence shall be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 25/710
admissible and hearsay evidence may be used for the purposes of supplementing and explaining other
evidence. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-45: SUBPOENAS:
The hearing officer shall have the authority to issue subpoenas (order to appear and give testimony)
and subpoenas duces tecum (order to produce document(s) or paper(s)). The hearing officer may only
issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum upon a showing of reasonable necessity by the
requesting party. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-46: RECORD OF THE HEARING:
The hearing shall be tape recorded and a copy of the recording will be provided to anyone requesting a
copy upon the payment of a fee set from time to time by resolution of the city council to cover the cost
of duplication. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-47: WRITTEN TRANSCRIPT:
Any person, including a party, may request a typewritten transcript of the hearing, but the requesting
person will be responsible for the cost of transcription, including an administrative fee. An estimate will
be provided of the cost of the transcription and the person requesting the transcript will be required to
deposit an amount equal to that estimate before transcription will be started. If the cost of the
transcription is greater than the estimate, the person requesting the transcript will be required to pay
the additional cost before the transcript is provided. If the actual cost of transcription is less than the
estimate, the city will refund the difference. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-48: WRITTEN DECISION:
The hearing officer shall prepare and forward to the parties a written decision within thirty (30) calendar
days of the close of the hearing. The decision shall be mailed by first class mail. If the hearing officer
grants the appeal, the hearing officer shall have the discretion to refund the fee charged to the
responsible person for the appeal. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
Article IV. Judicial Review
1-4A-60: FINAL ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION:
The decision of the hearing officer shall constitute the final administrative decision and shall not be
appealable to the city council or any committee or commission of the city. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-61: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Appeal shall be through judicial review of the final administrative decision by filing a petition for a writ of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 26/710
mandate with the superior court in accordance with the provisions of sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the
California Code of Civil Procedure. Such writs must be filed within ninety (90) calendar days from the
date of the final administrative decision. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-62: REVIEW STANDARD:
The court may not change the findings of fact of the hearing officer unless there is no substantial
evidence to support those findings. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
Article V. Enforcement Of Monetary Sanctions
1-4A-70: WHEN MONETARY SANCTIONS ARE DUE:
Monetary sanctions levied against a responsible person are due at the following times:
(A) If a request for hearing is not filed in relation to the notice of administrative violation, the monetary
sanction set out in the notice shall be due and payable ten (10) calendar days after service of the
notice of administrative violation.
(B) If a request for hearing is filed within the time limits prescribed by section 1-4A-30 of this chapter
and there is no appeal of the hearing decision to the court pursuant to section 1-4A-61 of this
chapter, the monetary sanction shall be due and payable ninety (90) calendar days after the date of
a hearing decision, an order by the hearing officer dismissing the request for hearing, or the date
the hearing request is withdrawn by the responsible party. The amount of sanction payable shall be
the amount set by the hearing officer in a decision after hearing, or the amount set forth in the
notice of administrative violation if there is no hearing decision.
(C) If there is judicial review of the hearing decision pursuant to section 1-4A-61 of this chapter, the
monetary sanction shall be due and payable thirty (30) calendar days after the date of the final court
order in relation to that review. The amount due shall be the amount ordered by the hearing officer
unless a court modifies the amount of monetary sanction. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
1-4A-71: PLACE FOR PAYMENT OF MONETARY SANCTION:
All monetary sanctions shall be paid to the city and delivered to the finance department of the city. All
payments shall be accompanied by a copy of the notice of administrative violation, or the decision of
the hearing officer or the court decision establishing the amount of the monetary sanction. The finance
department shall prepare a receipt documenting the payment of the monetary sanction and shall
forward one copy of the receipt to the enforcement authority and one copy of the receipt to the city
clerk. The city clerk shall thereafter verify that the sanction has been paid in full. If the sanction has
been paid in full, the city clerk shall so note in the records pertaining to the administrative violation. If
the sanction has not been paid in full, the city clerk shall notify the enforcement authority and
responsible person in writing. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 27/710
1-4A-72: FAILURE TO PAY A MONETARY SANCTION:
If the responsible party does not pay the monetary sanction within the times provided under section 1-
4A-70 of this article, or if the responsible party fails to pay the required monetary sanction in full within
the times provided under section 1-4A-70 of this article, any unpaid portion shall bear interest at the
rate of ten percent (10%) per annum from the date such payment was due until paid in full, and the city
may take any of the following actions to collect the monetary sanction:
(A) Liens: The amount of the unpaid sanction plus interest, plus a reasonable administrative fee
established by the city council from time to time to cover the cost of collection, constitutes and may
be declared a lien on any real property owned by the responsible party within the city.
1. Notice shall be given to the responsible party prior to the recordation of the lien, and shall be
served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action pursuant to article 3, (commencing
with section 415.10) of chapter 4 of title 5 of part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
2. The lien shall attach when the city manager or his/her designee records a lien listing delinquent
unpaid sanctions with the El Dorado County recorder's office. The lien shall specify the amount of
the lien, the date of the code violation(s), the date of the final administrative decision, the street
address, legal description, and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is
imposed and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.
3. In the event that the lien is discharged, released or satisfied, either through payment or
foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in subsection (A)2 of this
section shall be recorded by the city clerk.
(B) Special Assessments: The amount of the unpaid sanction plus interest, plus a reasonable
administrative fee established by the city council from time to time to cover the cost of collection,
may be declared a special assessment against any real property owned by the responsible person
within the city to the extent the responsible person owns more than one parcel within the city. The
city council may impose the special assessment on more than one parcel. However, the amount of
the assessment shall not exceed the penalty imposed for the administrative violation. The city
manager or his/her designee may present a resolution to the city council to declare a special
assessment, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy thereof to be
recorded with the El Dorado County recorder's office. The assessment may then be collected at the
same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be
subjected to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as
provided for ordinary municipal taxes.
(C) Withholding Entitlements: The city may withhold issuance of licenses, permits and other
entitlements to a responsible person until payment is received.
(D) Other Enforcement Procedures: The city may take such other actions as are allowed for
enforcement of a civil judgment as provided for pursuant to the enforcement of judgments law,
California Code of Civil Procedure section 680.010 et seq. (Ord. 1572, 4-24-2001)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 28/710
Chapter 4B
ADDITIONAL REMEDIES
1-4B-1: ABATEMENT BY CITY:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 38773, the city may abate any nuisance at the
expense of the persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance and any and all
expenses of abatement, including reasonable attorney fees incurred, shall constitute a lien against the
property on which the nuisance is maintained and such debt becomes a personal obligation against the
property owner. (Ord. 1573, 5-8-2001)
1-4B-2: PROCEDURE FOR CREATION OF NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN:
(A) Notice Requirement: Whenever a responsible person refuses to abate a nuisance and the owner or
person occupying the property refuses to consent to abatement by the city, the enforcement
authority shall serve a written notice to abate such nuisance upon the owner of the property (as
shown on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is most current),
and on any persons known to be possessing such property.
(B) Contents Of Notice: The notice shall include the following information:
1. The street address, legal description or other description sufficient to identify the affected
property;
2. A statement that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property has ten (10)
calendar days from the date of the notice to voluntarily abate the nuisance;
3. A statement that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property may, during the
period of voluntary abatement: a) file a written request for a hearing with the city clerk as provided
for in section 1-4A-30 of this title if there is an objection to the demand to abate the nuisance, or
b) present written evidence to the enforcement authority to show that the property owner or
person in possession of the property had no responsibility for creating or maintaining the
nuisance on the property and that to be required to remove or abate such nuisance will cause
financial or physical hardship; and
4. A statement that if the nuisance is not voluntarily abated within the stated period, and the
property owner and/or person in possession of the property fails to present the information set
forth in subsection (B)3 of this section or to file a timely written request for a hearing, all persons
served with such notice shall be deemed to have consented to the abatement of the nuisance
and that, at the election of the city, the city will abate the nuisance and the costs for such
abatement may be charged against the premises and may be recorded as a lien against the
premises.
(C) Service Of Notice: The notice to abate the nuisance shall be served in the same manner as a
summons in a civil action in accordance with article 3 (commencing with section 415.10) of chapter
4 of title 5 of part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure. If the owner of record, after diligent search,
cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon
the property for a period of ten (10) days. The failure to make or attempt such service on any
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 29/710
person as required herein shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter as to any other
person duly served.
(D) Failure To Pay Costs; Authority To Record Lien Or To Declare Lien A Special Assessment Against
Parcel:
1. Except as to persons who have demonstrated a financial or physical hardship in paying for the
costs of abatement, if all or any portion of the costs and expenses incurred by the city in abating
the nuisance and accounted for by the enforcement authority remain unpaid after thirty (30) days,
pursuant to authority created by law, including Government Code section 38773 et seq., such
portion thereof as remains unpaid shall constitute and shall be declared to constitute a lien on the
real property which was the subject of notice to abate.
2. Prior to recordation of the lien, notice shall be given to the landowners. If the landowner, after a
diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy of the notice upon
the property subject to the lien, in a conspicuous place, for a period of ten (10) days. The notice
shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
3. The lien shall attach when the city manager or his/her designee records a lien listing delinquent
unpaid nuisance abatement costs with the El Dorado County recorder's office. The lien shall
specify the amount of the lien, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal
description and assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed and the
name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.
4. In addition to the recordation of a lien, the amount of the costs and expenses incurred by the city
in abating the nuisance, plus a reasonable administrative fee established by the city council from
time to time to cover the cost of collection, may be declared a special assessment against any
real property owned by the responsible person within the city to the extent the responsible person
owns more than one parcel within the city. The city council may impose the special assessment
on more than one parcel. The city manager or his/her designee may present a resolution to the
city council to declare a special assessment, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall
cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the El Dorado County recorder's office. The
assessment may then be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary
municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subjected to the same penalties and the same
procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes.
5. In the event that the lien or special assessment is discharged, released, or satisfied, either
through payment or foreclosure, notice of the discharge containing the information specified in
subsection (D)1 of this section shall be recorded. (Ord. 1573, 5-8-2001)
1-4B-3: TREBLE DAMAGES FOR SUBSEQUENT ABATEMENT JUDGMENTS:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent
civil or criminal judgment within a two (2) year period that finds an owner of property responsible for a
condition that may be abated in accordance with California Government Code section 38773.5, a court
may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. These costs shall not include conditions
abated pursuant to California Health and Safety Code section 17980. (Ord. 1573, 5-8-2001)
Chapter 5
REVENUE SYSTEM
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 30/710
1-5-1: TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY:
The assessor and tax collector of the county shall perform the duties of assessment and tax collection
upon all real and personal property for the city. (Ord. 817, 10-16-1958)
1-5-2: DETERMINATION OF NECESSARY REVENUE:
Prior to fixing the rate of taxes, the council shall fix by ordinance the amount of revenue from property
taxes necessary to support its departments for the current year and to pay the bonded or other
indebtedness of the city, or any portion or district of the city. (Ord. 817, 10-16-1958)
1-5-3: DISTRICT BOUNDARIES; FILING:
On or before the first Monday of July each year, the council shall cause to be filed with the auditor of
the county a description of the exterior boundary of each district or portion of the city in which a rate of
taxation is to be levied which is different from the rate to be levied in any other district or portion of the
city. (Ord. 817, 10-16-1958)
1-5-4: TAX RATES; STATEMENT:
Annually before September 1 the council shall fix the rate of taxes, or rates of taxes if different portions
or districts require different rates, designated in the number of cents upon one hundred dollars
($100.00) using as a basis the value of the property as assessed and equalized. The rates shall be
sufficient to raise the amount fixed by ordinance and the expense of collection. The council shall
immediately transmit to the county auditor a statement of the rates fixed. (Ord. 817, 10-16-1958)
1-5-5: COMPENSATION:
The compensation to be paid to the county for assessing and collecting taxes for the city shall be fixed
by agreement between the board of supervisors of the county and the council. (Ord. 817, 10-16-1958)
1-5-6: COLLECTION TIME:
The taxes so levied shall be collected at the time and in the manner of county taxes and paid into the
county treasury. The net amount of the taxes, after deduction of the county's compensation, shall be
paid to the city treasurer by warrant of the county auditor. (1962 Code)
1-5-7: TAX SALE; REDEMPTION:
The collection of unpaid taxes levied on property by the city shall be enforced by the sale of the
property in the manner, at the time, and upon the penalties, of property sold for nonpayment of county
taxes. Real property so sold may be redeemed within the time and upon the terms of property sold for
nonpayment of county taxes. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 31/710
1-5-8: APPORTIONMENT OF REDEMPTION MONEY1:
The county auditor shall apportion to the city the money paid for redemption in the proportion to which
the tax due the city bears to the total tax for which the real property was sold. (1962 Code)
Chapter 6
PURCHASING SYSTEM
1-6-1: ADOPTION OF PURCHASING SYSTEM:
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the
city supplies and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost
commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly
define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing
system is hereby adopted. (Ord. 1417, 6-23-1987)
1-6-2: PURCHASING OFFICER:
There is hereby created the position of purchasing officer. The city administrator shall be the
purchasing officer1. The purchasing officer shall have authority to:
(A) Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any department in accordance with
purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the
purchasing officer shall adopt and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the
council.
(B) Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment.
(C) Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment at the least expense to the
city.
(D) Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all
purchases.
(E) Prepare and recommend to the council rules governing the purchase of supplies and equipment for
the city.
(F) Prepare and recommend to the council revisions and amendments to the purchasing rules.
(G) Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and
new products.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 32/710
(H) Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter
and other rules and regulations.
(I) Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with
specifications.
(J) Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as
needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or
which have become unsuitable for city use.
(K) Maintain a bidders list, vendors catalog file, and records needed for the efficient operation of the
purchasing department. (Ord. 1417, 6-23-1987)
1-6-3: EXEMPTIONS FROM CENTRALIZED PURCHASING:
The purchasing officer, with approval of the council, may authorize, in writing, any department to
purchase or contract specified supplies and equipment independently of purchasing department, but he
shall require that the purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the procedures
established by this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the department on purchases
and contracts under such written authorization. (Ord. 1417, 6-23-1987)
1-6-4: BIDDING:
Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to sections 1-6-7 and 1-6-8
of this chapter. Bidding shall be dispensed with only when an emergency requires that an order be
placed with the nearest available source of supply, when the amount involved is less than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or when the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor. (Ord.
1532, 5-14-1996)
1-6-5: PURCHASE ORDERS:
Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase order. (Ord. 1417, 6-23-1987)
1-6-6: ENCUMBRANCE OF FUNDS:
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or
equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the
purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 1417, 6-23-1987)
1-6-7: FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE:
Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases and contracts for supplies and equipment of estimated
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 33/710
value greater than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be by written contract with the lowest
responsible bidder pursuant to the procedure prescribed herein.
(A) Notice Inviting Bids: Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be
purchased, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured, and the time and place
for opening bids.
1. Published Notice: Notice inviting bids shall be given at least ten (10) days before the date of
opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation,
printed and published in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three (3) public
places in the city that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public
notices.
2. Bidders List: The purchasing officer, or designated department head, shall also solicit sealed bids
from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders list or who have
requested their names to be added thereto.
3. Bulletin Board: The purchasing officer, or designated department head, shall also advertise
pending purchases by a notice posted on a public bulletin board in the city hall.
(B) Bidder's Security: When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder's security may be
prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of the bid security;
provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit his bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the
contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is
responsible for the delay. The council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute
the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the council awards the contract to the
next bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the difference
between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the
lowest bidder.
(C) Bid Opening Procedure: Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be identified as
bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public
notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business
hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.
(D) Rejection Of Bids: In its discretion, the council may reject any and all bids presented and
readvertise for bids.
(E) Award Of Contracts: Contracts shall be awarded by the council to the lowest responsible bidder
except as otherwise provided herein.
(F) Tie Bids: If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and
service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for the bids,
the council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie
bidders at the time of the bid opening.
(G) Performance Bonds: The council shall have authority to require a performance bond before
entering into a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 34/710
interests of the city. If the council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond
shall be described in the notice inviting bids. (Ord. 1417, 6-23-1987)
1-6-8: INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURE:
Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), but not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be made by the purchasing
officer by informal bidding without observing the procedures prescribed by section 1-6-7 of this chapter.
(A) Bids: Three (3) bids shall be obtained, and the purchase shall be awarded based on the following
factors: product availability, service and price. A bid from a local vendor shall be given preference if
its price is essentially the same as that from a vendor outside the city limits, is responsive, and
meets the other applicable provisions of this section.
(B) Local Vendor: "Local vendor" shall mean a business or individual who regularly maintains a place of
business and/or has an inventory of merchandise for sale within the boundaries of the city, and has
obtained a city business license as provided for in title 5, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 1532, 5-14-
1996)
1-6-9: INSPECTION AND TESTING:
The purchasing officer or ordering department shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to
determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing
officer or ordering department shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples
submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and
conformance with specifications. (Ord. 1417, 6-23-1987)
ARTICLE A. INFORMAL BIDDING PROCEDURES UNDER
THE UNIFORM PUBLIC CONSTRUCTION COST
ACCOUNTING ACT1
1-6A-1: CONTRACTING PROCEDURES; DOLLAR AMOUNT LIMITATIONS:
(A) The city council of the city of Placerville hereby elects to be subject to the uniform construction cost
accounting procedures set forth in division 2, part 3, chapter 2, article 2 (commencing with section
22010) of the California Public Contract Code. The dollar amounts set forth hereinbelow shall be
subject to any amendments to California Public Contract Code section 22032 as said section may
be amended from time to time.
(B) "Public projects", as defined by the uniform public construction cost accounting act ("the act")
(commencing with Public Contract Code section 22000), of less than thirty thousand dollars
($30,000.00), or the current amount in section 22032 of the Public Contract Code as it may from
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 35/710
time to time be amended, may be performed by the employees of the city by force account, by
negotiated contract, or by purchase order.
(C) Public projects of less than one hundred twenty five thousand dollars ($125,000.00), or the current
amount in section 22032 of the Public Contract Code as it may from time to time be amended, may
be let to contract by informal procedures as set forth in the act.
(D) Public projects of more than one hundred twenty five thousand dollars ($125,000.00), or the current
amount in section 22032 of the Public Contract Code as it may from time to time be amended, shall,
except as otherwise provided, be let to contract by formal bidding procedure. (Ord. 1645, 12-13-
2011)
1-6A-2: CONTRACTORS LIST:
A list of contractors shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of section
22034 of the Public Contract Code and criteria promulgated from time to time by the California uniform
construction cost accounting commission. (Ord. 1416, 6-23-1987)
1-6A-3: NOTICE INVITING INFORMAL BIDS:
(A) Where a public project is to be performed which is subject to the provisions of this article, a notice
inviting informal bids shall be mailed to all contractors for the category of work to be bid, as shown
on the list developed in accordance with section 1-6A-2 of this article, and to all construction trade
journals as specified by the California uniform construction cost accounting commission in
accordance with section 22036 of the Public Contract Code. Additional contractors and/or
construction trade journals may be noticed at the discretion of the department/agency soliciting
bids; provided, however:
1. If there is no list of qualified contractors maintained by the city for the particular category of work
to be performed, the notice inviting bids shall be sent only to the construction trade journals
specified by the commission.
2. If the product or service is proprietary in nature such that it can be obtained only from a certain
contractor or contractors, the notice inviting informal bids may be sent exclusively to such
contractor or contractors.
(B) All mailing of notices to contractors and construction trade journals pursuant to this section shall be
completed not less than ten (10) calendar days before bids are due. The notice inviting informal
bids shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the
project, and state the time and place for the submission of bids. (Ord. 1416, 6-23-1987)
Chapter 7
RETIREMENT SYSTEM
1-7-1: PURPOSE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 36/710
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of establishing a retirement system under the public
employees' retirement system for certain employees of the city. (Ord. 1450, 10-25-1988)
1-7-2: COMMENCEMENT:
The city's participation in the public employees' retirement system commenced on January 1, 1981,
pursuant to a contract entered into between the city council of the city and the board of administration
of the public employees' retirement system on May 27, 1980, and thereafter may be amended. (Ord.
1450, 10-25-1988)
1-7-3: ELIGIBLE EMPLOYEES:
Employees of the city in the following classes are members of said retirement system except such in
each class as are excluded by law or by agreement:
(A) Firefighters (local safety members).
(B) Police officers (local safety members).
(C) Employees other than local safety members (miscellaneous members). (Ord. 1450, 10-25-1988)
1-7-4: RETIREMENT AGE:
"Normal retirement age" shall mean age fifty five (55) for local miscellaneous members, age fifty five
(55) for local fire members and age fifty (50) for local police members as set forth in the amendment to
the contract between the board of administration of the public employees' retirement system and the
city council of the city effective January 6, 2001. Any future amendments to said contract shall
supersede the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1568, 11-28-2000)
1-7-5: CONTRACTUAL AGREEMENTS:
The city and its employees shall be bound by all contractual agreements entered into between the city
council of the city and the board of administration of the California public employees' retirement system
and shall be governed by the public employees' retirement law. (Ord. 1450, 10-25-1988)
Chapter 8
PERSONNEL SYSTEM
1-8-1: ADOPTION OF PERSONNEL SYSTEM:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 37/710
In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters; to attract
to municipal service the best and most competent persons available; to assure that appointments and
promotions of employees will be based on job related merit and fitness; and to provide a reasonable
degree of security for qualified employees, the following personnel system is hereby adopted and shall
hereby repeal all ordinances and provisions or ordinances inconsistent herewith. (Ord. 1310, 11-9-
1982)
1-8-2: PERSONNEL OFFICER:
The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and
duties conferred upon him as personnel officer under this chapter to any other officer or employee of
the city included in the management personnel system or may recommend that such powers and
duties be performed under contract as provided in section 1-8-9 of this chapter. The personnel officer
shall:
(A) Attend all meetings of the personnel board and serve as its secretary.
(B) Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to
the city council or the personnel board.
(C) Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such
rules.
(D) Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and
revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by
the city council.
(E) Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of tests for positions in the classified service; the
receiving of applications therefor; the conducting and grading of tests; the certification to the
department head of a list of all persons eligible for appointment to the appropriate position in the
classified service. (Ord. 1310, 11-9-1982)
1-8-3: PERSONNEL BOARD:
There is hereby created a personnel board to consist of five (5) members, to be appointed by the city
council, utilizing the following procedure for selection:
(A) Two (2) members shall be selected by the city council.
(B) Two (2) members shall be selected by employees through the process of secret ballot elections.
The two (2) candidates receiving the highest number of votes will be certified to the city council, and
the council shall appoint same to serve on the board.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 38/710
(C) The four (4) members thus selected shall then submit one additional name to the council, and the
council shall appoint same to serve as the fifth member of the board.
The first board to be appointed shall, at its first meeting, so classify its members by lot that three (3)
shall serve for a term which shall expire December 31, 1977, two (2) shall serve for a term which
shall expire December 31, 1978. At the expiration of each of the terms so provided for, a successor
shall be appointed by the city council in the same manner prescribed above for a term of three (3)
years. The personnel board shall adopt rules of procedure and shall select a chairman from among
its members who shall act as presiding officer.
Vacancies on the personnel board shall be filled by appointment by the city council in the manner
prescribed above for the unexpired term. Each member shall serve until a successor is appointed. A
majority vote of the city council shall be required to appoint or remove a member of the personnel
board.
No person shall be appointed to the board who holds any elected or appointed office or employment
with the city.
The personnel board shall have the right of subpoena, the power to examine witnesses under oath,
the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the power to require the production of
evidence by subpoena. Subpoenas shall be issued in the name of the city and attested by the city
clerk.
Each member of the personnel board shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses. (Ord.
1310, 11-9-1982)
1-8-4: DUTIES OF THE PERSONNEL BOARD:
The personnel board shall determine the order of business for the conduct of its meetings and shall
meet on call of the chairman or the personnel officer. A majority of the members of the board shall
constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
The board, in a manner provided for in the rules and regulations of the classified service, shall hear
appeals submitted by any person in the classified service (who is eligible for appeals pursuant to these
rules and regulations or by state and/or federal statute) relative to any disciplinary action, dismissal,
demotion, charge of discrimination or alleged violation of this chapter or the rules and regulations of the
classified service and shall certify its findings and recommendations as provided in the rules and
regulations of the classified service. (Ord. 1310, 11-9-1982)
1-8-5: CLASSIFIED SERVICE:
Personnel rules and regulations for the classified service shall be adopted by resolution of the city
council after notice of such action has been publicly posted in at least three (3) public places for at
least ten (10) days prior to city council consideration and after all employees have been notified of
proposed amendments. All amendments and revisions shall be processed in a like manner. The rules
and regulations of the classified service shall apply to all employees, as provided for therein, except
those personnel specifically exempted or included in the management personnel system. The rules
shall establish regulations governing the classified service personnel system including:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 39/710
(A) Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all
positions in the classified service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class.
(B) Public announcement of all tests and acceptance of applications for employment.
(C) Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists
containing names of persons eligible for appointment.
(D) Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists and making of provisional
appointments.
(E) Establishment of probationary periods.
(F) Evaluation of employees during the probationary period and thereafter.
(G) Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the
classified service.
(H) Separation of employees from the city service.
(I) The establishment of adequate personnel records.
(J) The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this chapter
and any rules adopted hereunder. (Ord. 1310, 11-9-1982)
1-8-6: MANAGEMENT PERSONNEL:
A management personnel system shall be adopted by resolution of the city council after notice of such
action has been publicly posted in at least three (3) public places for at least five (5) days prior to city
council consideration and after all management personnel have been notified of proposed
amendments. All amendments and revisions shall be processed in a like manner. The management
personnel system shall apply to all department head positions, as well as middle management
positions and certain confidential employees. Specifically included in the management personnel
system shall be the following positions: (Ord. 1310, 11-9-1982)
Executive Group
Middle Management/
Confidential Group
Chief of police Accountant
City clerk/finance director Administrative assistant
City manager Administrative aide
Development services director Administrative secretary
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 40/710
Director of recreation and parks Assistant fire chief
Fire chief Building official
Public works superintendent City planner
Maintenance services supervisor
Police lieutenant
Recreation supervisor
Secretary
Sewer treatment supervisor
Water distribution supervisor
(Ord. 1310, 11-9-1982; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
The management personnel system shall be designed to isolate key positions in the city service from
inappropriate participation in the labor relations process and from personal interest in the outcome of
labor disputes over working conditions. The management personnel system shall also be designed in
such a way as to facilitate management responsiveness to the direction of the city manager, create a
system of accountability to the city council, and provide a reasonable degree of security to
management personnel. The management system shall also be designed to enable the city to compete
with other organizations for high quality personnel within the labor market.
The management personnel system shall, as applied to certain designated positions, supersede all and
any provisions of the rules and regulations of the classified service unless otherwise specified in the
management personnel system. The city manager shall have responsibility for interpreting and
determining the applicability of the provisions of the management personnel system. (Ord. 1310, 11-9-
1982)
1-8-7: EXEMPT SERVICE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employees in the service of the
city except:
(A) Elective officers;
(B) Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;
(C) Persons employed by independent organizations under contract to supply expert, professional,
technical or any other services;
(D) Volunteer personnel who are not regularly employed in full time positions.
(E) City attorney;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 41/710
(F) Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency
condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood, or earthquake which threatens life or property;
(G) Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in a
full time position. (Ord. 1310, 11-9-1982)
1-8-8: EMPLOYMENT ELIGIBILITY:
It shall be the policy of the city to determine employment eligibility without regard to race, color, creed,
sex, age, ancestry, national origin, non-job related physical handicap, religion, or political affiliation or
lack thereof, personal sponsorship or any other factor which is not related to the satisfactory
performance of a particular job pursuant to the city of Placerville's affirmative action program. It shall
also be the city's employment policy to comply with all provisions of title VII of the civil rights act as
amended by the equal employment opportunity act of 1972 and any subsequent amendments thereof.
Additionally, all due consideration shall be given to guidelines set forth by the fair employment practices
commission of the state of California and the office of federal compliance. (Ord. 1310, 11-9-1982)
1-8-9: RIGHT TO CONTRACT FOR SPECIAL SERVICES:
The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to
which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the
establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified
person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and
duties imposed by this chapter:
(A) The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof.
(B) The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent revisions and amendments
thereof.
(C) The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests.
(D) The conduct of employee training programs.
(E) Special and technical services of; advisory or informational character on matters relating to
personnel administration. (Ord. 1310, 11-9-1982)
1-8-10: STATUS OF PRESENT EMPLOYEES:
The city council hereby reserves the right, prior to making any determination to recognize or decline to
recognize any employee organization or employee bargaining unit, to formally determine and adopt
appropriate guidelines for organization recognition and unit determination.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 42/710
In establishing rules and regulations for the administration of employer-employee relations, the rights of
the city shall include, but not be limited to: the exclusive right to determine the mission of its
departments, commissions and boards; establish and utilize a chain of command; set standards of
service; determine the procedures and standards of selection for employment and promotion; direct its
employees; take disciplinary action; relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work, maintain
the efficiency of governmental operations; determine the methods, means and personnel by which
government operations are to be conducted; determine the content of job classifications; take all
necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; and exercise complete control and discretion
over its organization and the technology of performing its work.
Employees shall not be obligated to join or participate in any employee organization and no employee
shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced or discriminated against by the city or any
employee or employee organization for exercising his/her right of participation or lack thereof. (Ord.
1310, 11-9-1982)
Chapter 9
CITY OFFICERS
1-9-1: GOVERNING OFFICERS:
The government of the city shall be vested in the following officers:
(A) A council of five (5) members.
(B) A clerk.
(C) A treasurer.
(D) Such subordinate officers or employees as are provided for by law, and deemed necessary by the
council for the proper administration of the municipal government1. (1962 Code)
1-9-2: QUALIFICATIONS:
No person shall be eligible to hold office as councilman, clerk, or treasurer unless he is an elector of,
and has resided in the city for the year preceding his election2. (1962 Code)
1-9-3: ELECTIVE OFFICERS; TERMS:
The elective officers of the city shall hold office for a term of four (4) years, and until their successors
are elected and qualified3. (1962 Code)
1-9-4: OATH:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 43/710
Before entering upon his duties, each city officer shall take and file with the clerk the constitutional oath
of office4. (1962 Code)
1-9-5: VACANCIES:
The council shall fill any vacancy occurring in the offices provided for herein, by appointment. If a
vacancy occurs in an elective office and the council fails to fill it within thirty (30) days, its shall
immediately cause an election to be held to fill the vacancy. Any person appointed or elected to fill a
vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent5. (1962 Code)
1-9-6: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
Before entering upon the duties of their offices, the clerk and treasurer shall each execute a bond to the
city. The penal sum of the bond shall be the amount recommended by the attorney and fixed by the
council not less than thirty (30) days before the election of the officers. The council may require bonds
of any other officer or employee of the city, and shall approve all bonds. When approved the clerk's
bond shall be filed with the mayor, and other bonds shall be filed with the clerk6. (1962 Code)
1-9-7: SALARIES:
Salaries of the city officers shall be as follows: (Ord. 865, 8-17-1961)
(A) (Rep. by Ord. 1169, 9-12-1978)
(B) (Rep. by Ord. 1169, 9-12-1978)
(C) The salaries of appointive officers shall be as set forth by resolution of the council from time to
time7. (1962 Code)
1-9-8: CITY HALL OFFICE HOURS:
The city hall which is situated at 485 Main Street, will be open to the general public for the purpose of
transacting business, Monday through Friday inclusive, between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. of each day, except legal holidays. The city hall shall also be open to the
general public for the purpose of attending any council meeting held therein.
The city hall will not be open on either Saturday or Sunday for the transaction of business. (Ord. 1161,
7-25-1978)
1-9-9: MEMBERS OF COMMISSIONS, BOARDS, OR COMMITTEES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 44/710
Qualifications for city council are set forth in section 1-9-2 of this chapter, and qualifications for
members of the planning commission are set forth in section 2-2-3 of this code. All other members of
commissions, boards or committees of the city, except for the community pride/beautification
committee, must be residents of the city of Placerville or residents of El Dorado County, and either own
real property in the city or manage/operate a business in the city paying a business license tax to the
city. Members of the community pride/beautification committee must be residents of El Dorado County.
(Ord. 1605, 10-25-2005)
1-9-10: GENERAL MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS:
(A) The general municipal elections for the city shall be held concurrently with and on the same day as
the statewide general election, as such elections may be called under the law of the state. The first
such election shall be held on November 5, 1996. It is the city's intent to consolidate all such
municipal elections with the county of El Dorado, unless otherwise called pursuant to a duly
adopted resolution of the city council.
(B) Those elected city officers whose four (4) year terms of office would have, prior to the adoption of
this section, expired on Tuesday succeeding the second Tuesday in June of an even numbered
year, shall instead continue in their offices until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the day of the
general municipal election, and until their successors are elected and qualified.
(C) Within thirty (30) days after this section becomes operative, the city clerk shall cause a notice to be
mailed to all registered voters informing the voters of the changes in the election date. The notice
shall also inform the voters that as a result of the change in election date, elected city officeholders'
terms in office will be changed. (Ord. 1520, 2-28-1995)
Chapter 10
CLERK
1-10-1: RECORD OF PROCEEDINGS:
The clerk shall keep an accurate record of the proceedings of the council in books bearing appropriate
titles and devoted exclusively to such purposes. The books shall have a comprehensive general
index1. (1962 Code)
1-10-2: FINANCIAL RECORDS; STATEMENTS:
The clerk shall be accounting officer of the city and shall maintain records readily reflecting the financial
condition of the city.
At the end of each fiscal year he shall prepare and present to the council a summary statement of
receipts and disbursements by departments and funds, including opening and closing fund balances in
the treasury.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 45/710
He shall cause the financial statement to be published once in a newspaper of general circulation,
printed and published in the city. If there is no newspaper, he shall cause copies of the statement to be
posted in three (3) public places in the city designated by the council as the places for posting public
notices. The statement shall be printed or posted not later than one hundred twenty (120) days after
the close of the fiscal year for which the report is compiled2. (1962 Code)
1-10-3: ORDINANCE BOOK; CERTIFICATE:
The clerk shall keep a book marked "Ordinances" and record in it all city ordinances with his certificate
annexed to each, stating:
(A) It is a true and correct copy of a city ordinance.
(B) The ordinance number.
(C) It has been published or posted pursuant to law3. (1962 Code)
1-10-4: CITY RECORDS; USE IN COURT:
The official city records in the custody of the clerk shall not be filed in any court proceedings but shall
be returned to the custody of the clerk4. (1962 Code)
1-10-5: CUSTODIAN OF CITY SEAL:
The clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal5. (1962 Code)
1-10-6: ADDITIONAL DUTIES:
The clerk shall perform such additional duties as may be prescribed by the council and the provisions
of this code6. (1962 Code)
1-10-7: CERTIFICATION OF OATHS; AFFIDAVIT:
The clerk may administer oaths or affirmations and take and certify affidavits and depositions pertaining
to city affairs and business which may be used in any court or proceedings in the state7. (1962 Code)
Chapter 11
RESERVED
(Ord. 1082, 2-24-1976)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 46/710
Chapter 12
RESERVED
(Ord. 1082, 2-24-1976)
Chapter 13
RESERVED
(Ord. 1082, 2-24-1976)
Chapter 14
COUNCIL
1-14-1: TERMS1:
The regular terms for the office of city council shall be for four (4) consecutive years. (Ord. 1471, 9-25-
1990)
1-14-2: VACANCY FOR ABSENCE2:
If a councilman absents himself from all regular council meetings for sixty (60) days consecutively from
the last regular meeting he attended, his office becomes vacant and shall be filled as any other
vacancy. (1962 Code)
1-14-3: MEETINGS:
(A) Regular Meetings: The regular meetings of the city council shall be held at the hour of six o'clock
(6:00) P.M. on the second and fourth Tuesdays of each month unless those dates fall on a holiday,
in which event the meetings shall be held at the discretion of the city council. The meetings will be
held at town hall, 549 Main Street, Placerville, California, and will be held in accordance with the
provisions established by the state of California. (Ord. 1652, 1-22-2013)
(B) Special Meetings: Any special meetings, regardless of their purpose, shall be held in accordance
with the provisions established by the state of California. The city council will determine when and
where these meetings shall be held and it will be so stated in the notice and agenda for the special
meetings. (Ord. 1471, 9-25-1990)
1-14-4: PROCEDURAL RULES3:
The council may establish rules for the conduct of its proceedings. It may punish a member or other
person for disorderly behavior at a meeting. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 47/710
1-14-5: JOURNAL OF PROCEEDINGS4:
The council shall cause the clerk to keep a correct record of its proceedings. At the request of a
member, the clerk shall enter the ayes and noes in the journal. (1962 Code)
1-14-6: COUNCIL TO ACT AS REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY:
It is hereby found that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city, and the city
council is hereby designated as such redevelopment agency, and all rights, powers, duties, privileges
and immunities provided for in the community redevelopment law5 shall be vested in the city council as
the redevelopment agency. (Ord. 1319, 4-26-1984)
Chapter 15
MAYOR
1-15-1: MAYOR; SELECTION:
The council shall meet on the Tuesday after the general municipal election and choose one of its
number as mayor1. (1962 Code)
1-15-2: MAYOR PRO TEMPORE:
The mayor shall preside at the meetings of the council. If he is absent or unable to act, the council shall
appoint a mayor pro tempore, who shall serve only until the mayor returns or is able to act. The mayor
pro tempore shall have all of the powers and duties of the mayor in his absence2. (1962 Code)
1-15-3: CONDUCT AS COUNCILMAN:
The mayor may make or second any motion and present and discuss any matter as a member of the
council3. (1962 Code)
1-15-4: SIGNATURE:
The mayor shall sign:
(A) All warrants drawn on the treasurer.
(B) All written contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the city.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 48/710
(C) All instruments requiring the city seal4. (1962 Code)
1-15-5: ADMINISTRATION OF OATHS; AFFIDAVITS:
The mayor may administer oaths and affirmations, take affidavits and certify them under his hand5.
(1962 Code)
1-15-6: ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:
The mayor may acknowledge the execution of all instruments executed by the city and required to be
acknowledged6. (1962 Code)
Chapter 16
TREASURER
1-16-1: DUTIES:
(A) Keeping Of Money: The treasurer shall receive and safely keep all money coming into his hands as
treasurer.
(B) Deposit And Security Of Funds: He shall comply with all laws governing the deposit and securing of
public funds and the handling of trust funds in his possession.
(C) Disbursements: He shall pay out money only on warrants signed by legally designated persons.
(D) Monthly Reports: Regularly, at least once each month, the treasurer shall submit to the clerk a
written report and accounting of all receipts, disbursements and fund balances. He shall file a copy
thereof with the council1. (1962 Code)
Chapter 17
ATTORNEY
1-17-1: DUTIES:
The attorney shall advise the city officials in all legal matters pertaining to city business.
He shall frame all ordinances and resolutions required by the council, and shall perform other legal.
services required from time to time by the council1. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 49/710
Chapter 18
RESERVED
(Ord. 1082, 2-24-1976)
Chapter 19
CITY ADMINISTRATOR
1-19-1: CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
The office of the city administrator of the city is hereby created and established. The city administrator
shall be appointed by the city council on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and
qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-
1988)
1-19-2: RESIDENCE:
Within one hundred eighty (180) days after having been appointed city administrator, the city
administrator shall be required to reside either within the city or within a radius of five (5) miles from the
city limits of the city. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-1988)
1-19-3: ELIGIBILITY:
No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city administrator until one year has
elapsed after such council member shall have ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 1437,
3-22-1988)
1-19-4: BOND:
The city administrator shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such
sum as may be determined by the said city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful
performance of the duties imposed upon the city administrator as herein prescribed. Any premium for
such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-1988)
1-19-5: ACTING CITY ADMINISTRATOR:
During any period that the city administrator is absent, or disabled, the city administrator may designate
a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of acting city administrator
during his temporary absence or disability up to a maximum of thirty (30) days. For any absences or
disabilities over thirty (30) days, the city council shall designate the acting city administrator. (Ord.
1437, 3-22-1988)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 50/710
1-19-6: COMPENSATION:
The city administrator shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time
determine. In addition, the city administrator shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses
incurred by him in the performance of his official duties. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-1988)
1-19-7: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The city administrator shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction
and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for
the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his
general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall
have the powers set forth in the following subsections:
(A) Law Enforcement: It shall be the duty of the city administrator to enforce all laws and ordinance of
the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council
are faithfully observed.
(B) Authority Over Employees: It shall be the duty of the city administrator, and he shall have the
authority to control, order, and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate
officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads.
(C) Power Of Appointment And Removal: It shall be the duty of the city administrator to, and he shall
appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, except that for
the removal and appointment of department head positions, he shall receive official confirmation of
such appointment or removal by a majority of the city council. Appointment, removal, promotion and
demotion of any and all officers and employees of the city shall be subject to all applicable
personnel ordinances, rules, and regulations. The city attorney, city clerk, and city treasurer are not
subject to the appointment and removal procedure herein described.
(D) Administrative Reorganization Of Offices: It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city
administrator to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or
units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective, and economical
conduct of the city's business.
(E) Ordinances: It shall be the duty of the city administrator and he shall recommend to the city council
for adoption, such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary.
(F) Attendance At City Council Meetings: It shall be the duty of the city administrator to attend all
meetings of the city council unless at his request he is excused therefrom by the mayor individually
or by the city council, except when his removal is under consideration.
(G) Financial Reports: It shall be the duty of the city administrator to keep the city council at all times
fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 51/710
(H) Budget: It shall be the duty of the city administrator to prepare and submit the proposed annual
budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval.
(I) Expenditure Control And Purchasing: It shall be the duty of the city administrator to see that no
expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city
administrator or his authorized representative. The city administrator, or his authorized
representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or
divisions of the city1.
(J) Investigations And Complaints: It shall be the duty of the city administrator to make investigation
into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper
performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city administrator to
investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government
and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in said city.
(K) Public Buildings: It shall be the duty of the city administrator and he shall exercise general
supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the
control and jurisdiction of the city council.
(L) Additional Duties: It shall be the duty of the city administrator to perform such other duties and
exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or
resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-1988)
1-19-8: INTERNAL RELATIONS:
(A) Council-Administrator Relations: The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative
services of the city only through the city administrator, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither
the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the
city administrator. The city administrator shall take his orders and instructions from the city council
only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the city council and no individual councilman shall
give any orders or instructions to the city administrator.
(B) Departmental Cooperation: It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city clerk, city
treasurer, and city attorney to assist the city administrator in administering the affairs of the city
efficiently, economically and harmoniously.
(C) Attendance At Commission Meetings: The city administrator may attend any and all meetings of the
planning commission, recreation and parks commission, and any other commissions, boards or
committees created by the city council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the city council. At
such meetings which the city administrator attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards
or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall
inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council, and he
shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees
appointed by the city council. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-1988)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 52/710
1-19-9: REMOVAL PROCEDURE:
(A) Termination By City: If the city desires to terminate the employment of the city administrator, the city
shall give written notification to the city administrator and the city administrator shall continue his
employment with the city as city administrator for a period of sixty (60) days after receiving the
written notification of the desire of the city to terminate his employment.
(B) Termination By City Administrator: If the city administrator desires to terminate his employment with
the city, he shall give written notification to the city and he agrees to continue his employment with
the city for a period of sixty (60) days after the written notification of his desire to terminate his
employment with the city has been received by the city. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-1988)
1-19-10: AGREEMENTS ON EMPLOYMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to
enter into any supplemental agreement with the city administrator delineating additional terms and
conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-1988)
1-19-11: CITY ADMINISTRATOR AS CITY MANAGER:
All references in the city code, ordinances, personnel code, resolutions or other policy documents to
"city manager" shall apply to and be interchangeable with the "city administrator". All powers, duties,
authority, responsibilities and privileges conferred upon the city manager are hereby vested in the city
administrator. (Ord. 1437, 3-22-1988)
Chapter 20
RESERVED
(Ord. 1082, 2-24-1976)
Chapter 21
SALARIES FOR COUNCIL MEMBERS
1-21-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to section 36516 of the Government Code, authorizing the council to
provide by ordinance that each member of the council shall receive a prescribed salary the amount of
which is based upon the population of the city as determined by the last preceding federal census, or a
subsequent census, or estimate validated by the department of finance. (Ord. 1359, eff. 1-1-1985)
1-21-2: SALARIES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 53/710
Each member of the city council shall receive a salary in the sum of three hundred fifty three dollars
($353.00) per month in accordance with Government Code section 36516, effective March 27, 2003.
(Ord. 1592, 2-25-2003)
1-21-3: BENEFITS:
Any amounts paid for retirement, health and welfare, and federal social security benefits shall not be
included for purposes of determining salary under this chapter provided the same benefits are available
and paid by the city for its employees. (Ord. 1359, eff. 1-1-1985)
Chapter 22
FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST
COMPARISON SYSTEM
1-22-1: FINDINGS AND INTENT:
(A) Pursuant to article XIII B of the California constitution, it is the intent of the city council to require the
ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license
fees levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services hereinafter enumerated in this
chapter.
(B) The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set forth in this chapter provides a
mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the city for services rendered do not exceed the
reasonable estimated cost for providing the services for which the fees are charged.
(C) The adoption of this chapter is exempt from the California environmental quality act1, because it
approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operating
expenses of city departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code section 21080(b)(8). (Ord.
1577, 8-14-2001)
1-22-2: DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY AND DIRECTION TO MANAGER:
(A) The city manager is delegated the authority and directed to provide documents to the city council to
implement its herein enumerated policy to adjust fees and charges to recover the percentage of
costs reasonably borne as established hereby, in providing the regulation, product or service
enumerated in this chapter in the percentage of costs reasonably borne and on the schedule of rate
review and revision as hereinafter established in this chapter.
(B) The city manager is delegated authority to issue executive orders defining terms, setting out
administrative, fee collection and financial procedures, definitions and establishing effective dates of
all fees set by the city council by resolution. All executive orders shall be originated and signed by
the affected department head, shall be signed by the administrative services director certifying that
the financial requirements of this chapter are complied with, and shall be signed by the city
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 54/710
manager connoting the effective date of the executive order and new or reviewed rate structure,
procedure or definition.
(C) "Costs reasonably borne" shall be as defined in section 1-22-3 of this chapter. In adjusting fees and
charges, the city manager shall act in an administrative and ministerial capacity and shall consider
only the standards and criteria established by this chapter, and the procedures set hereby and by
applicable state law. All executive orders issued hereunder shall comply in all respects with this
chapter, and the several schedules of fees and rates as set by the city council by resolution. (Ord.
1577, 8-14-2001)
1-22-3: COSTS REASONABLY BORNE, DEFINED:
"Costs reasonably borne", as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter, are to consist of the
following elements:
(A) All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe
benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special
supplies and any other direct expense incurred.
(B) All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations,
equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and
reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt service and like expenses when distributed on an
accounted and documented rational proration system.
(C) Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed
asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated cost of replacement, divided
by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the
difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered, and reserved in cash and the
full cost replacement, also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such
unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset.
(D) General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the city
council, city attorney, city manager, city clerk, city treasurer, economic development, administrative
services department, personnel office and city promotion; and all other staff and support service
provided to the entire city organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax financed services
and fee financed services on the basis of the percentage so that each of the taxes, fees and
charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs.
(E) Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each
department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections (A), (B), (C)
and (F) of this section.
(F) Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest and trustee fees and
administrative expense for all applicable bond, certificate, note or securities issues or loans of
whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves, beyond
basic debt service costs, also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 55/710
securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the city. (Ord. 1577, 8-14-
2001)
1-22-4: SCHEDULE OF FEES AND SERVICE CHARGES:
(A) The city manager, administrative services director, and each city department head under the
direction of the city manager, shall review annually the fees and services charges listed in this
section, and provide an adjusted fee or charge schedule to the city council for its consideration so
as to recover the listed percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the listed
regulation, product or service. The percentage of costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the
listed regulation, product or service shall be limited to the extent the charge for any such regulation,
product or service is governed by state law or a state code adopted by the city. Any section/sections
of this code which, prior to the adoption of this chapter, provided for a fee or charge for any
regulation, product or service set forth herein shall be rescinded and superseded by this chapter.
The city council shall, no less than annually, set and/or adjust by resolution the fees and services
charges listed in this chapter. (Ord. 1577, 8-14-2001; amd. Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
CITY OF PLACERVILLE MASTER FEE SCHEDULE
Fee Description
Department
Target Subsidy
Percent Of Costs
Reasonably Borne
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT:
Appeal (building board of
appeals)
Building 25
Building; expired permit Building 0
Building inspection Building 0
Building permit Building 0
Building permit renewal Building 0
Certificate of occupancy Building 0
Demolition permit Building 0
Overtime inspection Building 0
Reinspection fee Building 0
Temporary certificate of
occupancy -
major
Building 0
Temporary certificate of
occupancy -
minor
Building 0
Park development fee Building/parks 0
Annexation Planning 0
Appeals (staff and
commission)
Planning 60
Burn down letter Planning 30
Common driveway Planning 0
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 56/710
Conditional use permit/major
(requires initial
study/negative
declaration)
Planning 0
Conditional use permit/minor
(categorical/statutory
exemption)
Planning 0
Covenants, conditions and
restrictions
review
Planning 10
Development agreement Planning 0
Environmental
assessment/initial
study/negative declarationmitigated
negative declaration
Planning 0
Environmental
assessment/initial
study/notice of exemption
Planning 0
Environmental impact report
Planning 0
Final subdivision map Planning 0
General plan amendment
(map or text)
Planning 0
Historic district review Planning 25
Landscape plan review
(planning
commission)
Planning 20
Minor deviation Planning 20
Notice of determination with
"de
minimus" finding
Planning 0
PD overlay Planning 0
Preliminary plan review Planning 25
Record duplication -
grading/TIs, etc.
Planning 0
Record duplication -
nonresidential
Planning 0
Record duplication -
residential permits
Planning 30
Sign package amendment
(planning
commission)
Planning 0
Sign package review
(planning
commission)
Planning 0
Sign permit Planning 0
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 57/710
Site plan review major
amendment
Planning 0
Site plan review/projects
under
$50,000.00
Planning 0
Site plan review/projects
$50,001.00 -
$250,000.00
Planning 0
Site plan review/projects
$250,001.00
and up
Planning 0
Special event signage Planning 50
State traffic impact fees Planning 0
Temporary manufactured
housing/
commercial coach permit
Planning 0
Temporary use permit Planning 0
Tentative subdivision map Planning 0
Tentative subdivision map
extension
Planning 0
Time extension (use permit,
design
review)
Planning 0
Traffic impact fees Planning 0
Variances/major (requires
initial
study/negative declaration)
Planning 0
Variances/minor
(categorical/statutory
exemption)
Planning 0
Zone change (map or text) Planning 0
Zoning/floodplain letter Planning 30
Zoning interpretation
(planning
commission)
Planning 0
POLICE DEPARTMENT:
ABC license review Police 0
Abandoned vehicle
abatements
Police 50
Billing for costs of police
security/
contract services
Police 0
Booking fee - cite and
release
Police 0
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 58/710
Burglar alarm permit -
commercial
Police 0
Burglar alarm permit -
residential
Police 55
Card room dealer Police 10
Clearance letter Police 40
Concealed weapons permit
(new)
Police 0
Concealed weapons permit
(renewal)
Police 35
Copies of crime and TC
reports
Police 0
DUI response Police 0
Daily log inquiries Police 0
Disturbance callback Police 0
Extensive records
research/copies
Police 0
False alarm response (first) Police 100
False alarm response (4 in
30 days)
Police 50
False alarm response (7 in
60 days)
Police 50
False alarm response (8 in
180 days)
Police 50
Federal firearms license
(residence
check)
Police 0
Fingerprints (includes
bookings)
Police 10
Impounded vehicle releases
Police 0
Parade permit/special event Police 0
Parking permit (tennis club) Police 0
Pawnbroker permit Police 0
Police photo/video
reproduction
Police 0
Registrants
(290/11590/457.1)
Police 0
Repossessed vehicle
releases
Police 0
Research departmental
records
Police 0
Ride-alongs (other than
citizens or
applicants)
Police 0
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 59/710
Security plan check Police 0
Solicitor's permit Police 0
Special traffic control Police 0
Taxicab driver permit Police 0
Taxicab driver renewal Police 0
Taxicab permit - proprietary Police 0
Temporary parking permit Police 0
VIN verification Police 60
Vacation house check Police 0
Vehicle cite correction -
signoff
Police 100
Vehicle escorts (wide load,
etc.)
Police 0
Vehicle lockout Police 100
PUBLIC WORKS/ENGINEERING:
Abandonment of right of way
Public works 50
Agreement review: site
improvement
Public works 0
Amended boundary line
adjustment
Public works 0
Amended parcel map Public works 0
Amended subdivision map Public works 0
Amended tentative parcel
map (4
parcels or less)
Public works 0
Amended tentative
subdivision map
Public works 0
Amended 20-1/2 parcel map
Public works 0
Bond review:
grading/completion/
restoration
Public works 25
Bond review: public
improvement
Public works 0
Bond review: site
improvement
Public works 0
Boundary line adjustment Public works 0
Boundary line agreement Public works 0
Certificate of compliance Public works 0
Certificate of correction Public works 50
Certificate of merge Public works 0
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 60/710
Change of address Public works 0
Change orders Public works 0
Commercial/MF building plan
review
Public works 0
Document recording fees Public works 0
Encroachment: commercial
driveway
Public works 0
Encroachment:
miscellaneous
encroachment
Public works 0
Encroachment:
parking/loading
Public works 0
Encroachment: permit
extension
Public works 0
Encroachment: preinspection
Public works 0
Encroachment: residential
driveway
Public works 0
Encroachment: temporary
parking
permit
Public works 20
Final subdivision map check
Public works 0
Grading change orders Public works 0
Grading improvement
agreement
review
Public works 0
Grading permit Public works 0
Grading permit extension Public works 0
Grading plan review Public works 0
Grading presite inspection Public works 0
Improvement agreement
review
Public works 0
Lighting, landscape and
maintenance
Public works 0
Parcel map check Public works 0
Permit appeal: public ROW
encroachment
Public works 0
Pregrading inspection Public works 0
Private sewer/water/storm
maintenance agreement
Public works 0
Public ROW encroachment:
permit
agreement
Public works 0
Reinspection Public works 0
Residential building plan Public works 0
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 61/710
review
Response letter Public works 40
Reversion to acreage parcel
map
Public works 0
Revised grading plan review
Public works 0
Revised site improvement
plan
review
Public works 0
SF building inspection Public works 0
Sewer application Public works 0
Sewer/water/storm drain
extension
application
Public works 0
Site improvement permit Public works 0
Site improvement plan
review
Public works 0
Street/easement
vacation/abandonment
Public works 30
Street frontage improvement
agreement -
commercial/multi-family
Public works 0
Street frontage improvement
agreement - residential
Public works 20
Street name/rename petition
Public works 0
Tenant improvements plan
review
(with change in building
occupancy)
Public works 0
Tentative parcel map Public works 0
Tentative parcel map
extension
Public works 0
Tentative parcel map
revisions
Public works 0
Transportation permit
(annual)
Public works 0
Transportation permit police
escort
Public works 0
Transportation permit (single
trip)
Public works 0
20-1/2 parcel map Public works 0
Water application Public works 0
RECREATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 62/710
Facility Rental - Town Hall, Scout Hall And Lions Park:
Senior Citizen Groups:
Senior: town hall hourly
rental -
main hall (first hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: town hall hourly
rental -
main hall (additional hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: town hall hourly
rental -
1/2 hall (first hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: town hall hourly
rental -
1/2 hall (additional hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs large (first hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs large (additional
hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs small (first hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs small (additional
hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: scout hall hourly
rental
(first hour)
Public services n/a
Senior: scout hall hourly
rental
(additional hour)
Public services n/a
Not For Profit Meeting Groups:
Meetings - no sales: town
hall hourly
rental - main hall (first
hour)
Public services n/a
Meetings - no sales: town
hall hourly
rental - main hall
(additional hour)
Public services n/a
Meetings - no sales: town
hall hourly
Public services n/a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 63/710
rental - 1/2 hall (first hour)
Meetings - no sales: town
hall hourly
rental - 1/2 hall (additional
hour)
Public services n/a
Meetings - no sales: town
hall hourly
rental - upstairs large (first
hour)
Public services n/a
Meetings - no sales: town
hall hourly
rental - upstairs large
(additional
hour)
Public services n/a
Meetings - no sales: town
hall hourly
rental - upstairs small (first
hour)
Public services n/a
Meetings - no sales: town
hall hourly
rental - upstairs small
(additional
hour)
Public services n/a
Meetings - no sales: scout
hall hourly
rental (first hour)
Public services n/a
Meetings - no sales: scout
hall hourly
rental (additional hour)
Public services n/a
Social Events - No Admission Charged:
Social: town hall hourly
rental -
main hall (first hour)
Public services n/a
Social: town hall hourly
rental -
Public services n/a
Social: town hall hourly
rental -
main hall (additional hour)
Public services n/a
Social: town hall hourly
rental -
1/2 hall (first hour)
Public services n/a
Social: town hall hourly
rental -
1/2 hall (additional hour)
Public services n/a
Social: town hall hourly Public services n/a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 64/710
rental -
upstairs large (first hour)
Social: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs large (additional
hour)
Public services n/a
Social: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs small (first hour)
Public services n/a
Social: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs small (additional
hour)
Public services n/a
Social: scout hall hourly
rental
(first hour)
Public services n/a
Social: scout hall hourly
rental
(additional hour)
Public services n/a
Other Uses:
All other: town hall hourly
rental -
main hall (first hour)
Public services n/a
All other: town hall hourly
rental -
main hall (additional hour)
Public services n/a
All other: town hall hourly
rental -
1/2 hall (first hour)
Public services n/a
All other: town hall hourly
rental -
1/2 hall (additional hour)
Public services n/a
All other: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs large (first hour)
Public services n/a
All other: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs large (additional
hour)
Public services n/a
All other: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs small (first hour)
Public services n/a
All other: town hall hourly
rental -
upstairs small (additional
hour)
Public services n/a
All other: scout hall hourly Public services n/a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 65/710
rental
(first hour)
All other: scout hall hourly
rental
(additional hour)
Public services n/a
Lions park softball field
rental
(first 2 hours - no lights)
Public services n/a
Lions park softball field
rental
(first 2 hours - lights)
Public services n/a
Lions park softball field
rental
(full-day tournament)
Public services n/a
Lions park softball field
rental
(1/2-day tournament)
Public services n/a
Lions park picnic area Public services n/a
Swimming pool rental (first
hour)
Public services n/a
Swimming pool rental
(additional
hour)
Public services n/a
Equipment Rental:
Barbecue rental Public services n/a
Lions park tennis keys Public services n/a
Picnic kit rental Public services n/a
Shade rental Public services n/a
Volleyball kit rental Public services n/a
Recreational Programs:
Adult basketball (per team)
Public services n/a
Adult softball (per team) Public services n/a
Competitive swim team
program
Public services n/a
Gold Bug park general tour
admissions - adult
Public services n/a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 66/710
Gold Bug park general tour
admissions - youth
Public services n/a
Gold Bug park gold pan
rental -
adult
Public services n/a
Gold Bug park gold pan
rental -
youth
Public services n/a
Recreational swimming -
general
admission
Public services n/a
Recreational swimming -
lap swim
Public services n/a
Recreational swimming -
senior
swim
Public services n/a
Special interest classes Public services n/a
Swim lessons (group
lesson)
Public services n/a
Swim lessons (private
lesson)
Public services n/a
Swim training team Public services n/a
Youth basketball (per
player)
Public services n/a
Youth camp Public services n/a
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES:
Agenda mailing charge Administrative
services
n/a
Agenda reproduction Administrative
services
0
Bad account collection fee Administrative
services
0
Bingo license Administrative
services
0
Business license Administrative
services
0
Document certification Administrative
services
0
Documents in storage:
record
reproduction (requested
under
the public records act)
Administrative
services
0
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 67/710
Duplicate business license Administrative
services
0
Franchise application Administrative
services
0
Minutes reproduction Administrative
services
0
Miscellaneous research (for
records not requested
under
the public records act)
Administrative
services
0
Notary public fee - noncity Administrative
services
0
Outdoor music festival
application
Administrative
services
0
Outdoor music festival permit
Administrative
services
0
Pawnbroker permit Administrative
services
0
Payment plan fee Administrative
services
60
Record reproduction
(requested
under the public records
act)
Administrative
services
0
Restaurant and vending
machine permit
Administrative
services
0
Returned check fee Administrative
services
0
Transient occupancy tax
registration
Administrative
services
0
Utility reinstatement Administrative
services
0
Utility shutoff Administrative
services
0
Utility 48 hour notice late fee
Administrative
services
70
Vacation: utility shutoff - 1
annually
Administrative
services
100
Vacation: utility shutoff -
more
than 1 annually
Administrative
services
0
(Ord. 1577, 8-14-2001; amd. Ord. 1627, 9-9-2008)
(B) The schedule of frequency of rate adjustments may be varied by the city manager to adjust
revenues sufficient to meet debt service coverage requirements of any bond, certificate or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 68/710
ordinance, resolution, indenture, contract or action under which securities have been issued by the
city which contain any coverage factor requirement.
(C) All fees and charges set pursuant to this chapter and section shall take effect ten (10) days after
the city manager signs an executive order stipulating that all provisions of this chapter have been
complied with, and no written appeal has been filed.
(D) The city manager may vary the review schedule listed in this section if, in the judgment of the city
manager and a directly affected and requesting department head, a gross inequity would be
perpetrated by not revising the rate schedule. Any such rate revision which deviates from the review
schedule as set herein shall be reported to the city council at its next succeeding meeting. (Ord.
1577, 8-14-2001)
1-22-5: STATUTORY PUBLIC MEETING:
Pursuant to California Government Code section 66016, the city clerk shall cause notice to be provided
as set out in Government Code sections 66016 and 6062a, and the city council periodically, at least
annually, shall receive at the regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations concerning
fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and
public meeting shall be provided prior to the city council taking any action on any new or increased fees
or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the city annual
budget process and hearing. (Ord. 1577, 8-14-2001)
1-22-6: PROVISION OF DATA:
Pursuant to the California Government Code, at least ten (10) days prior to the required public hearing
set out herein, the city manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the costs
or estimated costs required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be
made or fees or charges imposed. The city manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee
and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of
such changes also shall be published per the requirements of Government Code section 6062a. (Ord.
1577, 8-14-2001)
1-22-7: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
(A) Any person who feels that any fee or charge determined and set is in excess of the percentage of
costs reasonably borne to be recovered as set out in this chapter, or that such fee or charge has
been reviewed prior to or has not been reviewed within the review schedule as set out herein, may
appeal in writing to the city council.
(B) No fee or charge for which an appeal has been filed shall take effect until heard by the city council.
Such appeal shall be placed on the agenda of the next ensuing council meeting. Such appealed fee
or charge shall take effect immediately upon hearing by the city council unless ordered otherwise by
the city council by ordinance amending this chapter. (Ord. 1577, 8-14-2001)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 69/710
Chapter 23
EMERGENCY ORGANIZATIONS AND FUNCTIONS
1-23-1: PURPOSE:
The declared purpose of this chapter is to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the
protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency. (Ord. 1681, 9-27-2016)
1-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, "emergency" shall mean the actual or threatened existence of conditions of
disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such
conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, avalanche, or earthquake, or other
conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions
resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the
services, personnel, equipment and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political
subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 1681, 9-27-2016)
1-23-3: DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY SERVICES:
(A) There is hereby created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager or his or her
designee shall serve as director of emergency services.
(B) The director of emergency services shall approve, by separate policy of the city of Placerville,
emergency preparedness plans and other policies and procedures relating to emergency response
including establishment and facilitation of the emergency operations center.
(C) The director is empowered to:
1. Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of an "emergency" if
the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session.
Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to
ratify the proclamation within seven (7) days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further
force or effect;
2. Request the governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the
locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;
3. Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of
the purposes of this chapter;
4. Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization
of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;
5. Activate the emergency operations center to facilitate the emergency efforts of the city;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 70/710
6. Represent this city in all dealings with the public or private agencies on matters pertaining to
emergencies as defined in this chapter;
7. In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided in this section, the
proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the governor or the director of the state office of
emergency services, or the existence of a "state of war emergency", the director is empowered:
(a) To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life
and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations
must be confirmed at the earliest practical time by the city council;
(b) To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for
the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required
immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;
(c) To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the
proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the county in which this city is located or the
existence of a "state of war emergency", to command the aid of as many citizens of this
community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be
entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered
disaster service workers;
(d) To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; and
(e) To execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred
upon him by this chapter or by resolution of emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the
city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the
city council, and by any other lawful authority. (Ord. 1681, 9-27-2016)
1-23-4: EXPENDITURES:
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be
deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the
city. (Ord. 1681, 9-27-2016)
1-23-5: VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person, during an emergency, to wilfully obstruct, hinder or
delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation
issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this
chapter. (Ord. 1681, 9-27-2016)
Title 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Chapter 1
CITY-COUNTY HEALTH CONTRACT
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 71/710
2-1-1: CONTRACT WITH COUNTY; APPROVAL:
Whereas, the council has determined that it would be for the best interest of the city for it to enter into a
contract with the county of El Dorado for the county to enforce all public health laws within the city; and
Whereas, the council has examined and approved a contract for such services, which has been
submitted to the council by the county of El Dorado, a copy of which is attached hereto, it is hereby
resolved that the contract be approved by the council and that Merle Thomas as mayor and Harold W.
Duden, as city clerk, are hereby authorized and instructed to execute the contract on behalf of the city.
AGREEMENT
This Agreement, made and entered into in quadruplicate this first day of December, 1952, by and
between County of El Dorado, a political subdivision of the State of California, hereinafter referred to
and called "County", and the City of Placerville, a municipal corporation, hereinafter called "City",
WITNESSETH:
Whereas, the respective parties hereto have found it will be for the best interest of said City and of
said County that the County Health Officer of El Dorado County act for said City of Placerville.
Now, Therefore, pursuant to authority vested in the above referred to public agencies and in
consideration of the payments hereinafter provided for, and of the performance of the covenants
hereinafter contained, the said County and said City agree that the Health Officer of said County shall
perform in said City all the functions relating to the enforcement in said City of all ordinances of said
City relating to public health and general sanitation, and the making of all inspections and the
performance of all functions in connection therewith, and of all functions and duties as authorized
under Sections 480, 481 and 482 of the Health and Safety Code, State of California, including control
of communicable diseases general sanitation, food inspection, quarantine and isolation regulations and
other public health matters as are now or may hereafter be conferred upon health officers by State law
and local ordinances within the City or County, Said County agrees to furnish to said City such services
of a health officer at the date thereof or at any time during the life of this agreement.
It is understood and agreed that this contract shall be in force and effect until terminated, as
hereinafter provided.
In consideration of the agreement of the County herein contained, the City agrees to pay to the
County the sum of one dollar ($1.00) for the services performed for the City by the County under the
terms of this agreement.
It is understood and agreed that said City may as it sees fit appoint additional public health
personnel for duty within said City except that such appointments shall be passed upon by the Health
Officer as to ability and qualifications, and that all such appointees shall be under the control and
supervision of the Health Officer. The expense involved as to salaries, mileage, supplies and
equipment for City appointed public health personnel shall not be chargeable to said County. Said City
further agrees that said Health Officer of said County shall have such power and assistance in said
City, including access to such information and records of said City necessary and usually extended to
the City Health Officer for law enforcement.
Said City agrees and understands that said Health Officer may perform services for said County
outside of said City; provided, however, that City appointees will cooperate under the orders of the
Health Officer with County Public Health personnel in problems wherein mutual benefit to said City and
said County is involved, and that there will be no duplication of service by the above named public
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 72/710
health personnel.
It is also further understood and agreed that copies of this agreement will be distributed to said
County and said City, and County Health Officer, and the California State Department of Public Health,
Division of Local Health Service, 639 Phelan Building, 760 Market Street, San Francisco 2, California.
It is also further understood and agreed that either party hereto may terminate and end this
agreement on the first day of any month during the life of this agreement by giving to the other party
thirty (30) days notice of its intention to so terminate and end this agreement, anything herein
contained to the contrary thereof notwithstanding.
In Witness Whereof, the said County has, by order of the Board of Supervisors, caused this
agreement to be subscribed by the Chairman of said Board of Supervisors, and to be attested and the
seal of said Board affixed hereto by the Clerk of said Board, and the City has, by order of its City
Council, caused this agreement to be subscribed on its behalf by the Mayor of said City and to be
attested and the seal of said City affixed hereto by the Clerk of said City as of the day and year first
above written.
(Res. 692, 12-15-1952)
Chapter 2
PLANNING COMMISSION
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF PLANNING COMMISSION:
There is hereby established a planning commission pursuant to chapter 3 of title 7 of the California
Government Code, to be known as the "planning commission of the city". (Ord. 856, 4-20-1961)
2-2-2: DUTIES OF COMMISSION:
The planning commission shall prepare and adopt a master plan setting forth a comprehensive, long
term general plan for the physical development of the city, and shall have such other duties, functions
and powers as are set forth in title 7 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 856, 4-20-1961)
2-2-3: MEMBERS:
The planning commission shall consist of five (5) regular members. Each regular seat on the
commission shall be designated by number from one to five (5). All appointments to the planning
commission shall be made as follows:
(A) Interview: When an appointment is to be made to the planning commission the city council shall
interview all eligible persons who have applied for an appointment together with any other eligible
person who has been recommended by any member of the city council. (Ord. 1361, 12-11-1984)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 73/710
(B) Interview Vacancy Procedures: The interview time shall be set by the mayor. If there is a scheduled
or unscheduled vacancy, any of the council members desiring to submit names for consideration
shall do so at least five (5) days before the interview. Notice of the scheduled vacancy shall be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and shall be posted in the
office of the city clerk no later than forty five (45) days before the scheduled vacancy. Interviews for
a scheduled vacancy shall take place no later than fifteen (15) days before the vacancy occurs, and
the appointment shall be made at the council meeting immediately preceding the scheduled
vacancy, with the appointment to be effective as of the date of the scheduled vacancy. In the event
that there is an unscheduled vacancy, notice of such vacancy shall be posted as required by
Government Code section 54974, and the appointment shall be made at the next council meeting
after the interviews are completed, but in no event shall the appointment be made prior to ten (10)
working days after the posting of said notice, unless an emergency exists, in which case the
appointment may be made pursuant to Government Code section 54974(b). Members appointed for
a scheduled or unscheduled vacancy shall be by majority vote of the city council members. (Ord.
1500, 12-8-1992)
(C) Qualification Requirements: Upon appointment to the planning commission, the appointee shall
either be: 1) a city resident, or 2) a property owner within the city limits and who lives within the
community region, or 3) a primary business owner within the city limits who lives within the
community region, as shown on exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified herein, available for
inspection in the office of the city clerk. A majority of the planning commissioners shall be residents
within the city limits. Said term shall automatically expire if he/she no longer meets the qualification
requirements. (Ord. 1555, 2-9-1999)
2-2-4: TERMS:
The terms of regular members appointed shall be for four (4) years, and shall expire on March 1 of odd
numbered years. The terms of three (3) members of the commission shall run simultaneous to the
same year in which a city council election is held for three (3) seats. The terms of the other two (2)
members of the commission shall run simultaneous to the same year in which a council election is held
for two (2) seats. Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the
unexpired portion of the terms. (Ord. 1620, 1-8-2008)
2-2-5: REMOVAL; COMPENSATION:
Any regular member of the commission may be removed by a majority vote of the council. The regular
members of the planning commission shall receive the sum of seventy five dollars ($75.00) each for
each day's attendance at a regular, adjourned or special meeting of the commission; provided,
however, that no member shall receive in excess of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in any one
month. (Ord. 1599, 10-12-2004)
2-2-6: OFFICERS OF COMMISSION:
The planning commission shall elect a chairperson and a vice chairperson from among the regular
members, and shall appoint a secretary, who need not be a member of the commission, for the terms
and in the manner set forth in the bylaws of the commission. (Ord. 856, 4-20-1961)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 74/710
2-2-7: BYLAWS AND RECORDS:
The planning commission shall adopt bylaws providing for the method of electing officers, time and
place of regular meetings of the commission, which shall be held at least once each month, and such
other rules as may be necessary for the transaction of the business of the commission and shall keep a
public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings, and determinations1. (Ord. 856, 4-20-1961)
Footnote 1: Gov.C. § 65300 et seq.
Chapter 3
CIVIL DEFENSE
2-3-1: PURPOSES:
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for
the protection of person and property within the county of El Dorado in the event of a disaster, and to
provide for the coordination of the civil disaster functions of the city of Placerville with the city of South
Lake Tahoe and the county of El Dorado and all other affected public agencies, corporations and
organizations within the county of El Dorado. (Ord. 946, 4-19-1966)
2-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
CIVIL DEFENSE: The preparation for the implementation of all emergency functions, other than
functions for which military forces are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and
damage resulting from disasters.
DISASTER: Actual or threatened enemy attack, sabotage, extraordinary fire, flood, storm, epidemic,
riot, earthquake or other similar public calamity. (Ord. 946, 4-19-1966)
2-3-3: CIVIL DISASTER COUNCIL:
The El Dorado County civil disaster council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:
(A) Two (2) members appointed by the chairman of the board of supervisors of the county, one of
whom shall be a member of the board of supervisors;
(B) Two (2) members appointed by the mayor of each city, one of whom shall be a member of the city
council of each city;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 75/710
(C) The civil defense area coordinator appointed by the board of supervisors with concurrence of the
city councils, who shall serve as an ex officio member of the civil disaster council without vote;
(D) The county legal counsel who shall serve as an ex officio member of the civil disaster council
without vote;
(E) City manager or other administrative employee of each city as determined by his city council, who
shall serve as an ex officio member of the civil disaster council without vote. (Ord. 946, 4-19-1966)
2-3-4: CIVIL DISASTER COUNCIL POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the El Dorado County civil disaster council, and it is hereby empowered, to review
and recommend for adoption by the county board of supervisors and city councils, civil defense and
disaster and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions, and rules and
regulations, as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The members of the civil
disaster council shall elect a chairman, vice chairman, and such other officers as they deem necessary
and they shall prescribe their own rules of procedure. The civil disaster council shall meet upon call of
the chairman, or in his absence from the county, or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice
chairman. At least two (2) regular meetings shall be held during each calendar year. (Ord. 946, 4-19-
1966)
2-3-5: AREA COORDINATOR OF EL DORADO COUNTY CIVIL DISASTER; POWERS
AND DUTIES:
There is hereby created the position of El Dorado County area coordinator of civil disaster. The area
coordinator shall be selected by the civil disaster council, be confirmed by the board of supervisors,
and city councils and shall be responsible to the county board of supervisors for the day to day
management of the civil disaster program. The area coordinator is hereby empowered:
(A) To request the board of supervisors, to proclaim the existence, or threatened existence of a disaster
and the termination thereof;
(B) With the approval of the civil disaster council to request the governor to proclaim a state of extreme
emergency when in the opinion of the council the resources of the area or region are inadequate to
cope with the disaster;
(C) To control and direct civil disaster activities and efforts for the accomplishment of the purposes of
this chapter;
(D) To direct coordination and cooperation between divisions, services and staff of the civil disaster
organization, and to resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;
(E) To represent the civil disaster organization in all dealings with public or private agencies pertaining
to civil defense and disaster;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 76/710
(F) To appoint service chiefs subject to the approval of the civil disaster council; provided, however, the
service chiefs so appointed shall in so far as possible, be employees who hold regular
administrative positions with the county and the cities;
(G) To prescribe in writing the duties of any assistants provided him and the duties of chiefs of services,
in conformity with the El Dorado County civil disaster plan. Such duties may be changed from time
to time by the area coordinator particularly for the purpose of conforming to recommendations of the
director of the California disaster office or the federal office of civil defense;
(H) The area coordinator shall develop a civil disaster plan and program for El Dorado County and shall
have such other duties as may be assigned. (Ord. 946, 4-19-1966)
2-3-6: DISASTER AND EMERGENCY POWERS OF THE AREA COORDINATOR:
In the event of the proclamation of a disaster as herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of
disaster by the governor or the director of the California disaster office, the area coordinator is hereby
empowered:
(A) To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and
property as affected by such disaster; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be
confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the civil disaster council.
(B) Subject to the approval of the board of supervisors to obtain vital supplies, equipment and such
other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property of the people, and
bind the county for the fair value thereof, and if required immediately to commandeer the same for
public use.
(C) In the event of disaster to exercise complete emergency authority over the county and city or cities,
and to exercise all police power vested in the said political subdivisions by the constitution and
general laws in the event that governing bodies thereof delegate such authority or are unable to
function. (Ord. 946, 4-19-1966)
2-3-7: CIVIL DISASTER ORGANIZATION:
All officers and employees of the county of El Dorado, the city of Placerville, and city of South Lake
Tahoe together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during a disaster, and all groups,
organizations and persons including persons commandeered under the provisions of section 2-3-6 of
this chapter who may by agreement or operation of law be charged with duties incident to the
protection of life and property during such disaster, shall accept and discharge such duties and
responsibilities in the El Dorado County civil disaster organization as they may be assigned. (Ord. 946,
4-19-1966)
2-3-8: DIVISIONS, SERVICES AND STAFF OF THE EL DORADO COUNTY CIVIL
DISASTER ORGANIZATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 77/710
The functions and duties of the El Dorado County civil disaster organization shall be distributed among
such divisions, services and special staff as the El Dorado County civil disaster council shall prescribe
by resolution subject to the approval of the board of supervisors and the city councils. (Ord. 946, 4-19-
1966)
2-3-9: EXPENSES:
The cost of the civil disaster program, not otherwise paid for by federal or state agencies, shall be
shared by the county and the cities on a pro rata basis based upon population as determined by the
most recent state or federal census or state of California department of finance population figures.
(Ord. 946, 4-19-1966)
Chapter 4
REDEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION
(Rep. by Ord. 1319, 4-26-1983)
Chapter 5
RECREATION AND PARK COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 1521, 4-11-1995)
Chapter 6
RECREATION AND PARKS DEPARTMENT
2-6-1: RECREATION AND PARKS DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED; FUNCTIONS:
The recreation and parks department is hereby established for the city of Placerville. The functions of
the department are to provide opportunities for wholesome, year round public recreation service for
each age group and to develop and maintain in an attractive and safe manner, the recreation and park
areas and facilities of the city of Placerville, and to ensure that such facilities are suitable for a wide
variety of recreation purposes. (Ord. 932, 11-9-1965)
2-6-2: APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR:
The city manager shall appoint a director of recreation and parks to administer the recreation and parks
program, with appointment to be subject to council approval. (Ord. 939, 11-9-1965; amd. Ord. 1080, 2-
10-1976)
2-6-3: DUTIES OF DIRECTOR:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 78/710
The director of recreation and parks shall: (Ord. 932, 11-9-1965)
(A) Attend meetings of the commission; may serve as secretary to the commission and shall make
such reports to the commission or to the city manager as shall be required. (Ord. 932, 11-9-1965;
amd. Ord. 1080, 2-10-1976)
(B) Recommend the employment of required personnel, such as assistants, supervisors, leaders and
clerical and maintenance employees in accordance with established employment proceedings and
supervise them in the performance of their various duties.
(C) Administer, operate and maintain existing recreation and park areas and facilities and plan for the
acquisition, development and operation of the proposed facilities in accordance with policies
approved by the recreation and park commission and the city council.
(D) Inform the general public of the services and facilities being provided by the recreation and park
department.
(E) Solicit suggestions from the general public to improve or increase the effectiveness of the service.
(F) Cooperate with governmental and voluntary organizations and agencies in the furtherance of
recreation opportunities.
(G) Prepare manuals, bulletins and reviews on recreation problems.
(H) Provide, upon request, assistance of a technical nature to community agencies and organizations
having problems relating to recreation and park areas and facilities and programs.
(I) Counsel with officials of public and private organizations and interested groups concerning
community recreation and leisure activities and assist them in the promotion of recreation services.
(J) Conduct studies of local conditions and needs for recreation services and assist with recruitment
and training of recreation personnel. (Ord. 932, 11-9-1965)
(K) With advice of the recreation and parks commission, prepare and submit a budget to the city
manager for presentation to the city council. (Ord. 932, 11-9-1965; amd. Ord. 1080, 2-10-1976)
Chapter 7
BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS
2-7-1: ESTABLISHING BOARD:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 79/710
There is hereby established a building board of appeals consisting of five (5) members and one
alternate member who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to
building construction. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
2-7-2: DUTIES OF THE BOARD:
The duties of the board shall be to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations
made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the state codes. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally
adopted thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply or
an equally good or better form of construction is proposed. The board shall have no authority to waive
requirements of the state codes. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
2-7-3: MEMBERS:
The members of the building board of appeals shall be appointed by the mayor and shall receive the
approval of the majority of the city council. The initial terms shall be one member for two (2) years, two
(2) members for three (3) years, and two (2) members for four (4) years; and thereafter each member
shall be appointed for a four (4) year term. The alternate member shall be appointed for a four (4) year
term. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of the member affected. (Ord. 1528, 9-26-1995;
amd. Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
2-7-4: OFFICERS:
The building board of appeals shall meet in regular sessions and elect from their members a chairman
and vice chairman. Their duties shall respectively be such as are usually carried by such officers.
Officers shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are elected. The building official and the
fire chief shall be ex officio members and the building official shall act as secretary of the board. The
board shall adopt rules necessary to the conduct of its affairs and shall keep minutes of its
proceedings. The meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other
times as the board may determine. (Ord. 1226, 6-10-1980; amd. Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
2-7-5: APPEALS TO BOARD:
Appeals shall be filed with the secretary to the board within ten (10) days of the written decision of the
building official. A fee to defray the costs incidental to conducting the proceedings of the board shall be
collected at the time of filing. Refer to the development service department's master fee schedule.
(Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
2-7-6: HEARINGS ON APPEALS:
The board shall have a hearing on any appeal within twenty (20) days from the date the appeal is filed
with the secretary of the board. The board shall render its decision and finding in writing to the
appellant, building official and fire chief within thirty (30) days from the date the appeal is filed with the
secretary. (Ord. 1226, 6-10-1980)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 80/710
2-7-7: DECISION OF THE BOARD:
The decision of the building board of appeals shall be final. (Ord. 1226, 6-10-1980; amd. Ord. 1642, 6-
14-2011)
Title 3
FIRE REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT
3-1-1: DEPARTMENT:
The department shall consist of a chief and other officers as the chief and council may deem necessary
for the effective operation of the department. (Ord. 963, 2-14-1967)
3-1-2: CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The city manager shall appoint a fire chief to administer the operation of the fire department of the city
of Placerville, the appointment to be subject to council approval. (Ord. 963, 2-14-1967; amd. Ord. 1080,
2-10-1976)
The fire chief of the city, or his or her designee, after first obtaining the training required by Penal Code
section 832, may issue citations (notices to appear) for violations of the uniform fire code, as amended,
or other provisions of this code relating to fire regulations. (Ord. 1276, 8-11-1981)
3-1-3: REPORTS:
The chief shall be held accountable to the council, through the city manager, and he shall make written
and verbal reports as may be required. The other department officers and personnel shall be
accountable to the chief only. (Ord. 963, 2-14-1967; amd. Ord. 1080, 2-10-1976)
3-1-4: PERSONNEL:
All personnel of the volunteer fire department shall be appointed after they have taken and passed an
examination given by the personnel office of the city of Placerville, and the appointment shall be by the
chief, subject to the ratification by the council. (Ord. 963, 2-14-1967)
3-1-5: MEMBERS; COMPENSATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 81/710
The volunteer fire department may consist of forty five (45) members, including the officers thereof,
which membership may be increased or decreased in number by a resolution of the council.
Membership in the department shall be voluntary and neither the officers nor the members thereof shall
receive compensation for services performed, except as herein provided.
The fire chief and assistant chiefs and captains shall receive such compensation as is prescribed by
resolution of the council, and all members of the department who attend and perform services at all
fires and fire drills shall be compensated as follows:
(A) The city shall pay to the department each month, for all services performed and fire drills attended
during the preceding month by officers and members, the sum of four dollars ($4.00) per man for
each hour or fraction thereof required to suppress or control all fires.
(B) Members shall be compensated at the rate of four dollars ($4.00) per hour for each hour for
attending practice, drills and school. The council may, at any time by resolution, reduce, increase
and discontinue the further payment to the fire department of the amount of payment herein
provided. (Ord. 891, 5-16-1963; amd. Ord. 1263, 5-26-1981)
3-1-6: ADOPTION OF BYLAWS:
The fire department shall be governed by bylaws to be adopted by the department and approved by
the council, provided that such bylaws shall be consistent with this chapter and all other provisions of
this code pertaining thereto. (Ord. 891, 5-16-1963)
3-1-7: (Rep. by Ord. 963, 2-14-1967)
3-1-8: CORPORATION OFFICERS:
The department may elect a president, vice president, secretary and treasurer, and four (4) directors to
be known as corporation officers. Such officers may be elected in any manner and for any term the
membership may decide upon and their duties shall be to arrange for and manage any and all
corporation functions sponsored by the department.
The functions and duties of the corporation officers shall in nowise interfere with those of the regular
department officers who are charged with responsibility for all fire service activities of the department in
the city.
Corporation officers may be any man on the fire department under the rank of second assistant chief.
(Ord. 963, 2-14-1967)
3-1-9: SELECTION OF MEMBERS:
Members of the volunteer fire department shall be selected as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 82/710
(A) Applications for the position of volunteer fireman should be completed on an application form
(standard city form) and should be processed by the personnel office.
(B) Applicants shall be screened by a screening committee of the volunteer fire department consisting
of the city officers and corporation officers, subject to the approval of the simple majority of general
members of the volunteer fire department casting a ballot.
(C) In the event the applicant successfully passes the screening committee of the volunteer fire
department, he shall be given an examination by the personnel office of the city.
(D) In the event the applicant passes, the results shall be given to the chief and based upon the
application form, the results of the screening committee and the results of the examination and
interview of the personnel officer of the city, the candidate will then have his name placed on the
eligibility list of the volunteer fire department. Appointments will be made from the list in numerical
order.
(E) In the event the applicant is accepted, he is then appointed to a one year probationary period to the
volunteer fire department, and during the probationary period he shall be evaluated at least two (2)
times by the chief and four (4) members of the volunteer fire department. Said evaluation shall be in
the form provided by the personnel officer. The probationary employee shall be shown each
evaluation report and shall be asked to sign the report indicating that he has read the report. (Ord.
963, 2-14-1967)
(F) In the event that the applicant satisfactorily passes the probationary period, he shall then become a
member of the volunteer fire department; provided that he is voted in by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of
the general members of the volunteer fire department casting a ballot at the regular meeting. The
applicant shall not be present at the meeting at which the members vote upon his becoming a
member of the volunteer fire department. (Ord. 1015, 11-14-1972)
3-1-10: SUSPENSION OF A MEMBER:
(A) The chief may suspend for cause any member of the volunteer fire department, however, a
suspension shall not last longer than three (3) days unless the member is suspended as a result of
having been accused of committing a felony, in which event the suspension shall last until there has
been a decision rendered by a court of competent jurisdiction as to whether a felony has been
committed or there has been a dismissal. (Ord. 963, 2-14-1967)
3-1-11: DISMISSAL OF A MEMBER:
Any member of the volunteer fire department may be dismissed for cause by the chief with the
concurrence of the personnel officer of the city, or by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the
volunteer fire department meeting and voting at a regular meeting. The member of the volunteer fire
department against whom the dismissal proceedings are brought shall be given written notice that a
dismissal proceeding is to be brought against him and this written notice shall be served upon said
member at least seven (7) days prior to the meeting at which the dismissal action is to be conducted.
The cause for dismissal shall be in writing and shall be placed in the personnel records of the city, and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 83/710
a copy shall be given to the member who has been dismissed. Notice of the removal or dismissal of
any volunteer fireman shall be given to the council by the city personnel officer. At the time any
member has been dismissed from the volunteer fire department, he shall be informed of his right to
appeal to the city council pursuant to the terms set forth in the employee's appeal ordinance. (Ord. 963,
2-14-1967)
Chapter 2
FIRE LIMITS
(Rep. by Ord. 1454, 5-9-1989)
Chapter 3
FIRE HAZARDS; INCINERATORS
3-3-1: ELIMINATION OF HAZARDS:
No person shall permit paper, rags, boxes, waste or combustible rubbish or inflammable substances of
any character to accumulate in any quantity in any building, yard, street, alley or other place in such a
manner or to such an extent as to cause a fire menace, or increase the danger of fire or to endanger
life or property. The accumulation of rubbish or any materials is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it
shall be the duty of the fire chief, a representative from his department, or any police officer, to see that
such nuisances are abated immediately after discovery, using summary measures if necessary to
effect immediate abatement. If in his judgment the fire menace is not immediate he shall give written
notice to the occupant or owner of the premises or building or the person responsible for the condition,
to remedy or remove the condition within forty eight (48) hours thereafter, and such order must be
complied with. (Ord. 758, 6-6-1953; amd. Ord. 1355, 5-8-1984)
3-3-2: OPEN FIRES:
No person shall ignite, set fire to or burn in the open air in any open, exposed or outdoor fire, any
rubbish, paper, shavings, boxes, brush, weeds, trimmings, grass, litter or other combustible waste
materials or substance between May 2 and the date the director of the department of forestry declares,
by proclamation, that the hazardous fire conditions have abated for that year, or at any other time
during any year when unusual fire hazard conditions exist in the area, except between the hours of six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight, and then only after a written permit has been
secured from the fire chief. The fire chief may issue special permits for burning outside of these hours
if, in his opinion, the circumstances warrant. If the permit is granted, the burning shall be at all times
under competent and continuous supervision and not within ten feet (10') of any building or structure.
All inflammable or combustible materials shall be cleaned away from any hedge, ornamental shrub or
tree for such distance as may be necessary to safeguard the same from scorching, or igniting or
burning, but in no case less than ten feet (10') therefrom. (Ord. 1454, 5-9-1989)
3-3-3: FIRES IN OUTSIDE PITS OR GRILLS:
No permit is required when pit or grill is used for cooking of food preparation purposes provided grill or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 84/710
pit is under competent and continuous supervision and all flammable and combustible material is
removed a sufficient distance therefrom so as not to constitute a fire hazard; and further provided that
all fires and coals in the fireplaces, pits or grills shall be thoroughly extinguished after the use thereof
has been completed. (Ord. 1175, 11-14-1978)
3-3-4: FIRE CAUSING OFFENSIVE ODORS:
No person shall at any time or place within the city, set fire to, ignite or burn garbage, hair, rags, animal
waste matter, or other materials likely to create offensive odors or excessive smoke. (Ord. 758, 6-6-
1953)
3-3-5: APPROVED INCINERATORS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1454, 5-9-1989)
3-3-6: INCINERATORS; HOURS FOR BURNING:
No person shall cause or permit any fire in any incinerator to burn, smolder or smoke between the
hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. of any day. (Ord. 1318, 4-26-1983)
3-3-7: CHIEF MAY REFUSE BURNING PERMIT:
The fire chief shall have the right to refuse to issue a fire permit, or allow the burning of any
combustible material in any case where, in his opinion, such burning would be dangerous or unsafe.
(Ord. 758, 6-6-1953)
3-3-8: STREET FIRES:
It shall be unlawful for any person except an officer or employee of the city within the line of his duty, to
set fire to, ignite or burn any combustible material or substance upon any street, alley, sidewalk, park,
parkway or public property within the city. (Ord. 758, 6-6-1953)
3-3-9: PERMITS AND NOTICES:
(A) The fire chief, or any officer or member of the fire department designated by the chief, is hereby
authorized and empowered to issue any written permit required by this chapter.
(B) Any order or notice required to be given by the provisions of this chapter shall be in writing, and
signed by the fire chief or other authorized officer or member thereof. Such order or notice shall be
personally served upon the owner, or occupant in possession of the property or premises affected
thereby. In the event that neither the owner, occupant or person in charge of the premises can be
located thereon, then the order or notice shall be sent by registered mail directed to the owner or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 85/710
tenant or reputed owner or tenant of the property, at his last known post office address. (Ord. 1175,
11-14-1978)
3-3-10: FIRE SERVICE FEES:
Fire service fees may be charged to any person, firm, corporation or business that through negligence,
violation of the law or as the result of carelessness is responsible for the cause of any fire department
to respond to the scene of an incident. The fee shall not exceed the actual cost of suppressing the fire
and/or responding to the scene of the incident. (Ord. 1454, 5-9-1989)
Chapter 4
PUBLIC BUILDINGS; THEATERS
(Rep. by Ord. 1263, 5-26-1981)
Chapter 5
PUBLIC GARAGES
(Rep. by Ord. 1263, 5-26-1981)
Chapter 6
FIREWORKS
3-6-1: FIREWORKS PROHIBITED:
The sale or discharge of firecrackers, salutes and other explosive articles of similar nature within the
city is hereby prohibited and it shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale or discharge any
firecrackers, sparklers, roman candles and other explosive articles of similar nature within the city.
Exception: The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person engaged in the preparation for
or performance of a public fireworks display authorized by written order of the city council in advance,
in full compliance with the conditions or restrictions contained in such order. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
3-6-2: BLASTING WITH EXPLOSIVES; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to do any blasting within the city limits or to set off, fire, discharge, or
explode any dynamite, powder, nitroglycerin, or any other explosive, or explosive substance or
combustible device or material, without first obtaining written permission therefor from the fire chief,
and then only under such terms and conditions which will preclude the possibility of injury to persons or
property because of the blasting or the use of explosives or combustible devices or materials; provided
further, that such blasting or use of explosives or combustible materials or devices may be done or
carried on only under the terms of the permit and under the terms of this chapter, and under the written
permission of the fire chief. All blasting and use of explosives shall be conducted or carried on by the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 86/710
use of a screen, blanket, or other device which shall successfully hold all debris and waste material as
near the ground as possible and shall prevent the waste material and debris from being forced,
propelled, or shot into the air, and it shall be unlawful for any person to do any blasting or to use any
explosive or explosive material or device whether under written permission of the fire chief or
otherwise, without the use of a blanket, screen, or covering. The fire chief will give adequate notice to
the police chief of the issuance of all blasting permits.
The fire chief is hereby given power to regulate the use of explosives within the city and is given the
power to limit or regulate the size of charges or shots in all cases of blasting for construction work, or
otherwise, and it shall be the duty of the fire chief whenever application is made to him for permission
to use an explosive or to do blasting within the city, to investigate the place where the work is proposed
to be carried on, and to impose such terms or conditions upon the use of all explosives or combustible
materials or substances and all dynamite or powder which will preclude the possibility of injury to
persons or property because of the use; and it shall be the duty of the fire chief when written
permission for the use is given, to state the terms and conditions under which the permission is given.
Each permit shall require that the permittee notify emergency dispatch (by telephoning 911) within one
hour prior to conducting any blasting operation of the time and place of such blasting. (Ord. 1454, 5-9-
1989)
Chapter 7
FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS
3-7-1: FLAMMABLE AND COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS:
The scope of this chapter shall be the same as in article 79 of the fire code, except as provided in the
following:
No person shall possess, keep or store, or permit the possession, keeping or storing, aboveground,
within the city limits, class I liquids in containers in excess of five (5) gallons except class I liquids
contained in fuel tank or tanks of a motor vehicle, construction equipment, aircraft, motor boat or
mobile power or heating plant.
This section shall not apply to aboveground storage of class I liquids at wholesale distributing depots
now in existence within the city limits which are being operated and maintained in accordance with the
fire code. (Ord. 1263, 5-26-1981)
Chapter 8
LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GAS
(Rep. by Ord. 1454, 5-9-1989)
Chapter 9
COMBUSTION DETECTORS
(Rep. by Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 87/710
Chapter 10
FIRE HYDRANTS
3-10-1: REQUIREMENTS:
Fire hydrants shall be required on all public water pipelines of six inch (6") diameter or larger
constructed by or for property owners within the city. (Ord. 1216, 12-11-1979)
3-10-2: LOCATION:
The location, number and type of fire hydrants connected to a water supply capable of delivering the
required fire flow shall be provided on the public street or on the site of the premises to be protected as
required and approved by the chief. Maximum distance between hydrants and structures shall be as
follows:
Single-family residential parcels larger than
2 acres
1,000 feet
Single-family residential parcels 2 acres
and smaller
500 feet
Multi-family residential - maximum 4 units 500 feet
Commercial and industrial and multi-family residential - 5 or more units 250 feet
(Ord. 1323, 5-10-1983)
3-10-3: SPECIFICATIONS:
The fire flow, duration, and residual pressure shall be as specified by the fire chief. The minimum
requirements shall be:
Flow 500 gallons per minute
Duration 2 hours
Residual pressure 20 pounds per square inch
(Ord. 1216, 12-11-1979)
3-10-4: CONFORMITY OF FIRE HYDRANTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 88/710
Fire hydrants shall conform to the latest revision of AWWA C 502, AWWA standard for dry barrel fire
hydrants, and shall have the following characteristics:
(A) Fire hydrants shall be of the traffic type with a break off safety flange.
(B) Each hydrant shall have one 41/2-inch and two (2) 21/2-inch hose connections with national
standard hose threads.
(C) The operating nut and nozzle cap nuts shall be one and one-half inch (11/2") pentagon. Fire
hydrants shall open to the left.
Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations. (Ord. 1216,
12-11-1979)
3-10-5: VARIANCE:
When it is in the public interest, the fire chief, or his duly appointed representative, may grant a
variance from the strict requirements of this chapter relating to the following:
(A) Location of fire hydrants.
(B) Fire hydrant type and specifications for fire hydrants.
(C) Manner of installation of fire hydrants. (Ord. 1216, 12-11-1979)
Chapter 11
DEVELOPMENT FEES FOR FIRE PROTECTION
SERVICES
3-11-1: FINDINGS:
The city council of the city hereby finds and determines that new development in the city imposes
additional service requirements upon the fire department of the city and impairs the ability of the fire
department to provide proper and adequate fire protection to the existing residents of the city. The city
council further finds that it is essential to the proper and orderly development of the city that new
development be allowed to proceed only if adequate provision is made to provide proper fire protection
services for such new development. (Ord. 1430, 1-26-1988)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 89/710
3-11-2: APPLICABILITY:
As a condition to any permit for the development of any residential, commercial, institutional, or
industrial use in the city, the developer shall be required to pay a fee, as defined herein, to the city.
(Ord. 1430, 1-26-1988)
3-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
COMMERCIAL USE: Any use for commercial purposes, as defined in title 10 of this code.
DEVELOPER: Any person, firm, or corporation requesting a building permit for the construction of any
residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial building or unit.
FEE OR FEE STRUCTURE: A fee as established by the city. The fee approved by the city council shall
be reasonably related to, and shall not exceed, the cost of providing fire protection services to the
development, and shall be determined to otherwise comply with existing law.
The fee may include uniform schedules and rates based upon the type of use of the property and the
risk classification of the proposed structures on the property. The risk classification may include, but
need not be limited to, the amount of water required for fire suppression on the property, the proposed
structural use, and other factors relating to potential fire and panic hazards and the cost of providing
the fire suppression by the city to the property. The fee may also be based upon the developer's pro
rata contribution to an established capital facilities outlay program established by the city. The capital
facilities outlay program shall be based upon reasonable estimates of the anticipated growth and
development within the city during the term of the capital facilities outlay program and the facilities
necessary to provide adequate and proper fire protection services to the development. Nothing herein
shall be construed as prohibiting the city from establishing a different fee schedule, so long as the fee
is reasonably related to the cost of providing service to the proposed development, or is otherwise
allowed under existing law. All fees shall consider the extent to which sprinkler systems in the proposed
development will reduce the service requirement of the fire department to the proposed development.
All fees shall also consider the extent to which credit should be allowed the developer for fire protection
fees previously paid by the developer or his predecessor on the property.
INDUSTRIAL USE: Any use for industrial purposes, as defined in title 10 of this code.
INSTITUTIONAL USE: Any use for the charitable, educational, hospital, church purposes to the extent
such use is not also considered as commercial, residential or industrial under title 10 of this code.
PERMIT: Means, but not by way of limitation, the approval of any parcel map, tentative map for minor
or major subdivisions, the approval of any variance, use permit, rezoning, design review, or the
issuance of a building permit, unless the applicant can demonstrate exclusion under Government Code
section 65961.
RESIDENTIAL USE: Any use for residential purposes, as defined in title 10 of this code. (Ord. 1430, 1-
26-1988)
3-11-4: ADOPTION OF FEE AND PAYMENT:
The fee described herein shall be payable prior to the issuance of a building permit for any property
subject to the provisions herein. The fee shall only be required for property within the city provided the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 90/710
city council has reviewed and adopted a fee structure as provided herein. The fee shall not be required
unless it has been adopted by the city council not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the filing and
acceptance of an application for a building permit. The hearings by the city council shall be noticed
pursuant to Government Code section 65090 and section 54992. The fee shall be paid directly to the
city, whereupon developer shall provide city with a "receipt of payment" from the city at the time the
developer requests a building permit. (Ord. 1430, 1-26-1988)
3-11-5: DEVELOPMENT EXPENDITURE LIMITATIONS:
The fees collected herein by the city shall be kept in a separate fund and used solely to offset impacts
to the city created by new development for fire protection services. (Ord. 1430, 1-26-1988)
Title 4
CONSTRUCTION REGULATIONS
Chapter 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
4-1-1: NAME:
These regulations shall be known as and may be cited as the PLACERVILLE CONSTRUCTION
REGULATIONS. It shall be referred to hereinafter as "this title", and the term shall include any
subsequent amendment thereof. (Ord. 1491, 5-26-1992)
4-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this title is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and
public welfare by the enforcement of the California building standards code (California Code Of
Regulations, title 24, parts 1 through 12), and city ordinances which are included in this title. (Ord.
1642, 6-14-2011)
4-1-3: SCOPE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-1-4: ADOPTION OF STATE CODES:
The following parts of the California Code Of Regulations, title 24, are hereby adopted by reference:
Part 1, known as the California building standards administrative code;
Part 2, volume 1 and 2, known as the California building code, which is based on the international
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 91/710
building code;
Part 2.5, known as the California residential code, which is based on the international residential code;
Part 3, known as the California electrical code, which is based on the national electrical code;
Part 4, known as the California mechanical code, which is based on the uniform mechanical code;
Part 5, known as the California plumbing code, which is based on the uniform plumbing code;
Part 6, known as the California energy code;
Part 7, currently vacant;
Part 8, known as the state historical building code;
Part 9, known as the California fire code, which is based on the international fire code;
Part 10, known as the California existing building code, which is based on the international existing
building code;
Part 11, known as the California green building standards code, which is also called the CALGreen
code; and
Part 12, known as the California referenced standards code. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
4-1-5: AMENDMENTS TO THE CALIFORNIA BUILDING CODE (CBC); CALIFORNIA
RESIDENTIAL CODE (CRC):
CBC section 1505.1.1 and CRC R902, Roof Coverings Within Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones,
shall be amended to read as follows: "The entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof
covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure shall be a
fire retardant roof covering that is at least class A."
CBC section 1607A.11.2, Reduction In Roof Live Loads, shall be amended to read as follows: "No
reduction in roof live loads shall be allowed."
CBC section 1608A.2, Determination Of Snow Loads, shall be amended to read as follows: "The roof
live load for snow shall be (20) twenty pounds per square foot for all areas of the city of Placerville."
(Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
4-1-6: FINDINGS:
The city council of the city of Placerville finds and declares that the additions, modifications and
changes made to these codes are necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare
due to climatic, geological or topographical conditions. These amendments are authorized under
Health And Safety Code sections 18941.5 and 17958 and are identified as follows:
(A) Express finding number 1; climatic: The city of Placerville is located approximately forty five (45)
miles east of Sacramento and seventy (70) miles west of Lake Tahoe at an average elevation of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 92/710
one thousand eight hundred seventy feet (1,870') above sea level. It is the transition area between
the California central valley and the Sierra Nevada Mountains. It experiences a change in
precipitation and snowfall from the arid central valley to the deep snow of the mountains. The
average annual rainfall is thirty six inches (36"). This rainfall normally occurs from October to April.
Hourly rainfall for design purposes is three inches (3") per hour or 0.031 gpm per square foot as
established from data in the "El Dorado County Drainage Manual" and nearby jurisdictions. Snow
can be expected each winter but usually does not accumulate for an appreciable amount of time.
Historically for at least twenty (20) years, the design roof snow load has been twenty (20) pounds
per square foot with no reduction allowed.
Climate is one of the greatest impacts to fire behavior and other major emergency events because
it cannot be controlled. The drying out of wood building components and wildland fuels in the
summer months allows for easy ignition and propagation of fire. Steep, narrow, often congested
streets can lead to longer response times for firefighters. Therefore, the fire classification of roof
assemblies and roof coverings should be the most restrictive.
Amendments related to climate: CBC section 1505.1.1, 1607A.11.2, 1608A.2.
(B) Express finding number 2; geological: The city of Placerville has three (3) dominant east/west
ridgelines, which in turn define the principal watersheds, with a series of subwatersheds branching
off each major watershed divide. These subridgelines are generally oriented in a north/south
direction perpendicular to the primary ridgelines. The secondary ridgelines are located at "regular"
intervals approximately one-fourth (1/4) of a mile apart. The moderate to steep slopes, which are
characteristic of this topography, have a profound influence on the location of roads and hence the
development pattern. There are no identified active earthquake faults in Placerville; however, the
inactive Melones Fault does pass through the eastern part of the city, trending in a north/south
direction. The city of Placerville is subject to ground tremors from seismic events as the city is
located in site class C. Some portions of the city have poor soil conditions that are often expansive
in nature. Due to the potential for seismic activity, a need exists for more restrictive design criteria.
Amendments related to geological conditions: CBC section 1607A.11.2, 1608A.2.
(C) Express finding number 3; topographical: The city of Placerville is located in the transition between
the California central valley and the Sierra Nevada Mountains. Three (3) biophysical gradients are
apparent: a transition from central valley grassland vegetation, to mixed needleleaf and broadleaf
forests, to Sierra evergreen forests. The threat to Placerville from wildland fires is relatively high due
to the dense vegetative cover and steeply sloping lands. Therefore, a need exists for additional fire
protection measures.
Amendments relating to topographical conditions: CBC section 1505.1.1.
(Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-1-7: FILING OF FINDINGS:
The city clerk is hereby directed to file a copy of the ordinance codified herein with the California
building standards commission of the state of California. (Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-1-8: INTERPRETATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 93/710
(Rep. by Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
4-1-9: LIABILITY:
The provisions of this code shall not be construed as imposing upon the city of Placerville any liability
or responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting from defective work, nor shall the city of
Placerville, or any official, employee or agent thereof, be held as assuming any such liability or
responsibility by reason of the review or inspection authorized by the provisions of this code of any
permits or certificates issued under this code. (Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
Chapter 2
ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT
4-2-1: CREATION OF ENFORCEMENT AGENCY:
(Rep. by Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-2-2: POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
The building official may request and shall receive, so far as is required in the discharge of his or her
duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of this jurisdiction. (Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-2-3: UNSAFE BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES OR BUILDING SERVICE EQUIPMENT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-2-4: BUILDING BOARD OF APPEALS:
See title 2, chapter 7 of this code. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
4-2-5: VIOLATIONS:
lt shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move,
improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building, structure or
building service equipment, or to excavate or grade or permit the same to be done in violation of this
title and the technical codes. See section 1-4-5 of this code for penalties. (Ord. 1491, 5-26-1992)
Chapter 3
PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 94/710
4-3-1: PERMITS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-3-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
(Rep. by Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-3-3: PERMITS ISSUANCE:
(Rep. by Ord. 1623, 2-12-2008)
4-3-4: FEES:
The fee for each permit, plan review and investigation shall be those established and adopted by the
city council from time to time by resolution.
(A) Determination Of Value: The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of
these codes shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in computing the building
permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the
permit issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air
conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent equipment. (Ord. 1491,
5-26-1992)
(B) Plan Review Fees: A plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting plans and specifications
for review. The plan review fee for buildings or structures shall be as adopted by resolution and
determined by the building official based on building valuation data from the "Building Safety
Journal" published by the International Code Council (ICC).
The plan review fee for grading work shall be as adopted by resolution.
Where plans are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review, an additional plan
review fee shall be paid at the rate adopted by resolution. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
(C) Expiration Of Plan Review: Application for which no permit is issued within one hundred eighty
(180) days following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data
submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official.
The building official may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding one
hundred eighty (180) days upon request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the
control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken. No application shall be extended
more than once.
1. Exception; Residential Plan Review: An applicant may renew a plan review by paying a renewal
fee within thirty (30) days after the plan review expiration. The fee for each permit shall be those
established and adopted by the city council at the time of plan review. The applicant shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 95/710
resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee no later than thirty (30) days after the expiration of
the plan review. (Ord. 1491, 5-26-1992)
(D) Investigation Fees; Work Without A Permit: (Rep. by Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
(E) Fee Refunds:
1. The building official may authorize the refunding of any fee paid hereunder which was
erroneously paid or collected.
2. The building official may authorize the refunding of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the
permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.
3. The building official may authorize the refunding of not more than eighty percent (80%) of the
plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is
withdrawn or canceled before any plan reviewing is done.
The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written
application filed by the original permittee not later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the
date of fee payment. (Ord. 1491, 5-26-1992)
Chapter 4
RELOCATION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
4-4-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard public health, safety and
public welfare by regulating and controlling the relocation of buildings and structures. (Ord. 1164, 8-8-
1978)
4-4-2: PERMITS:
(A) Permits Required: No person, firm or corporation shall relocate any building or structure into or
within the city without first obtaining a separate relocation permit for each such building or structure
from the building official. (Ord. 1164, 8-8-1978)
(B) Application: To obtain a relocation permit the applicant shall file in writing an application for a site
plan review as required by section 10-4-9 of this code and for the relocation permit. The applicant
will pay the fees prescribed for the site plan review and a prerelocation inspection of the building or
structure to be relocated. The relocation application shall: (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
1. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which the application is made.
2. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and
street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed
work.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 96/710
3. Indicate the use or occupancy for the proposed building or structure.
4. Be accompanied by four (4) photographs showing each elevation of the building or structure to
be relocated.
5. Be accompanied by plans and specifications drawn to scale showing plot or site, foundation, floor
plan(s), and complete details for any changes proposed for the existing building or structure. The
building official may require such plans and specifications to be prepared and designed by an
architect or engineer licensed by this state.
Computations, stress diagrams and other data sufficient to show the corrections of the plans shall
be submitted when required by the building official.
6. Be signed by the permittee, or his authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to
indicate such authority.
7. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building official. (Ord. 1164, 8-
8-1978)
(C) Relocation Permits: The application, plans and specifications filed by the applicant shall be
reviewed by the building official. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the city to
check compliance with ordinances and laws under their jurisdiction. When the site plan has been
approved, as required in section 10-4-9 of this code, the work described in the relocation application
for the permit and the plans conform to the requirements of this chapter, other pertinent ordinances
and laws, and the fees have been paid and the insurance and bonds deposited as specified below,
a permit may be issued.
1. A relocation permit fee as determined by the building official. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
2. A cash bond, assigned deposit or performance bond of two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00) to provide for any damage to city property or utilities.
3. A liability and property damage insurance policy of five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00).
4. A cash bond, assignment deposit or performance bond based on the estimated cost of the work
to complete the building relocation plus ten percent (10%). This performance bond and insurance
policy must be approved by the city attorney as to form and legal requirements. (Ord. 1164, 8-8-
1978)
4-4-3: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Traffic Hazard: The relocation of buildings or structures shall be performed in such a manner so as
not to create a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or to unreasonably impede such traffic. Forty
eight (48) hours prior to the proposed relocation the permittee shall submit to the building official the
proposed route for the move. The building official will obtain the approval of the city engineer, fire,
police and public works departments. The relocation shall not be started until approval has been
obtained from the building official as to time and route.
(B) Danger To Persons Or Property: The relocation of buildings or structures shall be performed in such
a manner as to not create a hazard to the health and safety of any person or property.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 97/710
(C) Notice To Cease: If, in the opinion of the building official exercising reasonable judgment based
upon a personal inspection at the location, it is determined that the relocation is being performed in
a manner as to create a hazard or danger, the building official shall issue a written stop work notice
to persons relocating the building or structure to cease such hazardous or dangerous activity
immediately. Upon the receipt of such notice all persons engaged in the relocation shall cease such
activity immediately and take such corrective action as may be required by the building official so to
eliminate such hazard or danger. (Ord. 1164, 8-8-1978)
4-4-4: BONDS REQUIRED:
The bonds and insurance referred to in section 4-4-2 of this chapter shall guarantee the performance
by the person(s) relocating the building or structure to:
(A) Keep all streets and sidewalks clear and free of all debris during and after the relocation.
(B) Provide for and erect barricades or overhead protection to prevent damage to publicly owned
improvements.
(C) Leave the site from which the building or structure is relocated in a clean and level condition,
removing from the site all foundations and debris, to fill to grade all holes, depressions or trenches
resulting from the relocation, and to cap the sewer in an approved manner.
(D) Repair all damage done to public or private property in the relocation of a building or structures.
(E) Assure the completion of all work required by the relocation permit within the time designated. (Ord.
1164, 8-8-1978)
4-4-5: FORFEITURE OF BONDS:
The failure of the permittee to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or the permit, the city
shall initiate the forfeiture of the bond(s) to complete the work in accordance with the permit
requirements. (Ord. 1164, 8-8-1978)
4-4-6: COMPLETION:
Upon the completion of the relocation of buildings and structures under the provisions of this chapter
and the permit, the building official shall return the cash bond to the permittee and/or release the
performance bonds. (Ord. 1164, 8-8-1978)
Chapter 5
SIGN REGULATIONS1
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 98/710
(Rep. by Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002)
Chapter 6
MOVING BUILDINGS
(Rep. by Ord. 1164, 8-8-1978)
Chapter 7
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT FEE
(Rep. by Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
Chapter 8
DEVELOPMENT FEES
4-8-1: DEVELOPMENT FEES:
The city of Placerville shall require the payment of fees to defray the costs incidental to the processing
of plans, specifications and inspection of such work. The fees shall be in the amount hereinafter set
forth by resolution of the city council for the following:
(A) Improvements such as sewer, water, drainage, streets, curbs, gutter and sidewalks.
(B) Parcel maps.
(C) Subdivisions. (Ord. 1263, 5-26-1981)
Chapter 9
FLOOD DAMAGE PROTECTION
4-9-1: PURPOSE:
(A) Statutory Authorization: The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code sections
65302, 65560 and 65800 conferred upon local government units authority to adopt regulations
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 99/710
designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city
council of the city of Placerville does ordain as follows:
(B) Findings Of Fact:
1. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation, which results in loss of life
and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base,
all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood
hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage
uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately floodproofed, elevated or otherwise protected
from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss.
(C) Statement Of Purpose: It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and
general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas
by provisions designed:
1. To protect human life and health;
2. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric,
telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of
special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
7. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
8. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their
actions.
(D) Methods Of Reducing Flood Losses: In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes
methods and provisions for:
1. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water
or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;
2. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;
4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage;
and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 100/710
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 1621, 1-22-2008)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to
give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
A ZONE: See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A structure that is either:
(A) Solely for the parking of no more than two (2) cars; or
(B) A small, low cost shed or limited storage, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet and one
thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value.
ACCESSORY USE: A use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land
on which it is located.
ALLUVIAL FAN: A geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped deposit of boulders,
gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows,
and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows,
debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.
APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that
formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
APPEAL: A request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this
chapter.
AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO or AH zone on the flood insurance rate map
(FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet (3'); a clearly defined channel does not
exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such
flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: See definition of Special Flood Hazard Area (SFHA).
BASE FLOOD: A flood which has a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year (also called the 100-year flood). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE,
AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a
one percent (1%) or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor subgrade, i.e., below ground level, on all sides.
BUILDING: See definition of Structure.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not
limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations or storage of equipment or materials.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 101/710
ENCROACHMENT: The advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings,
permanent structures or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a
floodplain.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets,
and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before effective date of the
initial FIRM or after August 9, 1988.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured
homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD BOUNDARY AND FLOODWAY MAP (FBFM): The official map on which the federal
emergency management agency or federal insurance administration has delineated both the areas of
special flood hazards and the floodway.
FLOOD, FLOODING, OR FLOODWATER: (A) A general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid
accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and
(B) The condition resulting from flood related erosion.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): The official map on which the federal emergency
management agency or federal insurance administration has delineated both the areas of special flood
hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: The official report provided by the federal insurance administration that
includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR: The community official designated by this chapter to administer and
enforce the floodplain management regulations.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources
in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works,
floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: This chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and
erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood prone areas.
This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide
standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.
FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source. See definition of Flood, Flooding, Or Floodwater.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet
floodproofing, see FEMA technical bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 102/710
FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be
reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot (1'). Also referred to as regulatory floodway.
FLOODWAY FRINGE: The area of the floodplain on either side of the regulatory floodway where
encroachment may be permitted.
FRAUD AND VICTIMIZATION: As related to section 4-9-6 of this chapter, means that the variance
granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city of
Placerville will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government
responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings
that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to
increased risk of damage from floods, which future owners of the property and the community as a
whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood
damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to
potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.
FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities
that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship
repair facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.
GOVERNING BODY: The local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality that is empowered to adopt
and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.
HARDSHIP: As related to section 4-9-6 of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would
result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city of Placerville requires that the variance be
exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone
is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences,
or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All
of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the
alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a
different use than originally intended.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
(A) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the national register;
(B) Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(C) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the secretary of the interior; or
(D) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation
programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the
secretary of the interior or directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved
programs.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 103/710
LEVEE: A manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with
sound engineering practices.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see definition of
Basement).
(A) An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a
building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements,
including, but not limited to:
1. The flood openings standard in subsection 4-9-5(A)3 of this chapter;
2. The anchoring standards in subsection 4-9-5(A) of this chapter;
3. The construction materials and methods standards in subsection 4-9-5(A)2 of this chapter;
and
4. The standards for utilities in subsection 4-9-5(C) of this chapter.
(B) For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to
be basements (see definition of Basement). This prohibition includes below grade garages and
storage areas.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a
permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to
the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided
into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for sale or rent.
MARKET VALUE: As defined in the city of Placerville substantial damage/improvement procedures.
MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the national flood insurance program, the national geodetic
vertical datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced on or after August 9, 1988, and includes any subsequent improvements to
such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision
for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of the initial
FIRM or after August 9, 1988.
OBSTRUCTION: Includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile,
abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock,
gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 104/710
watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of
water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its
likelihood of being carried downstream.
100-YEAR FLOOD OR ONE HUNDRED YEAR FLOOD: See definition of Base Flood.
PROGRAM DEFICIENCY: A defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or
administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management
regulations.
PUBLIC SAFETY AND NUISANCE: As related to section 4-9-6 of this chapter, means that the granting
of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or
neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use,
in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
(A) Built on a single chassis;
(B) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
(C) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
(D) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than one foot (1').
REMEDY A VIOLATION: To bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local
floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its
noncompliance. Ways that impact may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected
development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or
otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard
to the structure or other development.
RIVERINE: Relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): An area in the floodplain subject to a one percent (1%) or
greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-30,
AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development
and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty
(180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the
construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such
as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does
it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms;
nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual
start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 105/710
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building that is principally aboveground; that includes a gas or
liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring
the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent (50%) of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a
structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure
before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred
substantial damage regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however,
include either:
(A) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
(B) Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure.
VARIANCE: A grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a
manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of
compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation
is provided.
WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD)
of 1929, North American vertical datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various
magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
WATERCOURSE: A lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or
over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in
which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1621, 1-22-2008)
4-9-3: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
(A) Lands To Which This Chapter Applies: This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards
within the jurisdiction of the city.
(B) Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard
identified by the federal emergency management agency or the federal insurance administration in
a scientific and engineering report entitled "Flood Insurance Study (FIS)" dated March 30, 1983,
flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) dated September 30, 1983, and flood boundary and floodway
maps (FBFMs) dated September 30, 1983, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions is
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This flood insurance study is
on file at city hall, 3101 Center Street, Placerville, CA 95667. This flood insurance study is the
minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 106/710
which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city council by the
floodplain administrator.
(C) Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations.
Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements
(including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall
constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city council of the city from taking such
lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
(D) Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another
ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(E) Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.
(F) Warning And Disclaimer Of Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased
by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special
flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This
chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the federal
insurance administration, or the state of California for any flood damages that result from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
(G) Severability: This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable.
Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the
section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 1621, 1-22-2008)
4-9-4: ADMINISTRATION:
(A) Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator: The development services director is hereby
appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in
accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 1621, 1-22-2008; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(B) Duties And Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: The duties and responsibilities of the
floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:
1. Permit Review: Review all development permits to determine:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 107/710
(a) Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial
improvement and substantial damage of existing structures;
(b) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;
(c) The site is reasonably safe from flooding;
(d) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where
base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This
means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base
flood more than one foot (1') at any point;
(e) All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the
issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters
of map revisions (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood
control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition.
2. Use Of Other Base Flood Data: When base flood elevation data has not been provided in
accordance with subsection 4-9-3(B) of this chapter, the floodplain administrator shall obtain,
review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a
federal, state or other source, in order to administer section 4-9-5 of this chapter. Any such
information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption.
3. Changes In Watercourses: Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:
(a) Notify adjacent communities and the California department of water resources prior to such
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the federal
emergency management agency;
(b) Require that the flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse
is maintained.
4. Changes In Base Flood Elevation: Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:
(a) Within six (6) months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever
comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits
technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR).
(b) All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits.
Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs).
Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land
preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition.
Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting
flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on
current data.
5. Changes In Corporate Boundaries: Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries
have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community
clearly delineating the new corporate limits.
6. Documents For Public Inspection: Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available
as needed:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 108/710
(a) The certification required in subsections 4-9-5(A)3(a) and 4-9-5(E) of this chapter (floor
elevations);
(b) The certification required in subsection 4-9-5(A)3(b) of this chapter;
(c) The certification required in subsection 4-9-5(A)3(c) of this chapter;
(d) The certified elevation required in subsection 4-9-5(D)2 of this chapter (subdivision
standards);
(e) The certification required in subsection 4-9-5(F)1 of this chapter (floodway encroachments).
7. Interpretations: Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of
the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a
mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in
section 4-9-6 of this chapter.
8. Remedy Violations: Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in subsection 4-
9-3(C) of this chapter.
(C) Development Permit: A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other
development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in
subsection 4-9-3(B) of this chapter. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms
furnished by the city of Placerville. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:
1. Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:
(a) Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures,
storage or materials and equipment and their location;
(b) Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;
(c) Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage
facilities;
(d) Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;
(e) Base flood elevation information as specified in section 4-9-3 of this chapter;
(f) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
structures; and
(g) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be
floodproofed, as detailed in FEMA technical bulletin TB 3-93.
2. Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed
building meets the floodproofing criteria in section 4-9-5 of this chapter.
3. For a crawl space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as detailed in
FEMA technical bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of
proposed development.
5. All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (B)6 of this section. (Ord. 1621, 1-22-2008)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 109/710
4-9-5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION:
(A) Standards Of Construction: In all areas of special flood hazards, the following standards are
required:
1. Anchoring:
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
(b) All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of subsection (E) of this section.
2. Construction Materials And Methods:
(a) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and
utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
(b) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and
practices that minimize flood damage.
(c) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that
are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
3. Elevation And Floodproofing:
(a) New construction and substantial improvement of any structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures
may meet the standards in subsection (A)3(b) of this section. Upon the completion of the
structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered
professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the community building inspector to be
properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain
administrator.
(b) Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection (A)3(a) of
this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
(1) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
(2) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and
effects of buoyancy; and
(3) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this
subsection be satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.
(c) Require, for all new construction and substantial improvements, that fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 110/710
(1) Either a minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square
inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom
of all openings shall be no higher than one foot (1') above grade. Openings may be equipped
with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
(d) Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in subsection (E) of this section.
(B) Garages And Low Cost Accessory Structures:
1. Attached Garages:
(a) A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the
BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. Areas of the garage below
the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials.
(b) A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry
floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA technical bulletin TB-6.
2. Detached Garages And Accessory Structures:
(a) "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (2 car detached garages or smaller) or limited
storage (small, low cost sheds), as defined in section 4-9-2 of this chapter may be constructed
such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed
and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage;
(2) The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood
resistant materials;
(3) The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and
lateral movement;
(4) Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or
floodproofed to or above the BFE;
(5) The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in subsection
(F) of this section; and
(6) The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in
accordance with subsection (A)3 of this section.
(b) Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be
constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in this section.
(C) Standards For Utilities:
1. All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into
floodwaters.
2. On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination
from them during flooding.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 111/710
(D) Standards For Subdivisions And Other Proposed Development:
1. All preliminary subdivision and other development proposals shall identify the flood hazard area
and the elevation of the base flood.
2. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as built information for each
structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided
as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain
administrator:
(a) Lowest floor elevation.
(b) Pad elevation.
(c) Lowest adjacent grade.
3. All subdivision and other development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage.
4. All subdivision and other development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.
5. All subdivisions and other development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(E) Standards For Manufactured Homes: All new and replacement manufactured homes and additions
to manufactured homes shall:
1. Be elevated so that the lowest floor is at or above the base flood elevation; and
2. Be securely anchored to a permanent foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral
movement.
(F) Floodways: Located within areas of special flood hazard established in subsection 4-9-3(B) of this
chapter are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area
due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the
following provisions apply:
1. Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other
development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided
demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge.
2. If subsection (F)1 of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements
shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. (Ord. 1621,
1-22-2008)
4-9-6: VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
(A) Nature Of Variances: The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only.
Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 112/710
modified by the granting of a variance.
The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that
variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted
for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the
requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the
surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared
by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its
inhabitants, or the property owners.
It is the duty of the city of Placerville to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so
compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so
serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are
quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if
variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more
detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly
granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a
variance are more appropriate.
(B) Appeal Board:
1. The city council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements
of this chapter.
2. The city council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any
requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement
or administration of this chapter.
3. In passing upon such applications, the city council shall consider all technical evaluations, all
relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:
(a) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
(b) The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
(c) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of
such damage on the individual owner;
(d) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;
(e) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;
(f) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding
or erosion damage;
(g) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;
(h) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management
program for that area;
(i) The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(j) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters
expected at the site; and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 113/710
(k) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including
maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water
system, and streets and bridges.
4. Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be
erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with
existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing subsections (B)3(a) through
(B)3(k) of this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half (1/2)
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
5. Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (B)3 of this section and the purposes of this
chapter, the city council of the city may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it
deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.
(C) Conditions For Variances:
1. Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in
section 4-9-2 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
2. Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
3. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum
necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford
relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case
of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city council need not grant permission
for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only
to that elevation which the city council believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity
of the local ordinance.
4. Variances shall only be issued upon:
(a) A showing of good and sufficient cause;
(b) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant; and
(c) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud
on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
5. Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other
development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the
provisions of subsections (C)1 through (C)4 of this section are satisfied and that the structure or
other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood
and create no additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.
6. Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a
community official that:
(a) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in
increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty five dollars
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 114/710
($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage; and
(b) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. A copy of the
notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the El Dorado County
recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected
parcel of land.
7. The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for
their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the federal
emergency management agency. (Ord. 1621, 1-22-2008)
Chapter 10
REIMBURSEMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE
FACILITIES
4-10-1: REIMBURSEMENT FOR CONSTRUCTION OF DRAINAGE FACILITIES:
(A) Persons other than the city may from time to time desire to have the drainage facilities of the city
extended for the purpose of making drainage facilities available to properties lying beyond existing
drainage facilities. The person desiring to extend the drainage facilities must make application with
the city engineer requesting that the drainage facilities be extended and must file with the city
engineer plans and specifications setting forth the manner in which the drainage facilities are to be
extended. The drainage facilities may be extended by the applicant in the event that the city
engineer approves the application, together with the plans and specifications.
(B) In the event the city engineer determines that properties other than the property being developed
by the person constructing the drainage facilities benefits from the construction, the city may enter
into an appropriate reimbursement agreement with the person constructing the drainage facilities.
Said agreement shall provide that the city shall, but without liability therefor, endeavor to collect by
way of building permit or other charge associated with new construction on undeveloped property
and reimburse to such initial developer so much of the construction costs of said drainage facilities
as may be practicably collected from the property owners on the basis of the extent to which said
drainage facilities shall benefit their respective properties.
(C) Each reimbursement agreement with the developer shall be authorized by the council in the same
manner as other contracts. Such reimbursement agreement and the rights therein granted shall be
assignable by the person constructing such drainage facilities in the first instance.
(D) All rights for reimbursement under any reimbursement agreement shall terminate on the tenth
anniversary of the date of the agreement, and the city shall thereafter retain any fees charged for
use of the system.
(E) The area to be benefited shall be determined by the city engineer, and a map designating the area
to be benefited shall be attached to all reimbursement contracts.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 115/710
(F) The determination of benefits may be based either on area or front foot charges, whichever is
determined to be most equitable by the city engineer, and the appropriate allocations of
construction costs shall be based upon the benefits to be derived from each parcel of property. The
determinations of benefit and allocation of cost by the city engineer shall be final and conclusive.
(G) Fees shall be paid as required by section 4-8-1 of this code to defray the costs incidental to the
processing of plans and inspection of such work.
(H) The developer or applicant shall pay all of the initial costs of constructing the drainage facilities as
set forth pursuant to this section. The parties within the area that will benefit from the addition to the
drainage facilities shall pay their proportionate share of the cost at such time as a building permit is
taken out, time to be determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 1463, 11-28-1989)
Chapter 11
DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES
4-11-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard public health, safety and
public welfare by regulating and controlling the demolition of buildings and structures. (Ord. 1469, 7-24-
1990)
4-11-2: PERMITS:
(A) Permits Required: No person, firm or corporation shall demolish any building or structure in the City
without first obtaining a separate demolition permit for each such building or structure from the
building official.
(B) Application: To obtain a demolition permit the applicant must complete and submit a written
application with the Building Division. The demolition application shall:
1. Indicate if the building or structure is within a Historic District or is identified as a historic building
or structure. If the building or structure falls into this category, an application for a site plan review
is required by section 10-4-10 of this Code and must be filed and fees paid.
2. Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which the application is made.
3. Describe the land on which the demolition work is to be done by the lot, block, tract, assessor's
parcel, number and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and
definitely locate the proposed work.
4. Indicate the use and/or occupancy of the building or structure.
5. Include a hazardous materials statement.
6. Be accompanied by photographs of each building or structure to be demolished.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 116/710
7. Be signed by the owner or his authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to
indicate such authority.
8. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building official.
9. To hold the City free and harmless for liability and indemnify the City from any loss or damage.
(C) Demolition Permits: The application and plans filed by the applicant shall be reviewed by the
building official. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the City to assure compliance
with ordinances and laws under their jurisdiction. When a site plan has been approved, the work
described in the demolition application for the permit shall contain any conditions of the approved
site plan. The demolition work shall also be in accordance with other pertinent ordinances and laws.
Fees shall be paid as set by resolution of the City Council and insurance and bonds as specified
below, shall be provided in order that a permit may be issued.
1. A cash bond, assigned deposit or performance bond of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to
provide for damage to City property or utilities.
2. A liability and property damage insurance policy of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
3. A cash bond, assignment deposit or performance bond based on the estimated cost of the work
to complete the demolition plus ten percent (10%). All performance bonds and insurance policies
must be approved by the City Attorney as to form and legal requirements. (Ord. 1469, 7-24-1990)
4-11-3: SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Hazards: The demolition of buildings or structures shall be performed in such a manner as not to
create a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic or to unreasonably impede such traffic. Forty eight
(48) hours prior to the start of demolition the permittee shall notify the building official. Approvals
must be obtained from affected city departments prior to start of any demolition.
(B) Danger To Persons Or Property: The demolition of buildings or structures shall be performed in
such a manner as not to create a hazard to health and safety of any person or property. A four foot
(4') fence and/or pedestrian protection as required by chapter 144 of the building code shall be
installed. The building official may waive the fence requirement for minor demolition work.
(C) Notice To Cease: If, in the opinion of the building official exercising reasonable judgement, based
upon an inspection at the demolition location, it is determined that the demolition is being performed
in a manner as to create a hazard or danger, the building official shall issue a written stop work
notice to persons demolishing the building or structure to cease such hazardous or dangerous
activity immediately. Upon receipt of such notice, all persons engaged in the demolition shall cease
such activity immediately and take such corrective action as may be required by the building official
so as to eliminate such hazard or danger. (Ord. 1469, 7-24-1990)
4-11-4: BONDS REQUIRED:
The bonds and insurance referred to in section 4-11-2 of this chapter shall guarantee the performance
by person(s) demolishing the building(s) or structure(s) to:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 117/710
(A) Keep all streets, sidewalks and other public property clear and free of all debris during and after the
demolition.
(B) Provide for fencing and pedestrian protection for site security, pedestrian protection, and prevent
damage to publicly owned improvements.
(C) Leave the demolition site in a clean and level condition, removing from the site all foundation and
debris, to fill to grade all holes, depressions or trenches resulting from the demolition, and cap to
sewer in an approved manner.
(D) Repair all damage done to public or private property in the demolition of the building(s) or
structure(s).
(E) Assure the completion of all work required by the demolition permit within the time designation.
(Ord. 1469, 7-24-1990)
4-11-5: FORFEITURE OF BONDS:
The failure of the permittee to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, or the permit, the city
shall initiate the forfeiture of the bond(s) to complete the work in accordance with the permit
requirements. (Ord. 1469, 7-24-1990)
4-11-6: COMPLETION:
Upon completion of the demolition of the building(s) and structure(s) under the provisions of this
chapter and the permit, the building official shall return the cash bond(s) and/or release the assignment
deposit(s) and performance bond(s). (Ord. 1469, 7-24-1990)
Chapter 12
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY
SYSTEMS
4-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively
ascribed to them in this section:
ASSOCIATION: A nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of
managing a common interest development.
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT: Any of the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 118/710
(A) A community apartment project.
(B) A condominium project.
(C) A planned development.
(D) A stock cooperative.
ELECTRONIC SUBMITTAL: Utilization of one or more of the following:
(A) E-mail; or
(B) Internet; or
(C) Facsimile.
REASONABLE RESTRICTIONS: Restrictions on a solar energy system that do not significantly
increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that
allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.
RESTRICTIONS THAT DO NOT SIGNIFICANTLY INCREASE THE COST OF THE SYSTEM OR
DECREASE ITS EFFICIENCY OR SPECIFIED PERFORMANCE: (A) For water heater systems or
solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten percent (10%) of the cost of the
system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or decreasing the efficiency of the
solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent (10%), as originally specified and proposed.
(B) For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) over the
system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount
exceeding ten percent (10%) as originally specified and proposed.
SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: All of the following:
(A) A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate
rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.
(B) A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other
building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state and city health and safety
standards.
(C) A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling, and accessory
buildings to the same.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 119/710
(D) A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as
defined by the city.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS: Either of the following:
(A) Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the
collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric
generation, or water heating.
(B) Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the
collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or
cooling, or for water heating.
SPECIFIC, ADVERSE IMPACT: A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on
objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they
existed on the date the application was deemed complete.
STANDARD SOLAR INSTALLATION: A system that meets the "California Solar Permitting Guidebook"
standard plan for installation of solar photovoltaic systems utilizing 2-wire multiple string central
inverters, not exceeding a total AC output of ten (10) kilowatts, in single-family dwellings having a 3-
wire electrical service not larger than two hundred twenty five (225) amps at a voltage of 120/240. The
system includes a standard installation of DC to AC inverters, both micro and central inverters. The
system does not contain batteries, power optimizers and generators. (Ord. 1671, 9-8-2015)
4-12-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that
complies with the solar rights act and AB 2188 (chapter 521, statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost
effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the
use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the
city and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows
the city to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 1671, 9-8-2015)
4-12-3: APPLICABILITY:
(A) This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.
(B) Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective
date hereof are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or
alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop
energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or
like kind parts replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 1671, 9-8-2015)
4-12-4: SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 120/710
(A) All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements
imposed by the state, the city and local fire district.
(B) Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in
commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as
defined by the California plumbing and mechanical codes.
(C) Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance
standards established by the California electrical code, the Institute Of Electrical And Electronics
Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where
applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 1671, 9-8-
2015)
4-12-5: DUTIES OF THE BUILDING DIVISION AND BUILDING OFFICIAL:
(A) All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be
made available on the publicly accessible city website.
(B) When possible, electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by e-mail, the
internet, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system
permit applicants.
(C) An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other
documents in lieu of a wet signature.
(D) The city's building division shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which
small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.
(E) The small photovoltaic residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and
checklist(s) shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the
checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the "California Solar
Permitting Guidebook" adopted by the governor's office of planning and research.
(F) An installation compliance checklist by the building official will be checked and signed by the solar
installer as having met all the requirements applicable to the installation. (Ord. 1671, 9-8-2015)
4-12-6: PERMIT REVIEW AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS:
(A) The city building division shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite
approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. The building division shall issue a
building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within three (3) business days for electronic
applications of receipt of a deemed complete application and meets the requirements of the
approved checklist and standard plan. The building official may determine that the proposed solar
energy system is not subject to the expedited permitting process if the official finds based on
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 121/710
substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the
public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the development services director.
(B) Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's or designee's review of whether
the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.
(C) The applicant shall verify to reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering
evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy
system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with
the system to the building foundation.
(D) The applicant shall verify to reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques
that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as
main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's
current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.
(E) A building official may deny an application for the use permit if the building official makes written
findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a
specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to
satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis
for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such
decisions may be appealed to the development services director.
(F) Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact
upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.
(G) "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is
not limited to, any cost effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another
similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best
efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of
subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of amended section 714 of the Civil
Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its
efficiency or specified performance.
(H) The city shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association or similar
group, as defined in section 4080 of the Civil Code.
(I) If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the
application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited
permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.
(J) Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division for small residential
rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. A separate fire inspection may be
performed if an agreement with the local fire authority does not exist to perform safety inspections
on behalf of the fire authority.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 122/710
(K) The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An
inspection will be scheduled within two (2) business days of a request and provide a four (4) hour
P.M. inspection window. The building official may require the presence of the installer or
representative of the installing company during the final inspection or subsequent inspections.
(L) If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is
authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1671, 9-8-2015)
4-12-7: FEES:
All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems must comply with
state Health And Safety Code section 17951 and Government Code amended section 66015. The city
shall not charge a residential permit fee that exceeds the estimated reasonable cost of providing the
service for which the fee is charged. A fee based on the number of hours for service for a solar permit
and inspection time provided is two hundred dollars ($200.00) unless determined the proposed system
is more than a standard installation. The permit fee shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00)
plus fifteen dollars ($15.00) per kilowatt for each kilowatt above ten (10) kilowatts. (Ord. 1671, 9-8-
2015)
4-12-8: SEVERABILITY:
(A) If any section, subsection, phrase, or clause of this chapter is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(B) The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section,
subsection, phrase or clause thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, phrases, or clauses be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 1671, 9-8-2015)
Title 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, Res 8479 - PROHIBITING
NONMEDICAL MARIJUANA . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
GENERAL LICENSES
5-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 123/710
BUSINESS: Includes professions, trades, and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or
not carried on for profit.
CITY: The city of Placerville, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present
incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged, or reincorporated form.
COLLECTOR: The city tax collector, city clerk/finance director, or other city officer charged with the
administration of this chapter.
EMPLOYEE: A person who works for an employer, where right or control exists with such employer,
where directions on performance of work can be given by employer and where breach of contract is not
involved if work is halted by employer or employee; evidence that a person is included on the payroll of
an employer, and deductions for federal or state income taxes, disability insurance, social security
taxes are taken from the earnings of such person, and the employer pays payroll taxes on the earnings
paid such person, is prima facie proof that such person is an employee.
PERSONS: Includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock
corporations, partnerships of every kind, club, business, or common law trusts, societies, and
individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than as an employee.
SALE: Includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for
consideration; the serving, supplying, or furnishing for a consideration of any property; and a
transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security
for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definition shall not be
deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the
contemplation of law.
SWORN STATEMENT: A written declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1354,
4-10-1984)
5-1-2: PURPOSE OF CHAPTER:
This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes, and is not intended for
regulation. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-3: EFFECT OF OTHER ORDINANCES:
Person required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter
shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business
required under any other ordinance of the city, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of
other ordinances. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-4: LICENSE TAX PAYMENT REQUIRED:
There are hereby imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings, and occupations
specified in this chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling, or occupation in the city
without first having procured a license from said city so to do and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed
or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter. This section shall not be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 124/710
construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such
requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or the state. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-5: BRANCH ESTABLISHMENTS:
A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business
transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each
license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the
location or in the manner designated in such license, provided that warehouses and distributing plants
used in connection with, and incidental to, a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter
shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. Any person
conducting two (2) or more types of businesses at the same location and under the same
management, or at different locations, but which businesses use a single set or integrated set of books
and records, may, at his/her option, pay only one tax calculated on the highest tax for the businesses
under the schedule that applies to the type of business of such person, except that a license tax equal
to one-half (1/2) of the original tax for each additional branch or location shall be paid upon issuance.
(Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-6: EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS:
When any person shall, by use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone books, or newspapers, advertise,
hold out, or represent that he/she is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license
or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he/she is in business in the city, and such
person fails to deny by sworn statement given to the collector that he/she is not conducting a business
in the city after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima
facie evidence that he/she is conducting a business in the city. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-7: EXEMPTIONS:
No person engaged in any business described in this section shall be required to pay any tax or fee
prescribed in this chapter, and such persons are exempted from payment thereof.
Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the
collector stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed, and in the absence of such statement
substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the taxes imposed by this
chapter.
The collector, shall upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a license to such
person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by
this chapter.
The collector, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke
any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not
entitled to the exemption as provided herein.
The following are the businesses declared to be exempt by this section:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 125/710
(A) Charitable And Nonprofit Organizations: Any church, school, charitable, benevolent, or social
organization conducting any exhibition, show, or performance for the exclusive benefit of such
organization. Also any such organization conducting any sale or business for the exclusive benefit
of such organization provided such organization is located within the corporate limits of the city. This
exemption shall not apply to any person operating any business, show, sale, exhibition, or
enterprise for profit who shares such profit with any such organization.
(B) Conflict With Federal And State Law: Any business exempt by virtue of the constitution or
applicable statutes of the United States or of the state from the payment to municipal corporations
of such taxes as are prescribed by this chapter.
(C) Employees: No person who is an employee or who is the direct representative of a licensee shall
be required to pay a license tax for doing any part of the work of such licensee, except for peddlers
and solicitors.
(D) Minors: Businesses owned and conducted by persons under the age of sixteen (16) years where all
of the following conditions exist:
1. All persons engaged in the operation of the business shall be under the age of sixteen (16)
years.
2. All persons engaged in the operation of the business shall have a bona fide ownership interest in
the business.
(E) Franchises: Any business which pays franchise taxes to the city. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-8: CONTENTS OF LICENSE:
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application as
hereinafter prescribed for the same to the collector of the city, and upon the payment of the prescribed
license tax, the collector shall issue to such person a license which shall contain the following
information:
(A) The name of the person to whom the license is issued.
(B) The business licensed.
(C) The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on.
(D) The date of the expiration of such license.
(E) Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 126/710
Whenever the tax imposed under the provisions of this chapter is from the operation of devices,
machines, or other pieces of equipment, the collector shall issue only one license to the applicant.
(Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-9: APPLICATION FOR FIRST LICENSE:
Upon a person making application for the first license to be issued hereunder or for a newly established
business, such person shall furnish to the collector a statement upon a form provided by the collector,
setting forth the following information:
(A) The exact nature of kind of business for which a license is requested.
(B) The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any
permanent place of business, the places of residences of the owners of same.
(C) In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under
a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning
said business.
(D) In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a
partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of the officers or
partners thereof.
(E) In all cases where the amount of license tax to be paid is measured by the number of employees or
annual payroll, the application shall set forth such information as may be therein required and as
may be necessary to determine the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant.
(F) Any further information which the collector may require to enable him to issue the type of license for
which an application has been made.
If the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant is measured by number of employees or
annual payroll, he/she shall estimate the number of employees or annual payroll for the period to be
covered by the license to be issued. Such information shall be considered strictly confidential by the
city, and the divulgence of any such information shall be grounds for disciplinary action pursuant to the
personnel code of the city1. Such estimate, if accepted by the collector as reasonable, shall be used in
determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant. The collector shall not reissue to any
such person another license for the same or another business until such person shall have furnished to
the collector a statement upon a form furnished by the collector showing the number of employees or
employee payroll during the period of such license, in order that the license tax may be finally
ascertained for that business. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-10: RENEWAL LICENSE:
Each year when the business licenses that are measured by employee payroll or number of employees
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 127/710
become due and payable, the business owners shall, upon request, submit to the collector for his/her
guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the business owners, a statement
upon a form to be provided by the collector setting forth such information concerning the applicant's
business during the preceding year as may be required by the collector to enable him/her to ascertain
the amount of the license tax to be paid by said applicant pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
Such information shall be considered strictly confidential by the city, and the divulgence of any such
information shall be grounds for disciplinary action pursuant to the personnel code of the city. (Ord.
1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-11: STATEMENTS AND RECORDS:
No statements shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth herein, nor shall the filing of the same
preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable
hereunder. Such statement and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to audit
and verification by the collector, his/her deputies, or authorized employees of the city who are hereby
authorized to examine, audit, and inspect such books and records of any licensee or applicant for
license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license fee due.
(Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-12: INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL:
It shall be unlawful for the collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of
this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations, or information
obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or
pay a license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the
amount of source of income, profits, losses, expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any
statement or application, or to permit any statement or application or copy of either or any book
containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person. Divulgence of any
such information shall be grounds for disciplinary action pursuant to the personnel code of the city;
provided that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:
(A) The disclosure to, or the examination of, records and equipment by another city official, employee,
or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of
this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder.
(B) The disclosure of information to, or the examination of, records by federal or state officials, or the
tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a
grand jury of court of law, upon subpoena.
(C) The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, to a
court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability
of the particular taxpayers to the city.
(D) The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer, or to his
successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees, and guarantors, if directly
interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax, or
amount of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 128/710
city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the collector may refuse to make any
disclosure referred to in this paragraph when in his/her opinion the public interest would suffer
thereby.
(E) The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued and the
general type or nature of their business.
(F) The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to
the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim
for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to claim asserted against
him/her by the city for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter.
(G) The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord.
1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-13: FAILURE TO FILE STATEMENT OR CORRECTED STATEMENT:
If any person fails to file any required statement, or if after demand made by the collector, he/she fails
to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails to apply
for a license, the collector may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of
such information as he may be able to obtain.
If the collector is not satisfied with the information supplied in statements or applications filed, he/she
may determine the amount of any license tax due by means of any information he/she may be able to
obtain.
If such a determination is made, the collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving
it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Placerville, California, postage
prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at his/her last known address. Such person may, within
fifteen (15) days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the collector
for a hearing on the amount of the license tax and shall pay a nonrefundable thirty dollar ($30.00) filing
fee. If such application is made, the collector shall cause the matter to be set for a hearing within thirty
(30) days before the city council. The collector shall give at least fifteen (15) days notice to such person
of the time and place that the hearing will be held. The council shall consider all evidence produced
and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the
applicant in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-14: APPEAL:
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue
such license may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk and paying a
nonrefundable thirty dollar ($30.00) filing fee. The city clerk shall thereupon fix a time and place for
hearing such an appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing
by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States post office at Placerville, California,
postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his/her last known address. The city council shall have
the authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with
any substantive provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 129/710
5-1-15: EXTENSION OF TIME FOR FILING STATEMENT OF APPLICATION:
In addition to all other authority conferred upon him/her, the collector shall have the authority, for good
cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required statement or application for a period not
exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case as to waive any penalty that would otherwise have
accrued. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-16: LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE; CHANGED LOCATION AND OWNERSHIP:
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable, provided that where a license is issued
authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon
application therefor and paying a fee of ten dollars ($10.00) have the license amended to authorize the
transacting and carrying on of such business under such license at some other location to which the
business is to be moved; provided, further, that transfer to another person under such circumstances
that the real or ultimate ownership after the transfer is substantially similar to the ownership existing
before the transfer, shall not be prohibited by this section. For the purpose of this section, stockbroker,
bondholders, partnerships, or other persons holding an interest in a corporation or another entity herein
defined to be a person, are regarded as having the real or ultimate ownership of such corporation or
other entity. Any change in ownership of a business shall require that the new owner file an application,
and upon approval by the city, he/she shall pay the applicable business license fee, which may be
prorated to no less than six (6) months fees for the appropriate classification. The transferor shall not
be entitled to a refund of any amount of the unexpired license tax fee. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-17: DUPLICATE LICENSE:
A duplicate license may be issued by the collector to replace any license previously issued by the
collector, which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing statement of such fact and at the
time of filing such statement, paying to the collector a duplicate license fee of ten dollars ($10.00).
(Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-18: POSTING AND KEEPING LICENSES:
Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the
license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is being conducted.
Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the
city shall keep the license upon his/her person at all times while transacting and carrying on the
business for which it is issued. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-19: LICENSE TAX; HOW AND WHEN PAYABLE:
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all license taxes shall be paid on an annual basis and shall be
due and payable on September 1 of each year; provided that license taxes covering new operations,
commenced after March 1, may be prorated for the balance of the license period, but not for less than
six (6) months. Licenses, other than for an annual period, shall not be prorated.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 130/710
Except as otherwise herein provided, license taxes, other than annual, required hereunder shall be due
and payable as follows:
(A) Daily flat rate license taxes each day in advance.
(B) Other flat rate license taxes are payable in advance on the first day of business and thereafter on
the first day of any applicable period. (Ord. 1495, 7-28-1992)
5-1-20: PENALTY FOR DEFAULT:
To every license provided for in this chapter, there shall be a penalty of ten percent (10%) per month of
the amount of the license imposed, with a maximum of five (5) months, if the license is not paid by the
specified time set forth on the billing notice, and the same shall be collected and the payment thereof
shall be enforced in the same manner as other licenses are collected and payment thereof enforced.
(Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-21: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the collector, and he/she is hereby directed to enforce each and all of the
provisions of this chapter, and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement
hereof as may from time to time be required by the collector or the city council. The collector, in the
exercise of the duties imposed upon him/her hereunder, and acting through his/her deputies or duly
authorized assistants, may examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to
ascertain whether the businesses have complied with the provisions of this chapter. The collector and
each and all of his/her assistants and any police officer assigned to do so, shall have the authority to
enter, free of charge, and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed herein,
and request an exhibition of its license. Any person having such license theretofore issued in his/her
possession or under his/her control, who wilfully fails to exhibit the same on demand, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor. It shall be the duty of the collector and each of his assistants to cause a complaint to
be filed against any and all persons found to be violating any of said provisions. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-22: LICENSE TAX A DEBT:
The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
debt to the city. Legal action may be commenced in the said city for the amount of any delinquent
license tax penalties. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-23: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city
shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (Ord.
1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-24: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 131/710
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or knowingly or intentionally misrepresenting
to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring the license herein provided for, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-25: EFFECT OF ORDINANCE ON PAST ACTIONS, UNEXPIRED LICENSES:
Neither the adoption of this chapter nor its superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city
shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed
prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision
applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit
required by any ordinance to be posted, filed, or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunder
pertaining shall continue in full force and effect.
Where a license for revenue purposes has been issued to any person by the city and the tax paid for
the business for which the license has been issued under the provisions of any ordinance heretofore
enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license tax prescribed for such business
by this chapter shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. (Ord.
1354, 4-10-1984)
5-1-26: LICENSE FEES:
Hereafter, license fees are to be established by resolution of the city council. The rate and amount of
license fee which shall be paid to the city by every person engaged in conducting or carrying on any
occupation, within the city, are established as follows: (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
(A) Low category: Sixty two dollars ($62.00). (Res. 5534, 7-14-1992)
In addition to the specific business classifications listed below, this category includes any business
which is solely owner operated with no employees.
Barber/beauty shops.
Bed and breakfast.
Chimney sweeps.
Dancing academy.
Handyman.
Hauling service.
Home occupations.
Janitorial service.
Junk collectors.
Nurses, private (contract).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 132/710
Pool and billiard tables, as an ancillary use.
Scavenger.
Secretarial service.
Shoe repair.
Tailor.
Teachers, private.
Towing service.
Wood service.
Yard/gardening service. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
(B) Regular category: One hundred twenty two dollars ($122.00). Includes occupations general. Any
business for profit not herein specifically licensed. (Res. 5534, 7-14-1992)
1. This is the general category for all businesses not fitting the criteria for low, special, or high
categories, including, but not limited to:
Advertising. For every person carrying on the business of advertising by means of billposting,
sign advertising, billboards, advertising signboards, theater film trailers, or any other method of
advertising.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed or construed as applying to the owners of real estate
or their agents in advertising their property for sale or lease by means of billposting, or other
advertising display, billboards, or advertising signboards, located upon the property advertised
for sale or lease, or within the office of the real estate agent; provided, further, that nothing in
this subsection shall be deemed or construed as applying to any person licensed to conduct a
business within the city in advertising such business, either by means of billposting, advertising
display, billboards, theater film trailers, or advertising signboards.
Ambulance. For every person conducting the business of operating an ambulance service.
Auto repair shops. For every person engaged in the business of operating an auto repair shop.
Collection agencies. For every person carrying on the business of collecting debts, claims, or
demands, and known as a collection agency.
Contractors. All contractors engaged in the business of contracting, whether general contractors
or subcontractors. A contractor under the terms of this chapter shall be deemed all persons
accepting contracts for the performance of any work in the following trades or occupations:
Brick masons.
Carpenters.
Concrete workers.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 133/710
Electricians.
Excavating work for laying or construction of sewers.
Grading.
House movers.
Painters.
Paper hangers.
Paving.
Plasterers.
Plumbers.
Any other craft relating to building.
Before any building permit is issued, it shall be the duty of the building official to ascertain if all
contractors to be engaged upon the work of the building shall have first obtained a license as
required by this section.
Dairy. For every person engaged in the business of operating a dairy.
Dry cleaning. For every person engaged in the business of cleaning and pressing clothing or
wearing apparel, being a business commonly known as dry cleaning.
Laboratories. For every person engaged in the business of a laboratory.
Laundromats. For every person operating a laundromat.
Lunch counter. A "lunch counter" shall be defined as a place serving light meals, but not serving
three (3) bona fide meals a day or dinner at night.
Machine shops. For every person engaged in the business of operating a machine shop.
Manufacturing. For every person conducting the business of manufacturing.
Newspaper. For every person engaged in the business of providing a newspaper service.
Pawnbroker. For every person carrying on the business of a pawnbroker.
Photographer. For every person engaged in the business of photographer.
Printing office. For every person engaged in conducting a printing office.
Professions. Every person engaged in any of the following professions:
Architect.
Attorney.
Certified public accountant.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 134/710
Chiropractor.
Dentist.
Engineer.
Funeral director, embalmer, or cremator.
Hypnotherapist.
Insurance brokers.
Oculist.
Optician.
Optometrist.
Orthodontist.
Physical therapist.
Physician.
Podiatrist.
Radiologist.
Real estate broker.
Stockbroker.
Surgeon.
Veterinarian.
Public dances, exhibitions, and entertainment. For every person conducting any public dance,
entertainment, or exhibition where admission is charged. For the purpose of this section,
entertainment or exhibitions shall be construed as including the following: boxing matches,
wrestling matches, athletic contests, or exhibitions where the performers are paid for their
services or by a fixed salary or by a percentage of the receipts, lectures, minstrels, theatrical
exhibitions, musical entertainments and concerts, or any and all other exhibitions or
entertainments given for the purpose of entertaining the public at which an admission is charged;
provided, however, that nothing in this subsection shall be deemed or construed as requiring a
separate license from a person licensed to conduct a theater in the city, it being expressly
provided that any person holding a license to conduct a theater in the city shall not be required to
obtain a license under this subsection; and provided, further, that no license to conduct any of the
dances, boxing matches, athletic contests, or exhibitions where the performers are paid for their
services by a fixed salary or by a percentage of the receipts at which an admission is charged
when fifty percent (50%) or more of the receipts from the dance, boxing match, wrestling match,
athletic contest, or exhibition is to be appropriated to any church, school, fraternal organization, or
society for any benevolent or charitable purpose; and when the dance, boxing match, wrestling
match, athletic contest, or exhibition is to be managed, conducted, held or carried on for the
purpose of any church, school, religious, or benevolent purpose or for any fraternal or charitable
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 135/710
organization, no license shall be charged.
Radio station. For every person engaged in the business of providing radio service.
Residential care home. For engaging in the business of providing twenty four (24) hour a day
residential care services, which includes room, board, and assisting with personal supervision.
Sign painter, sign contractor. For every person engaged in the business of sign painting or
window lettering, or every person engaged in the business of contracting for the construction,
erection, and repair of signs.
Storage. For every person conducting the business of storehouses or warehouses for the storage
of goods, merchandise, baggage, or household furniture or goods.
Taxicab service. For every person engaged in the business of providing a taxi service.
Telegraph office. For every person carrying on the business of telegraphing.
Television station. For every person engaged in the business of providing television service.
Transfer and express business. For every person carrying on the business of running, driving, or
operating any automobile, truck, or any other motor propelled vehicle used for the transportation
of baggage, express, freight, household goods, merchandise, or materials. The license fees in
this subsection shall not apply to any person operating any such vehicle in connection with any
commercial business where a license is herein otherwise specifically imposed upon the business.
Merchant. For every person whose business is buying and selling goods for a profit and engages
in any one or more enterprises in which personal property, other than meals, is sold or offered for
sale. (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
(C) High category: Three hundred seventy eight dollars ($378.00). (Res. 5534, 7-14-1992)
All businesses, regardless of prior classification, employing twenty (20) or more employees and
having a total payroll of over two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00). (Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984)
(D) Special category: As specified:
Auctioneer $ 29.00 per day
Amusements 152.00 per day
Auto courts, motels and hotels:
12 units or less
Over 12 units
62.00
122.00
Banking, finance and title companies 200.00
Bowling alley 152.00
Card room 456.00 (plus $62.00
per table over 6
tables)
Christmas trees, pumpkin sales or other harvest product sales (also
requires conditional use permit by planning commission)
75.00
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 136/710
Circus 152.00
County fair 500.00
Flea markets (also requires use permit by planning commission) 456.00 (or $27.00 per
day per person)
Fortune teller 303.00
Helicopter businesses 150.00
Itinerant merchant (requires approval of chief of police and conditional
use permit from planning commission)
75.00 per day (not to
exceed $300.00 for
any 7 consecutive
days)
Laundry 227.00
Nightclub/cabaret (for the operation of a restaurant and/or barroom with
dancing and/or live entertainment)
152.00
Peddler, solicitor (requires 48 hour review and approval by the chief of
police)
75.00 per day (not to
exceed $300.00 for
any 7 consecutive
days)
Restaurant:
10 employees or less
More than 10 employees
122.00
227.00
Skating rink 152.00
Telephone utility 378.00
Theater 152.00
Vendors (for every person engaged in the business of supplying and
locating automatic vending and/or music machines to established
businesses where a fee is charged to play music or dispense a product)
152.00
(Ord. 1354, 4-10-1984; amd. Ord. 1432, 1-26-1988; Res. 5071, 6-13-1989)
Business license fees shall be adjusted annually according to the consumer price index for all urban
consumers as of July 1 of each year and become effective thereafter on September 1 of each year.
(Res. 5534, 7-14-1992)
Chapter 2
SALES AND USE TAX
5-2-1: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM LOCAL SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord.
1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-2: RATE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 137/710
The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent (1%). (Ord. 1044, 10-
30-1973)
5-2-3: OPERATIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be operative on January 1, 1974. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-4: PURPOSE:
The city council hereby declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other
purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
(A) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations
contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
(B) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales
and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the
requirements and limitations contained in part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;
(C) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that
can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself
as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and
administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting
the California state sales and use taxes;
(D) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the
degree possible consistent with the provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the
burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-5: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
Prior to the operative date this city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all
functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided,
that if this city shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date,
it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first
calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar
quarter following the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-6: SALES TAX:
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 138/710
in the city at the rate stated in section 5-2-2 of this chapter of the gross receipts of the retailer from the
sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord.
1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-7: PLACE OF SALE:
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the
retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of
state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and
use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent
place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the
retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by the state board of equalization. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-8: USE TAX:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible
personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other
consumption in this city at the rate stated in section 5-2-2 of this chapter of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or
use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-9: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1 of
division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as
though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-10: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, whenever the state
of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted
therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "state" is used as part of the title
of the state controller, the state treasurer, the state of California; the substitution shall not be made
when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any
agency thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions
incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those
sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the
state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax
with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which
would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption
remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of
tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under said provisions of that
code; the substitution shall not be made in sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof),
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 139/710
6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be
made for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in section 6203 or in
the definition of that phrase in section 6203. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-11: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code,
an additional seller's permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-12: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS:
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:
(A) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.
(B) The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the
sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in
accordance with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county,
county, or city in this state.
(C) The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased
by, operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation
of such common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this city.
(D) The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons,
property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the
manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate or foreign commerce by
public utilities which are regulated by the public utilities commission of the state. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-
1973)
5-2-13: EXCLUSIONS AND EXEMPTIONS1:
(A) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer.
(B) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the
sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance
with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city,
in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.
(C) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sale tax the gross receipts from the
sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside
the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 140/710
carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any
foreign government.
(D) In addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation
Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators
of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such
aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of
public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or
any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 1342, 12-13-1983)
5-2-14: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS RELATING TO EXCLUSIONS AND
EXEMPTIONS:
(A) Section 5-2-13 of this chapter shall become operative on January 1 of the year following the year in
which the state board of equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state assessed property which
is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, at which time section 5-2-12 of this chapter shall become inoperative.
(B) In the event that section 5-2-13 of this chapter becomes operative and the state board of
equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state assessed property which is
higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, section 5-2-12 of this chapter shall become operative on the first day of the month
following the month in which such higher ratio is adopted, at which time section 5-2-13 of this
chapter shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the board
again adopts an assessment ratio for state assessed property which is identical to the ratio required
for local assessments by section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time section 5-2-
13 of this chapter shall again become operative and section 5-2-12 of this chapter shall become
inoperative. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-15: AMENDMENTS:
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax
and which are not inconsistent with part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall
automatically become a part of this ordinance. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-16: ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or
proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to
prevent or enjoin the collection under this ordinance, or part 1.5 of division 2 of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax or any amount of tax required to be collected2. (Ord.
1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-17: PENALTIES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 141/710
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor,
and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in California Penal Code section 19. (Ord.
1578, 8-28-2001)
5-2-18: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this ordinance or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, the remainder of the ordinance and the application of such provision to other persons or
circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
5-2-19: REPEALS:
Ordinance 783, as amended by ordinances 825 and 874, is hereby repealed; provided, however, that
said ordinance, as amended, shall remain applicable for the purposes of the administration of said
ordinance and the imposition of and the collection of tax with respect to the sales of, and the storage,
use, or other consumption of tangible personal property prior to January 1, 1974, the making of
refunds, effecting credits, the disposition of monies collected, and for the commencement or
continuance of any action or proceeding under said ordinance. (Ord. 1044, 10-30-1973)
Chapter 3
HANDBILLS
(Rep. by Ord. 1570, 5-8-2001)
Chapter 4
SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
5-4-1: PERMIT AND LICENSE REQUIRED:
Every person who operates the business of selling or peddling tickets, checks or coupons to be used in
payment or part payment for picture frames, pictures, portraits, photographs, or the enlarging or
retouching of the same or who engages in the taking of photographs and every person engaged in the
business of selling, offering for sale, or taking orders for or soliciting the sale of any goods, wares,
merchandise, or other personal property the subject of sale or trade, whether for present or future
delivery, on any street, public place, or vacant lot, or by a house to house canvass or by traveling from
place to place in the city, including sales by sample and also including the taking or soliciting of orders
for future delivery of photographs, portraits, prints, pictures, newspapers, magazines, clothing, fixtures,
machines, appliances, and all other articles or things to be made, produced, combined or
manufactured, and every person employed by such person to solicit business shall first secure a permit
from the chief of police and a license from the tax collector. (Ord. 768, 5-19-1955)
5-4-2: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 142/710
Every person requiring a permit as provided for herein shall make written application to the chief of
police for the permit on forms provided by the police department. The application shall be accompanied
by fingerprints of the applicant, shall contain all information deemed relevant by the chief of police and
shall contain in addition thereto the name, business or occupation and resident address of each person
financially interested in the business. Permits requested by persons acting as solicitors for the person
conducting, carrying on or managing the business shall be first authorized, in writing, by the person
engaging, employing or hiring the person. "Solicitors" shall mean every person acting as servant, agent
or employee of the person conducting, carrying on or managing the business. (Ord. 768, 5-19-1955)
5-4-3: INVESTIGATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF PERMIT:
Upon receipt of the application, the chief of police shall conduct such investigation as he may deem
proper as to the character and morals of the applicant and the character of the business to be
conducted. No permit shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony, petty theft or a
crime involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 768, 5-19-1955)
5-4-4: PERMIT FORWARDED TO TAX COLLECTOR:
When any permit is issued under the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall cause the
permit to be forwarded to the office of the tax collector for delivery to the permittee upon the payment of
the license fee as prescribed by chapter 1 of this title. The permit shall be carried by the permittee at all
times and exhibited upon request. (Ord. 768, 5-19-1955)
5-4-5: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The chief of police may revoke any permit issued hereunder when the permittee is violating or
attempting to violate any law of the state or the city. (Ord. 768, 5-19-1955)
5-4-6: LICENSEE; COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
The issuance of a permit or license under the provisions of this chapter shall not exempt the permittee
from any other provisions of this code requiring a permit or license or otherwise regulating the business
defined herein. (Ord. 768, 5-19-1955)
5-4-7: INVESTIGATION FEE:
At the time of filing with the chief of police the application for a license, the applicant shall pay a fee as
set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1300, 5-25-1982)
5-4-8: APPEAL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 143/710
Any person aggrieved by the action of the chief of police or by the tax collector in the denial of a license
shall have the right to appeal to the council. The appeal shall be taken by filing with the council, within
fourteen (14) days after notice of the denial, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds of
appeal. The council shall set a time and place for a hearing on the appeal and notice of the hearing
shall be given to the appellant by mailing a notice, postage prepaid, to the appellant at his last known
address at least five (5) days prior to the date set for hearing. The decision and order of the council on
the appeal shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 768, 5-19-1955)
5-4-9: EXCEPTIONS TO CHAPTER:
This chapter shall not apply to those who are classified and are paying a city license as either a
resident merchant or a nonresident merchant, nor to the employees, of a resident or nonresident
merchant. (Ord. 768, 5-19-1955)
Chapter 5
TAXICABS
Article I. General
5-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
CITY MANAGER: The city manager or his or her designee.
DIRECTOR: The city director of finance or his or her designee.
TAXICAB: Every motor propelled vehicle, except sightseeing and interurban busses, used solely or
mainly for the transportation of passengers for compensation over the public streets of the city,
irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the city, and between such
points and over such route as may be directed by the passenger.
TAXIMETER: Shall be held to mean and embrace any instrument or device attached to a vehicle and
designed or intended to measure mechanically the distance traveled by such vehicle, to record the time
the vehicle is in waiting, and to indicate upon such record by figures or designs the fare to be charged
in dollars and cents. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-2: CONTINUING INSPECTION OF VEHICLES:
In addition to the inspection specified in subsection 5-5-5(F) of this chapter, the city manager or the
chief of police, subject to the approval of the city manager, shall, in their sole discretion, have the
authority to require additional inspections of taximeters, lamps, brakes, and emission control, and if it is
found that the taxicab or equipment is in such condition that its operation is in violation of the state
Vehicle Code, the city manager shall, in accordance with the provisions of state Vehicle Code section
24004, prohibit the use of such taxicab until such time as it has been brought into compliance with the
state Vehicle Code. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 144/710
5-5-3: EXEMPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the operation of taxicabs transporting passenger(s):
(A) From a point outside the city to a destination within the city; or
(B) En route from a point outside the city to a destination outside the city. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
Article II. Taxicab Vehicular Permit
5-5-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a taxicab without first
obtaining a taxicab vehicular permit for each taxicab as required by this article. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-5: PERMIT PROCEDURE:
Applications for a taxicab vehicular permit shall be filed with the director and shall contain the following:
(A) The individual and business name, address, and telephone number of the permit applicant.
(B) Written evidence that the applicant is an owner, lessee or holder of a similar interest in the taxicab.
(C) The name and address of all legal and registered owner(s) of the taxicab, and each person with a
financial interest in the business which operates the taxicab.
(D) The state vehicle license number of the taxicab.
(E) A city certificate of insurance, establishing compliance with section.
(F) A state certificate of compliance or other writing, dated not more than six (6) months preceding the
application date, issued by a state certified examiner or examiners, and evidencing that the taxicab
complies with prevailing state smog, lamp and brake equipment standards.
(G) The serial number of the taximeter attached to the taxicab.
(H) An annual nonprorateable permit fee, as established by resolution of the city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 145/710
(I) Such other information as may be required to further the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-
1984)
5-5-6: PERMIT ISSUANCE AND DENIAL:
(A) A taxicab vehicular permit shall be issued by the director upon receipt of a complete application, as
specified in section 5-5-5 of this article.
(B) All taxicab vehicular permits shall expire on the calendar year following the date of issuance unless
sooner revoked.
(C) A taxicab vehicular permit shall authorize the operation of a single taxicab and taximeter and shall
not be transferable to any other vehicle or taximeter.
(D) A taxicab vehicular permit may be denied by the director on the following grounds:
1. The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the permit
applicant.
2. The applicant has been convicted of a crime which, in the opinion of the chief of police, is
substantially related to the qualifications, function or duties of a taxicab owner or owners of a
taxicab business. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-7: POSTING REQUIREMENT:
There shall be displayed in the taxicab passenger compartment in full view of any passenger:
(A) A copy of a valid permit issued pursuant to this article;
(B) A copy of the rate schedule identical to the rate schedule established pursuant to resolution of the
city council;
(C) The register display of the taximeter. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-8: RATE SCHEDULE AMENDMENT:
The rates to be charged for the hire of a taxicab shall be established by resolution of the city council.
The city may, upon application made by any permittee, amend the resolution establishing the rates to
be charged for taxi service. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-9: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 146/710
During the term of a permit issued pursuant to this article, the permittee or owner(s) of a taxicab
authorized by the permit shall maintain in full force and effect at no cost to the city a comprehensive
auto and general liability insurance policy:
(A) In an amount no less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) single limit per occurrence;
and
(B) Issued by an admitted insurer or insurers as defined by the California Insurance Code; and
(C) Providing that the city, its officers, employees and agents are to be named as additional insureds
under the policy. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-10: INDEMNIFY AND HOLD HARMLESS:
The permittee and taxicab owner(s) shall assume the defense of, and indemnify and hold harmless, the
city, its officers, employees and agents from and against all actions, claims, losses, damages, liability,
costs and expenses of every type and description, including, but not limited to, attorney fees, to which
any or all of them may be subjected by reason of, or resulting from, directly or indirectly, in whole or in
part, the acts or omissions of the permittee or the permittee's agents, officers or employees, directly or
indirectly arising from the operation of a taxicab. The foregoing is not intended to and shall not be
construed to limit any responsibility or liability that the permittee may be subjected to under other laws.
(Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-11: PROCEDURE FOR PERMIT DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
(A) The director may deny, revoke or suspend a taxicab vehicular permit only after a hearing granted
upon three (3) days' written notice to those persons specified in subsections 5-5-5(A) and (C) of this
article. Such notice shall specify the specific grounds for the proposed action. The hearing shall be
held by the city manager and shall be conducted in a manner so as to allow a full and fair hearing
and is to follow the procedure set forth in section 5-5-19 of this chapter.
(B) If any person specified in subsection 5-5-5(A) or (C) of this article is dissatisfied with the decision of
the city manager in ordering the denial, revocation or suspension of the permit, such person may
appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal in writing with the city clerk within ten (10) days
of the date of the written decision of the city manager. The city council shall hold a hearing within
thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice of appeal. The appellant shall be accorded the same
hearing rights provided in subsection (A) of this section. The city council may sustain, reverse or
modify the order of the city manager. The decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 1350, 2-
14-1984)
5-5-12: GROUNDS FOR PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
(A) A taxicab vehicular permit issued pursuant to this article may be revoked or suspended for the
following reasons:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 147/710
1. Failure to comply with the requirements specified in section 5-5-7 of this article; or
2. Operation of the taxicab without an accurate taximeter, or with a taximeter other than that
specified in the permit application; or
3. The taxicab or its equipment is in such condition that its operation violates the state Vehicle
Code; or
4. Since the issuance of the permit, grounds for permit denial pursuant to subsection 5-5-6(D) of
this article have occurred; or
5. Transfer or sale of the permit to a vehicle or taximeter other than that identified in the permit
application.
(B) Upon written notice by an insurer of cancellation, expiration or change in insurance coverage
resulting in noncompliance with section 5-5-9 of this article, a permit issued pursuant to this article
shall be automatically suspended effective upon the effective date of the change in coverage stated
in the written notice by the insurer.
The suspension shall continue until the city receives written notice from the insurer indicating
compliance with the requirements of section 5-5-9 of this article, or until the permit expires, as
provided in subsection 5-5-6(B) of this article. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
Article III. Taxicab Driver Permit
5-5-13: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall drive for compensation or offer to drive for compensation a taxicab unless he or she
holds a valid taxicab driver permit issued pursuant to this article. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-14: PERMIT PROCEDURE:
Application for a taxicab driver permit shall be filed with the director and shall contain the following:
(A) The name and address of the applicant;
(B) The number of a valid state driver license issued to the applicant, and date of license expiration;
(C) A statement of whether the applicant's state driver's license has ever been revoked or suspended
and, if so, the reason(s) for such revocation or suspension;
(D) A list of each conviction of the applicant. The list shall, for each such conviction, set forth the date
of arrests, the offense charged, and the offense of which applicant was convicted;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 148/710
(E) A list of the applicant's physical or mental disabilities or incapacities. With respect to each such
disability or incapacity, applicant shall state whether the same would interfere with proper
management and control of a motor vehicle;
(F) An annual nonprorateable permit fee, as established by resolution of the city council;
(G) Such other information as may be required by the director to further the purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-15: PERMIT ISSUANCE:
(A) A taxicab driver permit shall be issued by the director:
1. Upon receipt of a complete application, as specified in section 5-5-14 of this article; and
2. If no ground for permit denial or revocation exists, as specified in section 5-5-16 or 5-5-17 of this
article; and
3. After fingerprinting of the applicant by the police department, and submission of four (4) recent
dated portrait photographs, one to be attached to the application, one to be attached to the
driver's permit if issued, and two (2) for the use of special investigation section of the police
department.
(B) All permits shall expire on the calendar year following the date of issuance unless sooner revoked.
A permit shall not be transferable. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-16: GROUNDS FOR PERMIT DENIAL:
A taxicab driver's permit may be denied by the director on the following grounds:
(A) Failure to submit a complete application, as specified in section 5-5-14 of this article;
(B) Failure to submit fingerprinting and photographs, as required by subsection 5-5-15(A)3 of this
article;
(C) The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the permit
application;
(D) The applicant:
1. Has been convicted of a crime; or
2. Has done any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with intent to substantially benefit him or
herself, or another, or substantially injure another; or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 149/710
3. Has a physical or mental disability or incapacity. Provided, however, that the permit shall be
denied upon any of the grounds specified in this subsection only if, in the opinion of the chief of
police, the crime, act, disability, incapacity or the qualifications relates to the functions or duties of
a taxicab driver. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-17: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a taxicab for compensation with knowledge that the
taxicab or taximeter is not authorized by a valid permit or that grounds for revocation or suspension
of said permit pursuant to section 5-5-12 of this chapter exist.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any taxicab driver or person in the business of operating a taxicab for
compensation to do any of the following:
1. Charge an additional type of fee or higher fee other than those fees posted, as required by
section 5-5-7 of this chapter;
2. Transport a greater number of passengers than the rated seat capacity of the taxicab; or
3. Refuse, upon request, to give a passenger a written receipt showing the fare due, and the miles
and minutes employed; or
4. Fail to display a valid permit, issued pursuant to this article, in the taxicab interior in full view of
any passenger; or
5. Solicit or carry passengers for compensation in a taxicab not posted in compliance with section 5-
5-7 of this chapter, or not equipped with an operable accurate taximeter.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully refuse to pay the legal fair charged for his or her
employment of a taxicab. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-18: GROUNDS FOR PERMIT REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
A taxicab driver's permit may be revoked or suspended by the director on any of the following grounds:
(A) Violation of section 5-5-17 of this article; or
(B) If, since the issuance of the permit, grounds for permit denial pursuant to subsection 5-5-16(D) of
this article have occurred, or the applicant has been found by the director to have knowingly made a
false statement of fact required to be revealed in the permit application; or
(C) Transfer or sale of the permit to an individual other than the person specified on the permit
application. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
5-5-19: PROCEDURE FOR PERMIT DENIAL, REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 150/710
(A) The director may refuse to issue, revoke or suspend a taxicab driver's permit only after a hearing
granted upon three (3) days' written notice to the permittee. Such notice shall specify the specific
grounds for the proposed action. At the hearing, to be held by the city manager, the permittee shall
be given the opportunity to present witnesses and documentary evidence, to be represented by
counsel and to examine all witnesses presented. The city manager shall mail or otherwise furnish to
the permittee a written decision, stating the grounds for the decision. The taking or pendency of an
appeal under subsection (B) of this section shall not stay the effectiveness of such decision.
(B) If the permittee is dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager in ordering the denial,
revocation or suspension of the permit, such person may appeal to the city council by filing a notice
of appeal in writing with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date of the written decision of the
city manager. The city shall hold a hearing within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the notice of
appeal. The permittee shall be accorded the same hearing rights provided in subsection (A) of this
section. The city council may sustain, reverse or modify the order of the director. The decision of the
city council shall be final. (Ord. 1350, 2-14-1984)
Chapter 6
RESERVED
(Ord. 1018, 1-9-1973)
Chapter 7
RESERVED
(Ord. 1083, 5-25-1976)
Chapter 8
CARD ROOMS
5-8-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct within the city, any place of business or any room wherein
the playing of cards is permitted or carried on, except as hereinafter provided.
Before any person shall engage in the business of operating a card room he shall make application for
and obtain a license from the license and tax collector and pay the license fees as prescribed in
chapter 1 of this title. Before the license and tax collector shall issue a license to any person for the
purpose of permitting the person to operate a card room the applicant shall make a written application
to the chief of police on forms provided by the police department. The application shall be
accompanied by fingerprints of the applicant or any dealers or operators of said card room and shall
contain all information deemed relevant by the chief of police and accompanied by a photograph of the
operator or any dealer making such application to operate or deal cards in any licensed card room.
Upon the receipt of the application, the chief of police shall conduct such investigation as he may deem
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 151/710
proper as to the character and morals of the applicant and the character of the business to be
conducted. No permit or license shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony, petit
theft, or a crime involving moral turpitude. The chief of police may revoke any permit or license issued
hereunder when the permittee is violating or attempting to violate any law of the state or city. (1962
Code)
Any nonprofit society, club, fraternity, labor or other organization having adopted bylaws, duly elected
directors and members which have card tables for the exclusive use of its members, and where no
charge is made for any of the facilities, shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.
The license and tax collector shall issue the license upon the approval of the application by the chief of
police. In the event that the chief of police disapproves the application, the applicant shall be promptly
notified and furnished with the reasons therefor. No license shall issue sooner than ninety (90) days
following the date of the application. (Ord. 1330, 8-23-1983)
5-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
CARD ROOM: Any space, room or enclosure, or any portion thereof, open to the public for the lawful
playing of cards, regardless of whether the tables, chairs and other furniture and fixtures are temporary
or permanent, or at times used for other purposes.
CARD ROOM EMPLOYEE: Any owner, dealer, overseer or other person directly connected with the
operation and supervision of card tables.
HOUSE PLAYER: Any card room licensee or any person employed in a card room in the city who plays
any game in a card room. (Ord. 1330, 8-23-1983)
5-8-3: HOURS OF OPERATION; MINORS:
(A) It is unlawful for any minors under the age of eighteen (18) years to be upon the premises of any
card room.
(B) Card rooms may be open any hour of the day or night however, the dispensing and/or consumption
of alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1330, 8-23-1983)
5-8-4: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
(A) No licensee shall permit or otherwise allow any conduct, activity or condition upon the premises so
as to disturb the quiet and good order of the premises or the neighborhood.
(B) No licensee shall harbor, admit or permit to enter or remain on the premises any lewd or dissolute
person, or any person under the influence of narcotics, or any intoxicated person, and no such
person shall enter upon or remain upon such premises.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 152/710
(C) No person shall operate a card room unless there is present at all times it is open to the public, at
least one person twenty one (21) years of age or older who is devoting his/her entire time and
attention to the operation of the premises.
(D) No person shall be employed in any capacity at any card room unless such person:
1. Is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
2. Has completed the required application procedure and is granted a license in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(E) Limit On Card Room Licenses: The number of card room licenses issued shall not exceed two (2)
at any one time.
(F) Table Limit: The number of tables in any card room licensed as of the effective date of this section
shall not be increased, except that every card room may have up to five (5) tables. A "table" is
defined as an area in which a single game is played and shall not exceed eight (8) players plus a
dealer. The number of tables may be increased to a maximum of eight (8) upon application and
approval of the city council.
(G) License Transferability: No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable or
assignable.
(H) Inspection: All card rooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation.
(I) Loans Prohibited: No card room licensee, nor any persons required to disclose information under
this chapter, shall loan money or any other thing of value or representing value to any player at any
game in a card room.
(J) Notification Of Terminated Employees: Every card room licensee shall notify the chief of police
within two (2) working days after any employee is terminated for any reason.
(K) No card room licensee, nor any person employed in a card room, shall play any game in the card
room, whether off duty or not, and without regard to whether such person is employed, staked, or
financed by a card room licensee or any person required to disclose financial information under this
chapter, unless wearing suitable identification readily identifiable and observable by all the players
designating said person by name as a house player.
(L) Incentives Prohibited: No card room licensee shall furnish any gratuity or incentive to any player in
a card room, or to any person, as an inducement to play or to continue playing. Such incentives or
gratuities include, but are not limited to, alcoholic beverages, food, coffee, chips, or any other thing
of value. The term "incentive or gratuity" means without charge to the recipient, or at a price or other
consideration below that normally charged by the establishment for such item.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 153/710
(M) License, Number Per Person Limited: No person shall be granted more than one license to
conduct a card room.
(N) Financial Disclosure: Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this section, every card room
licensee, and upon application every applicant therefor shall disclose the following information:
1. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in
its articles of incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its
officers, directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent (5%) of the stock of the
corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and
residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. If one or more of the
partners is a corporation, the provisions of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall
apply. The names and addresses of every person deriving a profit, or holding any position of
management or control shall be disclosed.
2. A sale or transfer of any interest in a card room, which interest would be required to be reported
upon application for a card room license, shall be reported to the chief of police prior to such sale
or transfer. The chief of police shall investigate any person receiving any interest in a card room
as a result of such sale or transfer, and if such person satisfies the requirements relating to card
room license applicants, the chief of police shall give written approval to such transfer or sale. A
fee as set forth in the municipal fee schedule shall be paid to the city for investigation by the chief
of police necessitated by each such sale or transfer.
(O) Rules Posted: Each card room license shall post in a conspicuous place on the premises a copy of
the house rules and regulations and the charges for participating in the games. (Ord. 1330, 8-23-
1983)
5-8-5: LICENSE REVOCATION:
Any person operating a card room in any manner other than in compliance with the terms of this
chapter, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, in addition to such
other penalty as may be provided by law, he may have his license to operate a card room revoked by
the chief of police; and any person who shall hereafter be convicted of violating any law regarding
gambling or the use of intoxicating liquor upon the premises, shall have his license revoked by the chief
of police. (Ord. 1330, 8-23-1983)
5-8-6: REINSTATEMENT OF LICENSE; DEPOSIT:
Any person having had his license revoked or canceled under the terms of this chapter shall thereafter
be ineligible to obtain a license to operate a card room within the city, nor shall any license thereafter
be granted to any other person to conduct the business at the premises where the business has been
theretofore conducted, within one year after the cancellation, unless in addition to the requirements
herein set forth, the applicant shall deposit with the city the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), in
cash lawful money of the United States. The deposit shall abide the action of the city relative to the
granting of the license to the applicant, and in the event a license is so granted, the deposit shall
remain as security that the licensee shall not violate any law of the state, or any provision of this code
in conducting said business. In the event the city shall determine at any time after a hearing had, at
which the licensee shall be permitted to have counsel and introduce evidence in his behalf, that any of
the laws have been violated by the licensee, the council shall have the right to declare the deposit
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 154/710
forfeited to the city; provided, further, that conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction of the
violation of any of the laws upon the premises, shall be conclusive proof of the violation. (Ord. 1330, 8-
23-1983)
5-8-7: INVESTIGATION FEE:
At the time of filing with the chief of police the application for a license, the applicant shall pay a fee as
set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1300, 5-25-1982)
Chapter 9
HOTELS
5-9-1: DEFINITION:
Every building maintained or advertised as a public lodging house or where more than six (6) rooms
are provided for sleeping accommodations shall be known as a hotel. (1962 Code)
5-9-2: FIRE PROTECTION EQUIPMENT:
The fire chief, or other officer designated by the council, shall survey each hotel and specify suitable
fire detecting devices or extinguishing appliances which shall be provided. (1962 Code)
5-9-3: MAINTENANCE OF EQUIPMENT:
Fire protective or extinguishing systems or appliances which have been installed in compliance with
any permit or order, or according to any provisions of this code, shall be maintained in operative
condition at all times and it shall be unlawful for any owner or occupant to reduce the effectiveness of
the protection so required. (1962 Code)
5-9-4: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the fire chief and the health officer, or other officers so designated by the council,
to make periodic and regular inspections of every hotel and to make regular reports thereon to the
council concerning regulations imposed by this code. (1962 Code)
5-9-5: HOTEL REGISTER:
A register shall be maintained at every hotel and each guest shall be required to register his name and
home address. The date of arrival and departure shall be clearly indicated and the register shall be
maintained for a period of at least one year following registration. The register shall be open for
inspection to any authorized person. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 155/710
Chapter 10
POOL AND BILLIARD HALLS
5-10-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or conduct a billiard or pool table open to the
public without having first obtained a license and paid the fee therefor as provided in section 5-1-11 of
this title. All applications for license shall state thereon the intended location of the place of business
and the number of tables to be used therein. (1962 Code)
Chapter 11
AUCTIONS
5-11-1: LICENSE:
Any person desiring a license to sell at auction the stock of merchandise or any part thereof of any
business which has been duly licensed by the city as provided in chapter 1 of this title, shall
immediately prior to the filing of the application for an auction license, pay a license fee for such sale of
five dollars ($5.00) per day. (1962 Code)
5-11-2: SURETY BOND:
Any person desiring a license under the provisions of this chapter, before receiving the license, shall
furnish a surety bond in the principal sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) conditioned:
(A) Upon the observance by the applicant of all the provisions of this chapter relating to auction sales.
(B) Upon the truth of all representations made in connection with the application for the license.
(C) Upon the truth of all of the representations made in the course of any auction sale.
(D) As a guarantee that the purchase price of any article purchased at such sale will be returned to any
purchaser upon the proof that any false or misleading statement or representation has been made
concerning any personal property sold or offered for sale at any auction sale in the auction place of
business.
The bond by its terms shall be made to inure to the benefit of any person injured or aggrieved as a
result of the sale or any purchase made thereat, and shall provide that the aggrieved person shall have
the right of independent action thereon for a period of sixty (60) days from and after the day upon
which the purchase, act or representation was made which constitutes the basis of such action. (1962
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 156/710
Code)
5-11-3: FILING OF INVENTORY:
Before conducting any auction sale under any license issued hereunder, the licensee must file with the
clerk and chief of police a full, true and correct inventory of all items of personal property to be offered
for sale at the auction. The application must specify, also, the days upon which the sale is to be
conducted; provided, however, that no license may be issued for a period of more than thirty (30)
consecutive days. The clerk and the chief of police, either personally or through their representatives,
shall have the right to be present as official observers, representing the city, at any such auction sale,
for the purpose of seeing that no personal property is sold thereat except such as is included in the
inventory so filed; and they shall have the power to prevent the sale of any item not included in the
inventory. (1962 Code)
5-11-4: WARRANTY OF REPRESENTATION:
The licensee at any auction by offering any merchandise or personal property for sale thereat, shall
thereby warrant that all representations made with reference to the merchandise or personal property
in the course of the sale are true and correct. (1962 Code)
5-11-5: FALSE BIDDING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or offer a false bid or any other bona fide bid at a public
auction or to act as a by-bidder or what is commonly known as a "sapper", "booster" or "shiller" or
falsely to pretend to buy any object at an auction sale. (1962 Code)
5-11-6: LABELING OF MERCHANDISE:
Each item offered for sale at auction shall have a card or label attached thereto containing a true and
correct statement specifying the kind and quality of the item, and the tag shall accompany and be
delivered with each item sold at the time of delivery thereof to the purchaser, and it shall be deemed
prima facie evidence of intent to defraud in case the statement is not a true and correct description or
representation of the article sold. (1962 Code)
5-11-7: MANNER OF SOLICITATION:
It shall be unlawful for any auctioneer, or any corporation conducting an auction sale, to solicit by
music, singing or loud or unusual noises to be made or done for the purpose of attracting the public to
the auction sale. (1962 Code)
5-11-8: HOURS LIMITED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 157/710
It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any auction sale between the hours of six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. of any day and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. of the following day. (1962 Code)
5-11-9: ADDITIONS TO STOCK PROHIBITED:
No additions of any item shall be made to the stock set forth in the inventory before or during any
auction sale licensed hereunder. (1962 Code)
Chapter 12
SELF-SERVICE LAUNDRIES
5-12-1: DEFINITION:
The term "self-service laundries" as used in this chapter shall mean any establishment in which coin
operated facilities are available for washing clothes or for drying clothes, or both, and which is open
and available to the general public for use. (1962 Code)
5-12-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to establish or operate a self-service laundry in the city without first
having secured a license therefor from the clerk. Applications for license shall comply with the general
provisions relating to applications for licenses found in chapter 1 of this title. (1962 Code)
5-12-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful to keep any such establishment open for business between the hours of ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. unless there is an adult attendant in charge of the premises
during those hours. (1962 Code)
5-12-4: INSTALLATION OF EQUIPMENT:
Installation of all equipment in the establishment shall be in conformity with the building, plumbing and
electrical regulations established by this code. (1962 Code)
5-12-5: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the building inspector to see to the enforcement of this
chapter and to cause such inspection to be made of the premises as may be necessary for that
purpose. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 158/710
Chapter 13
AUTOMATIC DRY CLEANING MACHINES
5-13-1: DEFINITION:
The term "automatic dry cleaning machine" as used in this chapter shall mean any device or apparatus
for the cleaning of clothes or fabrics, and designed to be used or operated by the general public, which
machine makes use of or contains perchlorethylene or any other chemical solvent or substance which
may cause harm to human beings by reason of inhalation or contact. (1962 Code)
5-13-2: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install, operate or maintain any automatic dry cleaning machine
except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code)
5-13-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to install any automatic dry cleaning machine for use by the public without first
securing a license therefor. The annual fee for the license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) plus five
dollars ($5.00) for each unit in addition to five (5), maintained in any one establishment. (1962 Code)
5-13-4: INSTALLATION REGULATIONS:
(A) Machine Ventilation: Each machine shall be completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented
with intake at the top and the outlet at or near the bottom of the machine. Groups of machines may
be entirely enclosed or supported on all open sides by an enclosure topped with a hood vented as
provided for each individual machine.
(B) Exhaust System: The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of one hundred (100) cubic
feet per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is open.
(C) Discharge Stack: The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the machines are
located shall extend at least two feet (2') above the level of any window which can be opened
located within fifty feet (50') of the outlet of the stack, and shall be at least fifty feet (50') away from
any fresh air intake leading to any premises.
(D) Loading Door: The machines must be so constructed as to prevent the loading door from being
opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be equipped with a transparent
door or part to allow visual examination of the status of the cleaning cycle.
(E) Water Supply Connection: Any connection of the machine with the water supply system must be
equipped with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the condenser; with no
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 159/710
control valves downstream from such gap or breaker. Wastewater shall be discharged through an
air gap.
(F) Room Ventilation: The room in which the machine is installed shall be ventilated so that there shall
be a minimum flow of air per machine from the area to which the public is admitted, of at least five
hundred (500) cubic feet per machine per minute in a room where there are no more than three (3)
machines installed; four hundred (400) cubic feet per minute where there are no more than eight (8)
machines installed; three hundred seventy five (375) cubic feet per minute where there are no more
than sixteen (16) machines installed; and three hundred sixty (360) cubic feet per minute where
there are more than seventeen (17) machines installed. For this purpose each cleaning cell shall be
considered as one machine.
(G) Leakage Prevention: Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent the
leakage of liquids, gas or vapors. (1962 Code)
5-13-5: OPERATION REGULATIONS:
No automatic dry cleaning machine shall be operated unless all the equipment described in the
foregoing section is properly installed and in good operating condition.
No establishment for which a license is required under this chapter shall be open for business, and it
shall be un lawful to admit the public into the room where the machines are located unless there is on
duty in the establishment at all times a competent person in charge. There shall be warning signs
posted in places of easy observation warning of the dangers in the event leakage of liquids, gas or
vapor occurs. It shall be unlawful to permit any residue containing solvent to flow into the sewer system
of the city; tightly covered metal containers may be used for temporary storage of such waste outside
the building. Such containers shall bear labels indicating the contents and dangers involved in
handling, and shall be locked if in an unenclosed place.
At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place available to customers giving the name,
address and phone number of the owner of the establishment, and of the service department or
agency responsible for the proper maintenance of the machines. (1962 Code)
5-13-6: INSPECTIONS:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or the building inspector to cause such inspections to be made
as are necessary to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (1962 Code)
Chapter 14
REBOUND TUMBLING CENTERS
5-14-1: DEFINITION:
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meaning herein prescribed:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 160/710
REBOUND TUMBLING CENTER: A place where rebound tumbling equipment is provided and
maintained for public use.
REBOUND TUMBLING EQUIPMENT: A fabric bed or surface designed to provide resilience by virtue
of its own elasticity or that provided by an elastic or spring suspension system or both, within a stable
and tested frame and intended to be used for jumping, bouncing, or acrobatic tumbling. (1962 Code)
5-14-2: FEE:
Every person exhibiting, showing or operating a rebound tumbling center, and charging a fee for the
same, shall procure a license and pay an annual fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (1962 Code)
5-14-3: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall procure and at all times maintain in full force and effect
a policy of liability insurance for each rebound tumbling equipment insuring him against liability from
personal injury with limits of not less than:
(A) Fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for any one occurrence.
(B) Twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for any one person, per occurrence.
The operator shall file a true copy of his insurance policy with the clerk. (1962 Code)
5-14-4: CONDITION OF EQUIPMENT:
Rebound tumbling equipment shall be maintained in a good state of repair and equipment which has
broken springs or broken webbing shall not be used. The licensee shall take precautionary measures
to prevent broken springs from disengaging from the assembly. (1962 Code)
5-14-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The licensee shall enforce, and all customers using rebound tumbling equipment shall observe and
obey the following rules and regulations which shall be printed in clear, easily read letters not less than
one inch (1") in size, and posted in one or more conspicuous and well lighted locations within the
tumbling equipment center:
(A) Not over one person on the apparatus at a time.
(B) No flips, twists, or similar difficult routines unless under the immediate supervision of a qualified
instructor, or until qualified as demonstrated by an officially acceptable certificate or as determined
by the operator. In case of dispute with a patron, the operators ruling shall be final.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 161/710
(C) No use of equipment in street shoes or in bare feet.
(D) All patrons shall strictly and promptly comply with requests or requirements of the operator.
(E) No use while under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or when not in condition to safely use
the equipment, as determined by the operator.
(F) No jumping from apparatus to apparatus or to any point outside the frame of the apparatus.
(G) No actions allowed which will or may seriously distract or interfere with a performer.
(H) No children under six (6) years of age shall be allowed to use the equipment unless accompanied
by a responsible person.
(I) No smoking, eating, or drinking while using the equipment. (1962 Code)
5-14-6: SUPERVISION:
(A) A rebound tumbling center, whenever open for use, shall be under the direct supervision of as
many supervisors as are necessary to comply with the posted rules.
(B) The supervisor shall be observing all equipment units whenever they are in use.
(C) Each unit shall be numbered or otherwise clearly designated.
(D) A suitable loudspeaker system shall be maintained to enforce rules except where there are less
than eight (8) units.
(E) There shall be at least one supervisor on active supervising duty for each twelve (12) units or
fractional part which are in use. (1962 Code)
5-14-7: QUALIFICATIONS OF SUPERVISORS:
A rebound tumbling supervisor shall be:
(A) Eighteen (18) years of age or over.
(B) Of good moral character.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 162/710
(C) Trained and experienced in the supervision and control of personnel, both skilled and unskilled, in
the art of rebound tumbling.
(D) Physically and otherwise fully fit to manage the facility. (1962 Code)
5-14-8: HANDLING AND REPORTING OF ACCIDENTS:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall:
(A) Direct to competent care for handling and disposition of all accidents and injuries.
(B) Report to the health officer all accidents of a nature to cause unconsciousness, broken or sprained
extremities or bones, removal, breaking or loosening of teeth, hemorrhaging or lacerations which
may require suturing, and eye injuries.
(C) Maintain on the premises records of all medical aid or care administered.
(D) Keep, in a place readily available at all times to himself and his employees, the telephone number
of available emergency service. (1962 Code)
5-14-9: TELEPHONE:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall maintain on the premises a telephone which shall be
available for emergency at all times during which the rebound tumbling center is in operation. (1962
Code)
5-14-10: FIRST AID EQUIPMENT:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center at all times shall maintain on the premises and replenish as
necessary an adequate first aid kit of at least sixteen (16) units, as recommended by the American Red
Cross "First Aid Manual". (1962 Code)
5-14-11: SANITATION:
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall keep the premises and all facilities in a clean
condition. He shall provide, as needed to prevent litter, waste containers and appropriate signs.
The operator of a rebound tumbling center shall provide on the premises drinking facilities which shall
consist of either a sanitary drinking fountain or bottled water and paper cups available in a suitable,
sanitary dispenser. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 163/710
5-14-12: LAYOUT OF REBOUND TUMBLING EQUIPMENT:
(A) Rebound tumbling equipment shall be located on a level surface in such a way as to be within view
of the operator or attendant at all times.
(B) The spacing of equipment units shall conform to the following minimum dimensions as measured
from the inside edge of the frame:
1. Three feet (3') between sides of units.
2. Four feet (4') between ends of units.
3. Five feet (5') from ends of nearest fence, building, other similar construction.
4. Three feet (3') from sides or corners to nearest fence, building, or other similar construction.
(C) The area surrounding the rebound tumbling equipment shall be surfaced to prevent a dust
nuisance and have a reasonably level surface of pea gravel or equivalent type of material from a
safety and dust control standpoint.
(D) The entire rebound tumbling center shall be completely enclosed by fencing not less than five feet
(5') in height. (1962 Code)
5-14-13: CONSTRUCTION OF PITS:
(A) Pits for rebound tumbling centers shall be so constructed that they will not interfere with the
operation of the equipment and of a depth not less than three feet (3') nor more than four feet (4') at
centers.
(B) Such pits shall be so framed that the rebound tumbling equipment is held in a level position and is
supported on a solid stable surface. Lumber used as framing for pits shall be not less than two
inches (2") in thickness and shall be securely connected together. (1962 Code)
5-14-14: USE OF PADDING:
The frames of rebound tumbling equipment shall be completely padded to provide reasonable safety.
Pads two inches (2") thick filled with cotton linters shall be deemed to meet this requirement. (1962
Code)
5-14-15: INSPECTION:
The building inspector shall inspect annually every rebound tumbling center. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 164/710
Chapter 15
RESTAURANTS AND VENDING MACHINES
5-15-1: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of licensing restaurants, itinerant restaurants, food vehicles and
vending machines to facilitate enforcement of the California restaurant act1, pursuant to the authority
conferred by section 28693 of said act. (Ord. 885, 1-17-1963)
5-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The terms defined in article I of the California restaurant act shall have the same meaning when used
in this chapter as they are defined in said act, except as otherwise expressly provided herein.
"Temporary food stands" means any food establishment operating for less than ten (10) days, but does
not include a restaurant, itinerant restaurant, or vending machine, but includes those food
establishments at fairs, carnivals, and other public events of a temporary occupancy. (Ord. 885, 1-17-
1963)
5-15-3: OPERATION WITHOUT PERMIT UNLAWFUL2:
Any person, firm or corporation who operates any restaurant, itinerant restaurant, vehicle upon which
food or beverage is displayed, sold or offered for sale at retail or given away to the public, or maintains
or services any vending machine, as these terms are defined in the California restaurant act, without a
valid unexpired and unrevoked permit therefor, issued by the El Dorado County health department,
within the city, is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six
(6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 885, 1-17-1963)
5-15-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person desiring to secure a permit required by this chapter shall file an application therefor at the
office of the city clerk, in such form as shall be required. The application shall state the name and
address of the person who will operate the business for which the permit is sought, the name and
address of the owner of the property on which such business is to be conducted, the nature of the
business or operation for which the permit is sought, and such other information as the health
department may require. (Ord. 885, 1-17-1963)
5-15-5: PERMIT FEE:
No permit required by this chapter shall be issued unless and until the fee set forth in the following
schedule has been paid therefor to the city clerk:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 165/710
Each restaurant (over 100 seats) $25.00
Each restaurant (100 seats or less) 12.00
Each itinerant restaurant 12.00
Each vehicle 12.00
Temporary food stand 2.00
Each vending machine (per machine) 0.50
Upon the issuance of a new permit after revocation of a prior permit, or after a transfer of the business,
a new permit fee shall be charged and no refund shall be paid on the prior permit. (Ord. 885, 1-17-
1963)
5-15-6: PREREQUISITES TO GRANTING PERMIT:
No permit required by this chapter shall be issued unless and until:
(A) An application has been filed therefor.
(B) The permit fee has been paid in full.
(C) An inspection of the restaurant, itinerant restaurant, vehicle vending machine or temporary food
stand, as the case may be, has been made by the El Dorado County health department within one
year preceding the issuance of said permit and found to comply with the requirements of the
California restaurant act.
No permit shall be issued for a new restaurant for which a building permit was required after November
1, 1963, unless the county health department has approved the application for such building permit for
compliance with the California restaurant act. (Ord. 885, 1-17-1963)
5-15-7: PERMIT TERMS:
The permit shall be issued on a form prepared by the health department and shall specify that it shall
expire one year after the date of the issue unless sooner revoked, except that temporary food stand
permits shall specify the days (not to exceed 10 days) for which it shall be valid unless sooner revoked.
Every permit shall state on its face that it may be revoked by written order of the county health officer
for any violation of the California restaurant act delivered to the person operating the business or any of
his employees. (Ord. 885, 1-17-1963)
5-15-8: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In addition to any action authorized by the California restaurant act, the county health officer may
revoke the permit issued for any restaurant, itinerant restaurant, vehicle, or vending machine for any
violation of the California restaurant act found after his personal inspection of the premises. Any such
revocation shall be in the form of a written order dated and signed by the health officer specifying the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 166/710
violations of the restaurant act upon which it is based, posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.
The revocation of a permit shall become effective immediately upon posting of the notice of revocation
and shall remain in effect until the adjournment of the first regular meeting of city council, at which time
such revocation shall expire, unless the revocation has been confirmed by the city council, after
hearing thereon, or the city council has continued the revocation in effect by order entered in its
minutes, pending further hearings thereon. The health officer shall appear at such hearing of the city
council and present evidence and recommendations upon the confirmation of the revocation, and any
person aggrieved thereby may appear and present evidence thereon. The notice of revocation shall
state the time and the place where the city council will meet for the first hearing upon confirmation, of
the revocation and that any party aggrieved by the revocation may appear at said hearing and present
evidence thereon. If the revocation of the permit is confirmed by the city council, the restaurant,
itinerant restaurant, vehicle or vending machine shall not be operated until a new permit has been
issued therefor. If the revocation is not referred to the city council, at the meeting specified above, or
the city council, after hearing, refuses to confirm the revocation, the revocation shall expire on
adjournment of such meeting of the council, and the original restaurant license issued shall remain in
effect. The decision of the city council, made after hearing upon the confirmation of the revocation
order shall be final. (Ord. 885, 1-17-1963)
5-15-9: PERMITS NOT TRANSFERABLE:
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may not be transferred and shall automatically expire upon the
transfer of the business by the person holding such permit. Upon such transfer, the person acquiring
the restaurant, itinerant restaurant, vehicle or vending machine, shall not operate the same unless and
until a new permit has been issued therefor by the El Dorado County health department. (Ord. 885, 1-
17-1963)
5-15-10: COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH AND ZONING REGULATIONS:
No building permit shall be issued for any building for which a private sewage disposal system must be
installed, altered or added to, unless and until the building inspector is satisfied that a sanitation permit
has been issued therefor by the El Dorado County health officer or his authorized representative. No
building permit shall be issued unless and until the building inspector is satisfied that the construction
authorized by the permit will not violate any existing zoning ordinance. No building permit shall be
issued for any restaurant unless and until the county health department has approved the application
therefor for compliance with the California restaurant act. (Ord. 885, 1-17-1963)
Chapter 16
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
5-16-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the UNIFORM TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX ORDINANCE of the
city. (Ord. 951, 7-26-1966)
5-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 167/710
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the
construction of this chapter:
HOTEL: Any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for
occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist
home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house,
dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar
structure or portion thereof.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or
portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.
OPERATOR: The person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee,
sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his
functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing
agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same
duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the
principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal
organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate,
or any other group or combination acting as a unit.
RENT: The consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel
valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts,
cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom
whatsoever.
TRANSIENT: Any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of
concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive
calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying
space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless
there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of
occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both
prior and subsequent to the effective date of this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 951, 7-26-1966)
5-16-3: TAX IMPOSED:
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the
amount of ten percent (10%) of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by
the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The
transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in
installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall
be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not
paid to the operator of the hotel, the clerk may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the clerk.
(Ord. 1492, 6-23-1992)
5-16-4: OPERATOR'S DUTIES:
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 168/710
the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount
of rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator
of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part
thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if
added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 951, 7-26-1966)
5-16-5: REGISTRATION:
Within fifteen (15) days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after
commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients
shall register said hotel with the city clerk and obtain from him a "transient occupancy registration
certificate" to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall,
among other things, state the following:
(A) The name of the operator;
(B) The address of the hotel;
(C) The date upon which the certificate was issued;
(D) This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof
has fulfilled the requirements of the uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance by registering with
the city clerk for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting
said tax to the city clerk. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful
business or to conduct any lawful business in any unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without
strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit
from any board commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a
permit. (Ord. 951, 7-26-1966)
5-16-6: REPORTING AND REMITTING:
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter,
or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the city clerk, make a return
to the city clerk, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of
tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax
collected shall be remitted to the city clerk. The city clerk may establish shorter reporting periods for
any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may
require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of
business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust
for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the city clerk. (Ord. 951, 7-26-1966)
5-16-7: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
(A) Original Delinquency: Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the
time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the
amount of the tax.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 169/710
(B) Continued Delinquency: Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a
period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall
pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax in addition to the
amount of the tax and ten percent (10%) penalty first imposed.
(C) Fraud: If the city clerk determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is
due to fraud, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto
in addition to the penalties stated in subsections (A) and (B) of this section.
(D) Interest: In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by
this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) per month or fraction
thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first
became delinquent until paid.
(E) Penalties Merged With Tax: Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the
provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 951, 7-26-
1966)
5-16-8: FAILURE TO COLLECT AND REPORT TAX; DETERMINATION OF TAX BY
CITY CLERK:
If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this
chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the city
clerk shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to
base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the city clerk shall procure such facts and information as
he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and
payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and
remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and
penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the city clerk shall give a
notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail,
postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such
operator may within ten (10) days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing
to the city clerk for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not
made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the city clerk shall
become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the city
clerk shall give not less than five (5) days' written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the
operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein
should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing the operator may appear and
offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing
the city clerk shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to and
the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after
fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in section 5-16-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 951, 7-
26-1966)
5-16-9: APPEAL:
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk with respect to the amount of such tax, interest
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 170/710
and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within
fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time
and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his
last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be
served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount
found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 951, 7-26-
1966)
5-16-10: RECORDS:
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed
by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all records as may be necessary
to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection and the payment to
the city, which records the city clerk shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 951, 7-
26-1966)
5-16-11: REFUNDS:
(A) Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or
has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be
refunded as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section provided a claim in writing therefor,
stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with
the city clerk within three (3) years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by
the city clerk.
(B) An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount
overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established
in a manner prescribed by the city clerk that the person from whom the tax has been collected was
not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the
amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent
subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.
(C) A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally
collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection (A) of this
section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the city clerk, or when the
transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the city clerk that the
transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.
(D) No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right
thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 951, 7-26-1966)
5-16-12: ACTIONS TO COLLECT:
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to
the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 171/710
under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the
recovery of such amount and shall be liable to the city for reasonable attorney fees incurred by the city
in such an action. (Ord. 1524, 5-23-1995)
5-16-13: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter inasmuch as it provided for a tax levy for the usual and current expenses of the city shall
take effect immediately except that the tax imposed by this chapter shall become operative and be
imposed on June 1, 1965, and shall not apply prior to said date. (Ord. 951, 7-26-1966)
Chapter 17
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
5-17-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the real property transfer tax ordinance of the city. It is adopted
pursuant to the authority contained in part 6.7 (commencing with section 11901) of division 2 of the
Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 974, 12-12-1967)
5-17-2: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other
realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in,
the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the
consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or
encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), a tax at
the rate of twenty seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or
fractional part thereof. (Ord. 974, 12-12-1967)
5-17-3: PAYMENT:
Any tax imposed pursuant to section 5-17-2 of this chapter shall be paid by any person who makes,
signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is
made, signed or issued. (Ord. 974, 12-12-1967)
5-17-4: CLARIFICATION:
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a
debt. (Ord. 974, 12-12-1967)
5-17-5: EXCEPTIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 172/710
The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision
thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with
respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, but the tax may be collected by
assessment from any other party liable therefor. (Ord. 974, 12-12-1967)
5-17-6: EXEMPTIONS:
(A) Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of
conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:
1. Confirmed under the federal bankruptcy act, as amended;
2. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as
defined in subdivision (m) of section 205 of the title 11 of the United States code, as amended;
3. Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in
subdivision (3) of section 506 of title 11 of the United States code, as amended; or
4. Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.
Subsections (A)1 to (A)4, inclusive, of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of
instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five (5) years from the date of such
confirmation, approval or change.
(B) Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances
to make effective any order of the securities and exchange commission, as defined in subdivision
(a) of section 1083 of the internal revenue code of 1954; but only if:
1. The order of the securities and exchange commission in obedience to which such conveyance is
made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of
section 79k of title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the public utility holding company act
of 1935;
2. Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;
3. Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 974, 12-12-1967)
5-17-7: PARTNERSHIPS:
(A) In the case of any realty held by a partnership no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by
reason of any transfer to an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:
1. Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the
meaning of section 708 of the internal revenue code of 1954; and
2. Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.
(B) If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of section 708 of the internal revenue
code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 173/710
instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or
encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.
(C) Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination
described in subsection (B) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the
realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 974, 12-12-1967)
Chapter 18
PUBLIC DANCES
5-18-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No dance may be held in the city in which minors not accompanied by a parent or guardian are allowed
to attend, without the sponsor of the dance first having obtained a dance permit from the city police
department of the city. (Ord. 998, 1-12-1971)
5-18-2: REGULATIONS:
(A) The lighting at any dance held in the city shall be of sufficient intensity so that anybody at the dance
is easily recognized.
(B) No obscene or pornographic pictures may be shown at the dance. Any motion picture which the
sponsor desires to show at the dance must be given to the Placerville police department at least
two (2) days prior to the date of the dance so that the police department will have an opportunity to
preview the motion picture so as to determine whether it is obscene or pornographic.
(C) No minor shall be permitted to leave the dance and return, unless the minor has obtained the
permission of a member of the school faculty or other responsible adult in charge of the dance.
(D) It will be unlawful to advertise in or on any sign, pamphlet or other brochure, anything pertaining to
pot, grass or anything pertaining to narcotics, or any alcoholic beverages.
(E) No loitering shall be allowed outside the place where the dance is being held or in any vehicle
parked in the immediate vicinity of the dance.
(F) There will be no smoking whatsoever on the dance floor.
(G) No alcoholic beverages or narcotics will be allowed on or about the dance premises. (Ord. 998, 1-
12-1971)
5-18-3: SPONSORS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 174/710
(A) The sponsors shall be required to have at least one city police officer attend the dance unless it is a
public dance, in which event two (2) police officers must be in attendance.
(B) The dance sponsor shall be held financially liable for any injury to the person or uniform of any
police officer in attendance at the dance in his official capacity.
(C) If any sponsor allows any drinking or fights or any disturbance of any kind, or any of the rules and
regulations contained in this chapter are violated or deviated from, this will be cause to close the
dance immediately and thereafter a permit will not be issued to the same group or sponsor for a
period of one year.
(D) The names, addresses, telephone numbers together with a positive identification of the sponsors
must be given to the police department at the time the dance permit is requested. (Ord. 998, 1-12-
1971)
5-18-4: FEES:
(A) The city shall be reimbursed for actual costs of providing police security plus a handling fee as set
by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1300, 5-25-1982)
(B) In addition to the officer's fee, a city license fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day must be paid in
advance to the city clerk. This provision excludes nonprofit organizations. (Ord. 998, 1-12-1971)
5-18-5: DANCE CANCELED, POSTPONED:
If the dance is canceled or postponed for any reason, the police department must be notified forty eight
(48) hours in advance. Failure to so notify the police department will result in any forfeiture of all
monies paid. (Ord. 998, 1-12-1971)
5-18-6: RESTRICTIONS:
(A) Only one dance in which minors not accompanied by parents or guardians are allowed to attend
may be held in the city on any one date.
(B) A dance in which minors not accompanied by parents or guardians are allowed to attend may be
booked no longer than thirty (30) days in advance. The same sponsor or group may not book more
than two (2) dances within any thirty (30) day period unless there is still a vacancy existing one
week prior to the requested date. (Ord. 998, 1-12-1971)
5-18-7: RECEIPT FOR SERVICES:
A receipt for services rendered should be brought to the dance by the police officer assigned to duty at
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 175/710
the dance. This shall be signed by both the police officer and the sponsor, and the police officer shall
be given one copy of the receipt and the sponsor shall be given one copy of the receipt. The copy
retained by the police officer shall be returned by the police officer to the city clerk. (Ord. 998, 1-12-
1971)
5-18-8: APPLICABLE PROVISIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall only apply to those dances in which minors not accompanied by
their parent or guardian are allowed to attend. (Ord. 998, 1-12-1971)
Chapter 19
PARKING AND BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA TAX
5-19-1: AREA ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established, in the city, a parking and business improvement area pursuant to the
provisions of the parking and business improvement area law of 1965, sections 36000 through 36081
of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Ord. 1106, 2-22-1977)
5-19-2: TAX IMPOSED:
The boundary of the parking and business improvement area shall be the same as the boundary of the
present parking district of the city. There is hereby imposed a tax on businesses within the parking and
business improvement area, which tax shall be in addition to the general business license tax of the
city. The additional levy on all businesses within the parking and business improvement area shall be
the same amount as the general business license if the general business license is eighty dollars
($80.00) or less. Any business that is paying one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more for a general
business license shall pay a parking and business improvement area tax of eighty dollars ($80.00) per
year. (Ord. 1328, 8-9-1983, eff. 8-15-1983)
5-19-3: DISPOSITION OF REVENUE:
The revenue received pursuant to this chapter, which is in addition to the general business license tax,
shall be used as designated from time to time by the city council for any of the following purposes:
(A) The acquisition, construction or maintenance of parking facilities for the benefit of the parking and
business improvement area.
(B) The general promotion of business activities in the area. (Ord. 1410, 4-14-1987)
5-19-4: EXEMPTIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 176/710
Businesses classified as exempt businesses under the business license tax shall not be taxed
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter but may make a contribution for the purposes set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 1106, 2-22-1977)
5-19-5: AUTHORITY TO CHANGE TAX:
To the extent permitted by the parking and business license law of 19651, the city council may change
the parking taxes by resolution. (Ord. 1106, 2-22-1977)
Chapter 20
PAWNBROKERS
5-20-1: DEFINITION:
"Pawnbroker" shall include any person, firm or corporation, other than banks, trust companies or bond
brokers who may otherwise be regulated by law and authorized to deal in commercial papers, shares
of stock, bonds and other certificates of value, who keeps a loan or pawn office or engages in or carries
on the business of receiving jewelry, precious stones, valuables, firearms, clothing or personal property,
or any other article or articles in pledge for loans or as security or in pawn for the repayment of monies,
and exacts an interest or any other charge for such loans. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-2: LICENSE:
Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroker shall pay an
investigative fee as set by resolution of the city council in addition to all other license taxes and fees
required. (Ord. 1300, 5-25-1982)
5-20-3: PERMITS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, or carry on or conduct, or to permit to be carried on,
engaged in or conducted, within the city of Placerville, the business of any pawnbroker, whether as a
separate business or in connection with any other business, or to advertise the same by means of
signs or notices on buildings or windows, or by distribution of printed circulars or by public display, or
otherwise in any manner whatsoever, unless there exists a valid permit therefor, granted and existing in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-4: APPLICATION FOR PERMITS:
The application for such permit shall set forth, and such permits shall set forth, the exact nature of the
business to be carried on, and such application shall be accompanied by the signatures of three (3)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 177/710
citizens; certifying to the good moral character and reputation of the person or persons making such
applications. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-5: INVESTIGATION; GROUNDS FOR DENIAL:
The application shall be filed with the chief of police and at the time of filing such application, the
applicant and all persons to be directly or indirectly interested in the permit if granted, including all
members of any firm or partnership, shall be fingerprinted by the police department, and if any such
person shall be found to have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving theft, obtaining
money or property by false pretense, embezzlement, receiving stolen property or violating any
provisions of this chapter or any other law regulating pawnbrokers, the application for such permit shall
be denied. The investigating official to whom such application shall be referred, shall be the chief of
police. In addition to the grounds set forth in this section, any permit may be revoked upon the
recommendation of the chief of police establishing the fact that such permittee has, or has had, in his
possession any stolen article without there having been made a record of such article as hereinafter in
this chapter provided. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-6: NO PERMIT TO ALIEN OR MINOR:
No permit shall be issued for any business if the applicant therefor is under eighteen (18) years of age
or an alien, nor, if the applicant is a firm, partnership or corporation, if any member of such firm or
partnership is under eighteen (18) years of age or an alien, or any officer or director of such corporation
is an alien. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-7: RECORD OF TRANSACTIONS:
Every person managing, maintaining or conducting the business of any pawnbroker in the city of
Placerville, shall keep, or cause to be kept, at the store or place of business, a well bound book
containing a record in which shall be legibly entered in the English language, in ink, at the time of every
purchase, sale, exchange, pledge, pawn, or other transfer of possession of any article, or loan thereon,
a description of such article received or delivered in such transaction, sufficient to identify the same,
including serial number and all particular or prominent marks of identification that may be found on
such property, the signature, address, age, sex and description of the person receiving, delivering, or
transferring the property or who is otherwise dealt with, the amount of money paid or received in such
transaction, and the rate of interest, if any, and the date and hour of the transaction. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-
1977)
5-20-8: INSPECTION AND REPORTS:
The record of transactions required by the provisions contained within section 5-20-7 of this chapter,
shall be open for inspection by the police department at any time during business hours, and the police
department shall also have the right to thoroughly inspect the premises, store or place where the
business so recorded is being conducted at any time in search of any lost or stolen property, or to
compare the entries kept in such records with the article or articles located on such premises or place
of business. All persons in charge of such business, and the agents and employees thereof, shall
render to the police department such assistance as may be reasonably necessary to enable such
inspection or search. The person in charge of such business shall each day excepting holidays furnish
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 178/710
or cause to be furnished, to the chief of police at nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., a legible and complete copy
of such record, and the chief of police shall upon receipt of such reports cause the same to be
permanently filed in the offices of the police department and the same shall be open for inspection only
to the police department of the city of Placerville or upon an order of the court duly made for that
purpose. The original will be forwarded to the department of justice by the police department. Said
reports shall be made upon forms to be furnished by the police department at cost. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-
1977)
5-20-9: PURCHASE FROM MINORS AND SERVANTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining or conducting the business of any pawnbroker,
secondhand jewelry dealer, secondhand dealer, or exchange dealer, or any agent or employee thereof,
to purchase or take any goods or article or thing offered to him by any minor, or knowingly purchase or
take any goods, article or things from any servant or apprentice without first ascertaining that such
article or thing is the property of the person delivering the same, or that such servant or apprentice has
the authority from the owner to deliver or sell such property. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-10: HOURS:
It shall be unlawful for any person conducting or maintaining the business of pawnbroker, secondhand
jewelry dealer, or exchange dealer, or any agent or employee thereof, to keep or cause to be kept such
place of business open except between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-11: PAWNBROKERS' RECEIPT BOOKS:
Every person managing, maintaining or conducting the business of a pawnbroker in the city of
Placerville shall keep or cause to be kept, at the store or place of business, receipt books as
hereinafter described. Such books, shall be kept in addition to the record of transactions required by
section 5-20-7 of this chapter, and shall consist of duplicate sheets of white paper not less than four by
seven inches (4 x 7") in size and bearing consecutive numbers. One of each of said duplicate pages
shall be so perforated as to enable its removal. One of the aforesaid books shall be kept for the
recording of, and the receipting for, sales, and there shall be printed at the top of the perforated sheet,
in colored type, not less than three-eighths (3/8) of an inch in height, the following words: "This is a sale
and not a pledge". One of the aforesaid books shall be kept for the recording of, and the receipting for,
pledges, and there shall be printed at the top of the perforated sheet, in colored type, not less than
three-eighths (3/8) of an inch in height, the following words: "This is a pledge and not a sale". (Ord.
1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-12: PAWNBROKERS' CUSTOMER RECEIPTS:
It shall be unlawful for pawnbrokers to make any purchase, exchanges, pledge, pawn or other transfer
of possession of any article, unless the same is recorded in one of the record and receipt books
required by the provisions of section 5-20-11 of this chapter, setting forth the name and address of the
pawnbroker, a description in the English language of the article involved in such transactions, the date
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 179/710
of the sale, the name of the customer with whom such transaction is made, the rate of interest charged,
if any, the term of redemption, if any, and the same shall be signed by the pawnbroker, or his agent
making such transactions. The perforated sheet, which shall be the duplicate shall, after being filled out
as herein provided, be delivered to the person with whom the transaction is made. The original thereof
shall be kept by the pawnbroker for a period of at least two (2) years next following the date of the
transaction, and shall during such time, be available at all times during business hours for inspection by
the Placerville police department. Any alteration of such duplicate sheet shall constitute a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
5-20-13: CHANGE IN CIRCUMSTANCES; TRANSFERABILITY:
Notification of any change in circumstances or information given in the application for a pawnbroker's
permit shall be filed with the city clerk forthwith. No change in the location of the place of business or
personnel of the permittee shall be permitted without prior permission of the city of Placerville. No
permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred. (Ord. 1114, 4-26-1977)
Chapter 21
SPECIAL EVENTS
5-21-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in or participate in, aid, form or start any special event unless a permit has
been obtained from the special event committee which shall consist of the chief of police, fire chief,
public works superintendent and the city manager of the city of Placerville. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-2: APPLICATION FILED:
Any person seeking issuance of a special event permit shall file an application with the chief of police
on a form provided by the chief of police. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-3: TIME LIMIT FOR FILING:
The application for a special event permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than thirty (30)
nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of the special event. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-4: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, a "special event" shall be defined as any event other than a parade
which is held in any parking lot of the city of Placerville or on any portion of any street in the city of
Placerville. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 180/710
5-21-5: FILING FEE:
The fee to be paid for the filing of an application for a special event permit shall be set by resolution of
the city council, except that there shall be no fee if the special event is for the purpose of promoting the
city or for youth or charitable projects in the city. (Ord. 1300, 5-25-1982)
5-21-6: COMMUNITY INTEREST REQUIRED FOR PERMIT:
The special event committee shall only grant a permit if it finds that the event is likely to be an event
that many of the residents of the city will be interested in seeing and will not unduly interfere with the
parking or moving of vehicles. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-7: APPROVAL, DENIAL OF PERMIT:
The committee shall act upon an application for a special event permit within five (5) days after the
filing thereof. If the committee disapproves the application, they shall mail to the applicant within five (5)
days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice of its action, stating the reasons for its
denial of the permit. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-8: APPEAL OF DENIAL:
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special event permit to the city
council. The appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days after notice. The city council shall act upon the
appeal within twenty one (21) days after its receipt. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-9: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT, COPY TRANSMITTED:
Immediately upon the issuance of a special event permit, the special event committee shall transmit a
copy thereof to the mayor and the city council. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-10: TIME AND AREA OF EVENT REQUIRED:
Each special event permit shall state the time during which the special event shall take place and the
area where the special event shall take place. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-11: PERMITTEE REQUIREMENTS:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable
laws and ordinances. (Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
5-21-12: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 181/710
The special event committee shall have the authority to revoke a special event permit issued
hereunder if the standards for issuance as herein set forth are not complied with by the permit holder.
(Ord. 1129, 10-25-1977)
Chapter 22
BINGO GAMES
5-22-1: ENACTMENT AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority and under the conditions of section 326.5 of the
California Penal Code. (Ord. 1185, 2-13-1979)
5-22-2: CONDITIONS FOR CONDUCTING GAMES:
Organizations which are exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by sections
23701(a), 23701(b), 23701(d), 23701(e), 23701(f), 23701(g) and 23701(1) of the Revenue and
Taxation Code, mobilehome park associations and senior citizens' organizations may hold bingo
games under the following conditions:
(A) Before an organization shall be entitled to operate a bingo game in the city, the organization must
first receive a license from the city and prior to receiving a license must fill out an application which
will be available at the police department and receive approval from the chief of police.
(B) It is a misdemeanor for any person to receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game
authorized by section 19 of article IV of the state constitution.
(C) A violation of subsection (B) of this section shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city which
enacted these provisions authorizing the bingo game. A violation of any provision of this section
other than subsection (B) of this section is a misdemeanor.
(D) The city may bring an action to enjoin a violation of this chapter.
(E) No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.
(F) An organization authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to subsection (A) shall conduct a
bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such
organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is
organized. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require that the property owned or
leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.
(G) All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the authorized organization.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 182/710
(H) A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization which
organized it. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only
the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the
promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game.
(I) No individual corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the organization authorized to
conduct a bingo game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.
(J) With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by section
23701(d) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in
a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits
shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to
conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept
in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such
proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:
1. Such proceeds may be used for prizes.
2. A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the proceeds after the deduction
for prizes, or five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental
of property, overhead and administrative expenses.
(K) No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present
at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted.
(L) The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed two
hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.
(M) As used in this section "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis
of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at
random. (Ord. 1185, 2-13-1979)
Chapter 23
ADULT RELATED ESTABLISHMENTS
5-23-1: PURPOSES:
A system of requiring regulatory licenses for adult related establishments and for those persons
rendering services to customers will assist in assuring illegal activities do not occur on the premises or
otherwise in connection with such establishments within the city of Placerville. If criminal activity occurs
on the premises, or if other provisions of this chapter are violated, the licenses are subject to
revocation. Criminal liability also exists for a violation of this chapter. These provisions will provide the
chief of police with both preventative and investigatory tools to control illegal activity in such
establishments, and will promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare.
By the definition of "adult related establishment" contained in section 5-23-2 of this chapter it is the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 183/710
intent of the city council to prevent evasion of the provisions of this chapter through the device of
calling the establishment by a new or different name. If specified sexual activities are involved, or if
specified anatomical areas are displayed, this chapter is intended to apply to both the premises and the
individuals who provide such services to the patrons, regardless of the individual's title or position, or of
the name given to the establishment.
This chapter is enacted in part, pursuant to the provisions of section 51034 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the terms identified by this section shall be ascribed the meanings indicated.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment whose primary business is to offer for sale any one or more of
the following:
(A) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture,
videocassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis
upon the depiction or description of "sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", or
(B) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified
sexual activities". This definition does not include a bona fide pharmacy.
ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL: A hotel or motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations,
for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas".
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown and in which
any portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
ADULT RELATED ESTABLISHMENT: A bathhouse, escort bureau, introductory service, massage
establishment, outcall massage service, modeling studio or sexual encounter center, as defined by this
chapter. "Adult related establishment" shall also include adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult motion
picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult theater or cabaret or any other business or establishment
which has available or offers any patron, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward,
services or entertainment or activities which involve the display of "specified anatomical areas", or in
which "specified sexual activity" occurs.
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of
consideration features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
BATHHOUSE: An establishment whose primary business is to provide, for pecuniary compensation,
consideration, hire or reward, access to any kind of bath facility, including, but not limited to, showers,
saunas and hot tubs.
CABARET: An establishment that serves food and/or alcoholic beverages and features live
entertainment depicting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 184/710
ESCORT SERVICES: In relation to escort services, the following terms shall be ascribed the following
meanings:
Escort: A person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, either escorts or
accompanies others to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or keeps
company with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.
Escort Bureau: An establishment which, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts.
INTRODUCTORY SERVICE: An establishment which, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire
or reward helps persons to meet or become acquainted with others for social purposes. For purposes
of this section, "others" include personnel of the introductory service.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment where massage, alcoholic rub, fomentation, electric
or magnetic treatment or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered in
exchange for any form of consideration for the purpose of providing any service during which time
"specified anatomical areas" are displayed or "specified sexual activity" occurs.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN: Any person who for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward,
engages in the practice of massage.
MODELING SERVICES: In relation to modeling services, the following terms shall be ascribed the
following meanings:
Figure Model: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses to
be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise depicted.
Modeling Studio: An establishment which provides for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or
reward, figure models who display "specific anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched,
photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons who pay such consideration.
OUTCALL SERVICE ACTIVITY: Any establishment or business which provides an outcall service
which consists of individuals leaving the premises upon request or by appointment to visit other
premises for a period of time for the purpose of providing any service during which time "specified
anatomical areas" are displayed or "specified sexual activity" occurs.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: An establishment which provides two (2) or more persons, for
pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, with a place to assemble for the purpose of
engaging in specified sexual activities" or displaying "specified anatomical areas". "Sexual encounter
center" does not include hotels or motels.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Includes:
(A) Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals or pubic regions; 2) buttocks; or
3) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(B) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Includes the following:
(A) Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality,
direct physical or stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 185/710
(B) Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, as arousal or tumescence; or
(C) Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or ejaculation; or
(D) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; or
(E) Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or
(F) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or
(G) Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation.
(H) Any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: necrophilia, pederasty,
pedophilia or zooerastia. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to or include the following:
(A) Hospital, nursing homes, sanitariums, or persons working in any such establishments;
(B) Any licensed or certificated medical practitioner, chiropractor, massage therapist, massage
technician, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person licensed or certificated by
the state of California including those persons who have completed a course of study and hold a
certificate of completion from a state approved school which teaches the theory, ethics, practices,
profession and work of massage;
(C) Barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular occupation or business, and holding
a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the state of California;
(D) Modeling schools or classes maintained pursuant to standards established by the state board of
education of the state of California; or
(E) Any recognized school of massage which: 1) teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession and
work of massage; and 2) requires a residence course of study to be given before the student is
furnished with a diploma or certificate of learning or completion; and 3) has been approved pursuant
to section 94311(d) of the Education Code, or, if said school is not located in California, has
complied with the standards commensurate with those specified in said section 94311(d). A
"recognized school of massage" as those terms are used above, shall not include a school or
institution of learning offering or allowing correspondence course credit not requiring actual
attendance at class, or courses of massage technician not approved by the California state
department of education. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-4: HOURS OF OPERATION:
It shall be unlawful for any adult related establishment to be operated or remain open for business
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 186/710
between the hours of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord.
1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-5: LIST OF SERVICES:
A list of the services available and the price of such services shall be posted in a clearly visible place at
or near the entrance of each adult related establishment. The services available shall be described in
readily understandable language. No adult related establishment shall render or provide, or offer to
render or provide, any service not listed in compliance with this section. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-6: PERSONNEL REGISTERS:
Operators of adult related establishments shall maintain personnel registers, which shall be available
for inspection by the chief of police at all times during regular business hours, as follows:
(A) With respect to a massage establishment and an outcall massage services, a personnel register
shall be maintained containing the names and employee permit numbers of each person employed
or retained to perform service as a massage technician.
(B) With respect to an escort service, a personnel register shall be maintained which includes the
names and employee permit number of each person employed or retained as an escort.
(C) With respect to a model studio, a personnel register shall be maintained which includes the name
and employee permit number of each person employed or retained as a figure model.
(D) With respect to any adult related establishment, other than a model studio, escort service, massage
establishment or outcall massage service, a personnel register shall be maintained which includes
the names of all persons employed or retained on the premises to provide services, the title of the
position of each such person, and as to those persons required to possess employee permits by
this chapter, their employee permit numbers. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-7: EMPLOYMENT OF MINORS:
(A) It shall be unlawful for the operator or any other person in charge of an adult related establishment
to employ or retain any person who is under the age of eighteen (18) years to perform any service
on the premises of the establishment.
(B) It shall be unlawful for any business owner or operator to permit a minor on the business premises
to purchase, rent, handle, view or hear any material which has its primary or dominant theme matter
depicting, illustrating, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas" as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-8: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS, MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 187/710
Massage establishments shall at all times be equipped with an adequate supply of clean sanitary
towels, coverings and linens. Towels, coverings and linens shall not be used on more than one patron
unless they have first been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be
used on more than one patron. Soiled linens and paper towels shall be deposited in approved
receptacles.
Within massage establishments wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms or cabinets, shower
rooms and compartments, toilet rooms and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected as
needed, and at least once each day the premises are open, with a disinfectant approved by the health
officer. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use with a disinfectant approved by the health
officer. All walls, ceilings, floors and other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Instruments for massage shall not be used on more than one patron
unless they are sterilized before each use by sterilization methods approved by the health officer. (Ord.
1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-9: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS, BATH HOUSES:
Within bath houses, towels shall not be supplied to more than one patron unless such towels have first
been laundered and disinfected. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms and cabinets, shower
rooms and compartments, toilet rooms and pools shall be thoroughly cleaned sand disinfected as
needed, and at least once each day the premises are open, with a disinfectant approved by the health
officer. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use with a disinfectant approved by the health
officer. All walls, ceilings, floors and other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-10: SANITATION REQUIREMENTS, MASSAGE TECHNICIANS:
While performing services in any adult related establishment, massage technicians shall wear
garments which cover the entire body, exclusive of the head, neck, arms, legs, hands and feet, while
giving a massage. Such garments shall not be transparent. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-11: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS, MASSAGE MANAGERS:
Each massage establishment and outcall massage service offering any services involving physical
contact with patrons shall be managed by a person who possess a diploma or certificate of graduation
from a recognized school of massage, as the terms "recognized school of massage" are defined by
subsection 5-23-3(E) of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment or outcall
massage service offering such services to operate unless managed by a person possessing a diploma
or certificate.
Such an establishment and service shall not be deemed "managed" as required by this section unless
a person possessing the required certificate or diploma having the authority and responsibility to
supervise personnel employed or retained to perform services and to supervise the delivery of services
is on the premises of the establishment not less than seventy five percent (75%) of the time the
business is open for the delivery of services. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-12: MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS, MASSAGE TECHNICIANS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 188/710
It shall be unlawful for any massage establishment and outcall service to employ or retain a person to
provide services as a massage technician, and unlawful for any person to work at or for such an
establishment or service, unless the person possess a diploma or certificate of graduation from a
recognized school of massage, as the terms "recognized school of massage" are defined by
subsection 5-23-3(E) of this chapter. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-13: LICENSES AND PERMITS:
(A) License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or conduct an adult related
establishment unless under and by authority of a valid, unexpired and unrevoked business license
issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Display Of License: Each adult related establishment, except an outcall massage service, shall
display a special business license in a conspicuous place within the establishment so that the same
may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.
A person engaged in an outcall massage service who is the licensee for said service shall have the
license available for inspection at all times while providing outcall massage services.
(C) Employee Permits Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to provide any of the following
services without possessing a valid, unexpired and unrevoked employee permit issued by the chief
of police pursuant to this chapter:
1. Act as a manager of an adult related establishment by supervising or controlling the personnel of
such an establishment or the services rendered therein;
2. Give a massage for a fee or any other form of consideration;
3. Act as an escort; or
4. Act as a figure model in a modeling studio.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of any adult related establishment to employ or retain a person
to perform any of the above services unless such person possesses such an employee permit.
(D) Application: An application for an employee permit to provide services identified by this chapter
shall contain the following:
1. A list of each conviction of the applicant, plea of guilty, or plea of nolo contendere. The list shall,
for each such conviction, set forth the date of arrest, the offense charged and the offense of
which the applicant was convicted.
2. Proof of the age of the applicant; and
3. With respect to a permit to perform services as a manager of a massage establishment or outcall
massage service or as a massage technician, the name and address of each school of massage
attended or provider of instructional services in massage which has been received, the name and
address of the school or provider, the dates of attendance or receipt of instruction, and a copy of
any certificate or diploma or other evidence of completion which the applicant has received.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 189/710
(E) Issuance: Upon receipt of an application for an employee permit to act as a manager of an adult
related establishment or a massage technician, an escort or a figure model, the chief of police shall
conduct such investigation as is deemed necessary. The chief of police shall issue the permit
unless he or she finds any of the following:
1. That the application fails to contain information required by the chief of police, the provisions of
this chapter, city resolution or is otherwise incomplete;
2. That information contained in the application is false or otherwise inaccurate;
3. That the applicant has been convicted of a crime and the time for appeal has elapsed, or when
an order granting probation is made suspending the imposition of sentence, irrespective of the
entry of a subsequent order under California Penal Code section 1203.4; or has done any act
involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with intent to benefit him or herself, or another, or injure
another; and the chief of police concludes that by reason of the crime or act the applicant would
not perform his or her duties as a manager, massage technician escort or figure model in a law
abiding manner or in a manner which does not subject patrons to risk or harm or criminal,
deceitful or otherwise unethical practices.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an application shall not be denied solely on the basis that a
person has been convicted of a felony. If the person obtained a certificate of rehabilitation under
California Penal Code section 4852.01 et seq., or that the person has been convicted of a
misdemeanor if the person has met all applicable requirements of the criteria of rehabilitation
developed to evaluate the rehabilitation of a person when considering the denial of a license
under California Penal Code section 482(a).
4. That the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age; or
5. That with respect to an application for an employee permit to act as a manager of a massage
establishment or outcall massage service offering services involving physical contact with
patrons, or massage technician, the applicant has not graduated from a recognized school of
massage, as those terms are defined by subsection 5-23-3(E) of this chapter.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, the chief of police may deem
the requirements of subsection (E)5 of this section and section 5-23-12 of this chapter satisfied if
he or she finds in writing that the applicant for the permit has attended not less than one hundred
hours of instruction in massage at a school within or outside this state or in any foreign country
that provides education substantially equal to or in excess of that received as a result of
graduating from a recognized school of massage, as defined by subsection 5-23-3(E) of this
chapter.
(F) Revocation Of Permits: An employee permit may be revoked or suspended pursuant to this section
on any of the following grounds:
1. Violation of any of the duties, requirements or prohibitions contained in this chapter;
2. Violation of any of the duties, requirements or prohibitions set forth in any administrative
regulations issued pursuant to chapter;
3. Misrepresentation of a material fact contained in the application for the permit; or
4. That since issuance or renewal of the permit the chief of police has acquired information
supporting a finding prescribed by subsection (E) of this section in relation to the holder of the
permit. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 190/710
5-23-14: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person who operates or transacts any business not exempt from license by section 5-23-3 of this
chapter in the city of Placerville without having an unrevoked and unexpired city business license
therefor issued by the city clerk or who violates any provision of this title is guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed six (6) months or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day a business is operated in violation of this section shall be deemed a separate
and distinct offense punishable as provided in this section. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-15: INSPECTION:
The chief of police is charged with the responsibility of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, and to
that end may inspect any and all types of classes of businesses which by this chapter are licensed and
regulated. The chief of police or subordinate personnel may enter any place of business which is
subject to the provisions of this chapter for the purpose of inspection for compliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
5-23-16: LICENSE PROCEDURE AND ISSUANCE:
The procedure for the application and issuance of the business license as required by the provisions of
this chapter, except as provided for herein, shall be established by resolution of the city council of the
city of Placerville. (Ord. 1407, 11-25-1986)
Chapter 24
DOWNTOWN BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT AREA
5-24-1: PUBLIC HEARINGS AND FINDINGS:
The recitals hereof, which set forth facts regarding the adoption of the council resolutions, the conduct
of public hearings and certain findings of the city council, are true and correct and incorporated herein
by reference. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-2: DEFINITIONS:
In order to distinguish between area businesses, and for the purpose of calculating and applying the
amount of assessments owed, the following definitions shall apply:
FINANCIAL: Includes banking and savings and loan institutions, credit unions, etc.
LODGING: "Lodging" businesses include hotels, motels, inns, bed and breakfast establishments, RV
parks, etc.
OTHER: "Other" businesses include contractor/builders, light manufacturing, production, fabrication,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 191/710
wholesaling, etc.
PROFESSIONAL: Includes architects, designers, attorneys, dentists, doctors, realtors, insurance
agencies, mortgage brokers, counselors, etc.
RESTAURANTS: Businesses selling prepared food and drinks.
RETAIL: "Retail" businesses include businesses that buy and resell goods. Examples are clothing
stores, gift shops, or office supplies, etc.
SERVICE: "Service" businesses include businesses selling nonretail goods and services. Examples
are personal care salons, barbershops, repair shops, automotive oriented businesses, entertainment
facilities, travel services, news and advertising media, printers, photographers, etc. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-
1999)
5-24-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF BOUNDARIES:
A parking and business improvement area is hereby established pursuant to the parking and business
improvement area law of 1989, Streets and Highways Code section 36500 et seq. The boundaries of
the area shall be set forth on exhibit A, attached to ordinance 1558 and incorporated herein by
reference. The area shall be known as the Placerville downtown parking and business improvement
area, a true and correct copy of exhibit A, setting forth the boundaries of the area, is on file with the city
clerk. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF BENEFIT ASSESSMENT:
All businesses, trades and professions located within the area boundary shown on exhibit A shall,
commencing July 1, 1999, pay an annual benefit assessment to the area in the following amounts:
Business Type Amount
Retail/restaurant $225.00 per year
Service 175.00 per year
Lodging 225.00 per year
Professional 175.00 per year
Financial 200.00 per year
Other 175.00 per year
(Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-5: PURPOSE AND USE OF BENEFIT ASSESSMENTS:
The types of improvements and activities proposed to be funded by the levy of assessment on
businesses in the area are as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 192/710
(A) The acquisition, construction, installation or maintenance of any tangible property with an estimated
useful life of five (5) years or more, including, but not limited to, the following improvements:
1. Signage at the following locations: city entrance; parking lots; parking garage graphics; and
parking garage entrance.
2. Garbage cans.
3. Streetlights.
4. Tree health care.
5. Physical cleanup upon sidewalks. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-6: PROHIBITED USE OF REVENUES:
The revenue from the levy of assessments within the area shall not be used to fund improvements or
activities outside the area, or for any purpose other than specified in this chapter. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-
1999)
5-24-7: EXCLUSIONS FROM BENEFIT ASSESSMENTS:
No person or business shall be required to pay an assessment based on:
(A) Residential use of property within the area;
(B) A nonprofit corporation, as defined by section 501(c)(3) of the internal revenue service code,
located within the area. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-8: NEW BUSINESS ASSESSMENT WAIVER:
Any new business established within the area shall not be required to pay an assessment for the billing
period during which said business is initiated. The business will have been considered initiated on the
date of issuance of the business license. This waiver shall not apply to an existing business that has
changed ownership or location within the area. City agrees to supply the area with timely information
regarding new businesses initiated within the area. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-9: COLLECTION OF BENEFIT ASSESSMENT:
The benefit assessment authorized by this chapter for Placerville businesses shall be billed and
collected once each year on June 1. The area will bill and the city will collect the assessments at no
charge to the area, and forward all funds collected to the area within thirty (30) days of said collections.
Late payment penalties shall be applied to businesses that do not provide their respective assessment
payments on the date provided for herein at a rate of ten percent (10%) per month. At such time as late
payment penalties equate to fifty percent (50%) of the total assessment, action shall be taken to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 193/710
recover the delinquent assessment. Costs of this recovery shall be borne by the business owing the
assessment and late penalties. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-10: VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO AREA:
Contributions to the area shall be permitted on a voluntary basis. The boundary of the area shall not be
modified as a result of the contribution, nor shall contributing businesses be considered a member of
the area for voting or other purposes. However, said businesses making a voluntary contribution may
be entitled to participate in the programs of the area upon a finding by the city council that the area
derives a benefit from said business's participation in the program. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-11: ANNUAL BUDGET PROCESS:
Pursuant to the act, an annual report shall be presented by the advisory board to the city council for
review and approval prior to the beginning of any fiscal year. The purpose of this process is to comply
with the act provisions regarding public notice and hearing prior to establishing the benefit assessment
for the following fiscal year. The city shall adopt, modify, or otherwise amend the report in accordance
with the provisions of Streets and Highways Code sections 36533, 36534 and 36535 of the act. (Ord.
1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-12: AREA PROCEEDS DO NOT OFFSET CITY SERVICES:
The city specifically finds and declares that the funds derived from the area shall not be used to offset
or diminish current maintenance, capital improvement programs, including, but not limited to, public
property and sidewalk cleaning, street cleaning and maintenance, tree maintenance, restroom cleaning
and maintenance. The city declares its intent to provide at least the same level and standard of
maintenance and repair of the public property within the area, providing city funds are available from
year to year. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-13: DISESTABLISHMENT OF THE AREA:
Proceedings to disestablish the area shall be initiated by the city council following presentation of a
petition to the city council signed by business owners paying fifty percent (50%) or more of the
assessments levied in the area. Proceedings to disestablish the area shall follow the procedure set
forth in Streets and Highways Code section 36550. The city council shall disestablish the area if,
following the public hearing prescribed in section 36550(b), written protests are not withdrawn as to
reduce the protests below the fifty percent (50%) level.
In the event of disestablishment of the area, remaining revenues of the area shall be refunded to
paying business owners in a pro rata manner calculated in the same manner as was used to establish
the most recent assessments applied in the area. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence or clause or phrase of this chapter is, for any reason, held to be
invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not effect the validity or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 194/710
constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter, it being expressly declared that this chapter
and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase hereof would have been prepared,
proposed, adopted, approved and ratified irrespective of the facts of any one or more of the other
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord.
1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-15: AMENDMENTS:
The businesses in the area established by this chapter shall be subject to any amendments to division
18, part 6, of the California Streets and Highways Code, parking and business improvement area law
of 1989. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
5-24-16: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect upon the thirty first day after its final passage. (Ord. 1558, 4-13-1999)
Chapter 25
MEDICAL MARIJUANA1
(Rep. by Ord. 1693, 10-9-2018)
Chapter 26
SPECIAL TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX FOR
REPAYMENT OF WATER AND WASTEWATER DEBT
REPAYMENT AND SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS
5-26-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF PLACERVILLE SPECIAL TRANSACTIONS AND USE
TAX ORDINANCE FOR REPAYMENT OF WATER AND WASTEWATER DEBT REPAYMENT AND
SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS. The city of Placerville hereinafter shall be called "city". This chapter shall
be applicable in the incorporated territory of the city. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-2: OPERATIVE DATE:
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred
ten (110) days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below.
(Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 195/710
5-26-3: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions
hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
(A) To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of part 1.6
(commencing with section 7251) of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code and section
7285.91 of part 1.7 of division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be
operative if two-thirds (2/3) of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of
the tax at an election called for that purpose.
(B) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those
of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not
inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue
And Taxation Code.
(C) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure
therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that
adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering
and collecting the California state sales and use taxes.
(D) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will,
to the greatest degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of part 1.6 of division 2 of the
Revenue And Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at
the same time, minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-4: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all
functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if the city shall not
have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so
contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter
following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-5: TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE:
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers
in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-fourth of one percent (0.25%) of the gross
receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on
and after the operative date of this chapter. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-6: PLACE OF SALE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 196/710
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the
retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of
state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and
use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent
place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the
retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by the state board of equalization. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-7: USE TAX RATE:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible
personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this chapter for
storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-fourth of one percent (0.25%) of
the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are
subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-
2010)
5-26-8: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1
(commencing with section 6001) of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-9: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE
TAXES:
In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code:
(A) Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city
shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:
1. The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, state board of
control, state board of equalization, state treasury, or the constitution of the state of California.
2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any
agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
3. In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior
boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:
(a) Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under
the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code; or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 197/710
(b) Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that
code.
4. In sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of
the Revenue And Taxation Code.
(B) The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business
in this state" in section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in section 6203. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-
2010)
5-26-10: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue And Taxation Code,
an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-11: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
(A) There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of
any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county
pursuant to the Bradley-Burns uniform local sales and use tax law or the amount of any state
administered transactions or use tax.
(B) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts
from:
1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft
to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and
exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
2. Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant
to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the
retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this subsection,
delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
(a) With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to
chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in
compliance with section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels
registered under division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by
registration to an out of city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by
the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
(b) With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out of city and
declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from
that address.
3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 198/710
4. A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of
time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior
to the operative date of this chapter.
5. For the purposes of subsections(B)3 and (B)4 of this section, the sale or lease of tangible
personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any
period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate
the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
(C) There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other
consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state
administered transactions and use tax ordinance.
2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed
by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of
persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and
necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the
Revenue And Taxation Code of the state of California.
3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract
entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter.
4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property
arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for
which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date of this chapter.
5. For the purposes of subsections (C)3 and (C)4 of this section, storage, use, or other
consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property
shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for
which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
6. Except as provided in subsection (C)7 of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city
shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless
the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the
sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or
indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent,
canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
7. "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following:
vehicles subject to registration pursuant to chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of division
3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of
the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who
registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.
(D) Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or
reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax
pursuant to part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 199/710
person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax.
(Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-12: AMENDMENTS:
All amendments subsequent to the effective date hereof to part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue And
Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with part 1.6 and part 1.7
of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code, and all amendments to part 1.6 and part 1.7 of
division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter,
provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this
chapter. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-13: ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or
proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to
prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation
Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-14: EXPENDITURE PLAN:
The expenditure plan required by Revenue And Taxation Code section 7285.91(c) for the revenue from
the tax approved by this chapter is the following: The city may use revenue from the tax only to repay
bond and state revolving fund debt incurred for improvements to the Hangtown Creek Water
Reclamation Facility and to fund water and sewer construction projects, including, but not limited to,
line replacement. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-15: CITIZENS OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
There shall be a five (5) person committee of members of the public to review and report on the
revenue and expenditure of funds from the tax adopted by this chapter. Prior to the operative date, the
city council shall adopt a resolution establishing the composition of the committee and defining the
scope of its responsibilities. Also prior to the operative date, the city council shall appoint at least a
quorum of the members of the committee; the council shall complete the appointment of members of
the committee by the end of fiscal year 2011. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
5-26-16: TERMINATION DATE:
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall expire on the thirtieth anniversary of the last
day of the calendar quarter following the operative date. (Ord. 1639, 12-14-2010)
Chapter 27
SPECIAL TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX FOR WATER,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 200/710
SEWER, STORM DRAIN AND STREETS FACILITIES
5-27-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CITY OF PLACERVILLE SPECIAL TRANSACTIONS AND USE
TAX ORDINANCE FOR WATER, SEWER, STORM DRAIN AND STREETS FACILITIES. The city of
Placerville hereinafter shall be called "city". This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory
of the city. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-2: OPERATIVE DATE:
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred
ten (110) days after the adoption of this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below.
(Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-3: PURPOSE:
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions
hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:
(A) To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of part 1.6
(commencing with section 7251) of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code and section
7285.91 of part 1.7 of division 2 which authorizes the city to adopt this tax which shall be operative
if a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of
the tax at an election called for that purpose.
(B) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those
of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not
inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue
And Taxation Code.
(C) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure
therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that
adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing
statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering
and collecting the California state sales and use taxes.
(D) To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will,
to the greatest degree possible, be consistent with the provisions of part 1.6 of division 2 of the
Revenue And Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at
the same time, minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-4: CONTRACT WITH STATE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 201/710
Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all
functions incident to the administration and operation of this chapter; provided, that if the city shall not
have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so
contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter
following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-5: TRANSACTIONS TAX RATE:
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers
in the incorporated territory of the city at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the gross receipts
of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after
the operative date hereof. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-6: PLACE OF SALE:
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the
retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out of
state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out of state destination. The gross receipts
from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and
use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent
place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the
retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and
adopted by the state board of equalization. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-7: USE TAX RATE:
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible
personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date hereof for storage, use or
other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half of one percent (0.5%) of the sales price of the
property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or
use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-8: ADOPTION OF PROVISIONS OF STATE LAW:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the
provisions of part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code, all of the provisions of part 1
(commencing with section 6001) of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code are hereby adopted
and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-9: LIMITATIONS ON ADOPTION OF STATE LAW AND COLLECTION OF USE
TAXES:
In adopting the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 202/710
(A) Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city
shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:
1. The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the state controller, state treasurer, victim
compensations and government claims board, state board of equalization, state treasury, or the
constitution of the state of California;
2. The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this city or any
agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
3. In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior
boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:
(a) Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other
consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax
while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under
the provisions of part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code; or
(b) Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that
code.
4. In sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of
the Revenue And Taxation Code.
(B) The word "city" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business
in this state" in section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in section 6203. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-
2016)
5-27-10: PERMIT NOT REQUIRED:
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under section 6067 of the Revenue And Taxation Code,
an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-11: EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS:
(A) There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of
any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any city, city and county, or county
pursuant to the Bradley-Burns uniform local sales and use tax law or the amount of any state
administered transactions or use tax.
(B) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts
from:
1. Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft
to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and
exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the
authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 203/710
2. Sales of property to be used outside the city which is shipped to a point outside the city, pursuant
to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the
retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph,
delivery to a point outside the city shall be satisfied:
(a) With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to
chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in
compliance with section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels
registered under division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by
registration to an out of city address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by
the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and
(b) With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out of city and
declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from
that address.
3. The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed
price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date hereof.
4. A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of
time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior
to the operative date hereof.
5. For the purposes of subsections (B)3 and (B)4 of this section, the sale or lease of tangible
personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any
period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate
the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
(C) There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other
consumption in this city of tangible personal property:
1. The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state
administered transactions and use tax ordinance.
2. Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed
by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of
persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and
necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.
This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the
Revenue And Taxation Code of the state of California.
3. If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract
entered into prior to the operative date hereof.
4. If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property
arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for
which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the
operative date hereof.
5. For the purposes of subsections (C)3 and (C)4 of this section, storage, use, or other
consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property
shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for
which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or
lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 204/710
6. Except as provided in subsection (C)7 of this section, a retailer engaged in business in the city
shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless
the retailer ships or delivers the property into the city or participates within the city in making the
sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or
indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the city or through any representative, agent,
canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the city under the authority of the retailer.
7. "A retailer engaged in business in the city" shall also include any retailer of any of the following:
vehicles subject to registration pursuant to chapter 1 (commencing with section 4000) of division
3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with section 21411 of the Public Utilities
Code, or undocumented vessels registered under division 3.5 (commencing with section 9840) of
the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who
registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the city.
(D) Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or
reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax
pursuant to part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the
person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax.
(Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-12: AMENDMENTS:
All amendments subsequent to the effective date hereof to part 1 of division 2 of the Revenue And
Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with part 1.6 and part 1.7
of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code, and all amendments to part 1.6 and part 1.7 of
division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter,
provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this
chapter. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-13: ENJOINING COLLECTION FORBIDDEN:
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or
proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to
prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or part 1.6 of division 2 of the Revenue And Taxation
Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-14: CITIZENS OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE:
There shall be a five (5) person committee of members of the public to review and report on the
revenue and expenditure of funds from the tax adopted by this chapter. Prior to the operative date, the
city council shall adopt a resolution establishing the composition of the committee and defining the
scope of its responsibilities. Also prior to the operative date, the city council shall appoint at least a
quorum of the members of the committee; the council shall complete the appointment of members of
the committee by the end of fiscal year 2017. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-15: EXPENDITURE PLAN:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 205/710
The expenditure plan required by Revenue And Taxation Code section 7285.91(c) for the revenue from
the tax approved by this chapter is the following: The city may use revenue from the tax only to pay for
repair, replacement, maintenance, and improvement of water, sewer and storm drain systems, and for
the repair, replacement, maintenance, and improvement of existing streets. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
5-27-16: TERMINATION DATE:
The authority to levy the tax imposed by this chapter shall expire on the twentieth anniversary of the
last day of the calendar quarter following the operative date. (Ord. 1685, 12-13-2016)
Chapter 28
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY
5-28-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to implement the provisions of the Medicinal and Adult Use
Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA") to accommodate the needs of medically-ill persons
in need of and provide access to cannabis for medicinal purposes as recommended by their health
care provider(s), and to provide access to adult-use for persons over the age of twenty one (21) as
authorized by the Control, Tax & Regulate the Adult Use Cannabis Act ("AUMA" or "Proposition 64"
passed by California voters in 2016), while imposing sensible regulations on the use of land to protect
the City's residents, neighborhoods, and businesses from disproportionately negative impacts. As
such, it is the purpose and intent of this chapter to regulate the cultivation, processing, manufacturing,
testing, sale, delivery, distribution and transportation of cannabis and cannabis products in a
responsible manner to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Placerville
and to enforce rules and regulations consistent with State law. It is the further purpose of intent of this
chapter to require all commercial cannabis operators to obtain and renew annually a permit to operate
within the City of Placerville. It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize
the illegal use or consumption of cannabis under Federal, State, or local law. The provisions of this
chapter are in addition to any other permits, licenses and approvals which may be required to conduct
business in the City, and are in addition to any permits, licenses and approval required under State,
City, or other law. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-2: LEGAL AUTHORITY:
Pursuant to sections 5 and 7 of article XI of the California Constitution, the provisions of the Medicinal
and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (hereinafter "MAUCRSA"), any subsequent State
legislation and/or regulations regarding same, the City of Placerville is authorized to adopt ordinances
that establish standards, requirements and regulations for the licensing and permitting of commercial
cannabis activity. Any standards, requirements, and regulations regarding health and safety, security,
and worker protections established by the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions,
shall be the minimum standards applicable in the City of Placerville to all commercial cannabis activity.
(Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 206/710
5-28-3: CANNABIS CULTIVATION AND COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITIES
PROHIBITED UNLESS SPECIFICALLY AUTHORIZED BY THIS CHAPTER:
(A) Except as specifically authorized in this chapter, the commercial cultivation, manufacture,
processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, sale, delivery, distribution or transportation1, of
cannabis or cannabis product is expressly prohibited in the City of Placerville.
(B) Persons who cultivate cannabis for their sole personal use, or qualified primary caregivers who
cultivate medical cannabis on behalf of their qualified patient(s) may do so in quantities authorized
by State law and in accordance with all State and local regulations without submitting any
application or permit. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance may also be
deemed to exist if such activity is determined to be related to the cultivation of cannabis and
produces:
1. Odors which are disturbing to people residing or present on adjacent or nearby property or areas
open to the public.
2. Repeated responses to the property from law enforcement or other Code Enforcement Officers
(more than 3 times in a 1-year period).
3. Repeated disruption to the free passage of persons or vehicles in the neighborhood (more than 3
times in a 1-year period) as reported to law enforcement officers or the City Code Enforcement
Officer.
4. Any other impact which adversely impacts the health, safety or general welfare of people on
adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public.
(C) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the City's authority to abate any
nuisance which may exist from the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, processing or storage of
cannabis plants or any part thereof from any location.
(D) All cannabis cultivation shall be subject to title 1, chapters 4, 4A and 4B of this Code (public
nuisance) and the State Housing Code2 and other applicable provisions of local and State law.
(Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-4: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE AND LOCAL LAWS:
It is the responsibility of the owners and operators of the commercial cannabis business to ensure that
it is, always, operating in a manner compliant with all applicable State and local laws, and any
regulations promulgated thereunder. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any
actions that violate State law or local law with respect to the operation of a commercial cannabis
business. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and the operators of the commercial cannabis
business to ensure that the commercial cannabis business is, at all times, operating in a manner
compliant with all applicable State and local laws, including the Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis
Regulation and Safety Act ("MAUCRSA"), and any subsequently enacted State law or regulatory,
licensing, or certification requirements, and any specific, additional operating procedures or
requirements which may be imposed as conditions of approval of the commercial cannabis business
permit. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any actions that violate State law
regarding the operation of a commercial cannabis business. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 207/710
5-28-5: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them as set forth
herein. Any reference to California Statutes includes any regulations promulgated thereunder and is
deemed to include any successor or amended version of the referenced statute or regulatory provision.
A-LICENSE: Means a State license issued by the Bureau of Cannabis Regulation for cannabis or
cannabis products that are intended for adults twenty one (21) years of age and over and who do not
possess physician's recommendations.
A-LICENSEE: Means any person holding a license under this chapter for cannabis or cannabis
products that are intended for adults twenty one (21) years of age and over and who do not possess
physician's recommendations.
APPLICANT: Means an owner applying for a City license pursuant to this chapter.
BATCH: Means a specific quantity of homogeneous cannabis or cannabis product that is one of the
following types:
(A) "Harvest batch" means a specifically identified quantity of dried flower or trim, leaves, and other
cannabis plant matter that is uniform in strain, harvested at the same time, and, if applicable,
cultivated using the same pesticides and other agricultural chemicals and harvested at the same
time.
(B) "Manufactured cannabis batch" means either of the following:
1. An amount of cannabis concentrates or extract that is produced in one production cycle using
the same extraction methods and standard operating procedures.
2. An amount of a type of manufactured cannabis produced in one production cycle using the
same formulation and standard operating procedures.
BUREAU: Means the Bureau of Cannabis Control within the Department of Consumer Affairs, formerly
named the Bureau of Marijuana Control, the Bureau of Medical Cannabis Regulation, and the Bureau
of Medical Marijuana Regulation.
CANNABIS: Means all parts of the Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis,
whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part
of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its
seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from
cannabis. "Cannabis" does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil
or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture,
or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the
sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. For the purpose of this chapter,
"cannabis" does not mean "industrial hemp" as defined by section 11018.5 of the Health and Safety
Code.
CANNABIS ACCESSORIES: Has the same meaning as in section 11018.2 of the Health and Safety
Code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 208/710
CANNABIS CONCENTRATE: Means cannabis that has undergone a process to concentrate one or
more active cannabinoids, thereby increasing the product's potency. Resin from granular trichomes
from a cannabis plant is a concentrate for purposes of this definition. A cannabis concentrate is not
considered food, as defined by section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code, or drug, as defined by
section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code.
CANNABIS INNOVATION ZONE: Is defined as a park or campus which is one contiguous commercial
area of land which has many cannabis related businesses grouped together. Each individual business
would be clearly defined, which has a unique entrance and immovable physical barriers between
uniquely licensed premises.
CANNABIS PRODUCT: Means a product containing cannabis or cannabis, including, but not limited to,
manufactured cannabis, intended to be sold for use by cannabis patients in California pursuant to the
Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition 215), found at section 11362.5 of the California Health
and Safety Code (as the same may be amended from time-to-time) or pursuant to the Adult Use of
Cannabis Act. For purposes of this chapter, "cannabis" does not include industrial hemp as defined by
section 81000 of the California Food and Agricultural Code or section 11018.5 of the California Health
and Safety Code.
CANNABIS PRODUCTS: Has the same meaning as in section 11018.1 of the Health and Safety Code.
CANOPY: Means the designated area(s) at a licensed premises, except nurseries that will contain
mature plants at any point in time.
(A) Canopy shall be calculated in square feet and measured using clearly identifiable boundaries of
all areas(s) that will contain mature plants at any point in time, including all of the space(s) within
the boundaries;
(B) Canopy may be noncontiguous but each unique area included in the total canopy calculation
shall be separated by an identifiable boundary which include, but are not limited to: interior walls,
shelves, greenhouse walls, hoop house walls, garden benches, hedgerows, fencing, garden beds
or garden plots; and if mature plants are being cultivated using a shelving system, the surface
area of each level shall be included in the total canopy calculation.
CAREGIVER OR PRIMARY CAREGIVER: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
11362.7 of the California Health and Safety Code.
CHILD RESISTANT: Means designed or constructed to be significantly difficult for children under five
(5) years of age to open, and not difficult for normal adults to use properly.
CITY: Means the City of Placerville, a General Law City.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS ACTIVITY: Includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution,
processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis
and cannabis products as provided for in this chapter.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS: Means any business or operation which engages in medicinal
or adult-use commercial cannabis activity.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT: Means a regulatory permit issued by the City of
Placerville pursuant to this chapter to a commercial cannabis business and is required before any
commercial cannabis activity may be conducted in the City. The initial permit and annual renewal of a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 209/710
commercial cannabis business permit is made expressly contingent upon the business' ongoing
compliance with all of the requirements of this chapter and any regulations adopted by the City
governing the commercial cannabis activity at issue.
CULTIVATION: Means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading,
or trimming of cannabis.
CULTIVATION SITE: Means a location where cannabis is planted, grown, harvested, dried, cured,
graded, or trimmed, or a location where any combination of those activities occurs.
CUSTOMER: Means a natural person twenty one (21) years of age or over, or a natural person
eighteen (18) years of age or older who possesses a physician's recommendation, or a medical
marijuana identification card.
DAY CARE CENTER: Has the same meaning as in section 1596.76 of the Health and Safety Code.
DELIVERY: Means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. "Delivery"
also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer.
DIRECTOR: Means the Director of Consumer Affairs.
DISPENSING: Means any activity involving the retail sale of cannabis or cannabis products from a
retailer.
DISTRIBUTION: Means the procurement, sale, and transport of cannabis and cannabis products
between licensees.
DISTRIBUTOR: Means a person holding a valid commercial cannabis business permit for distribution
issued by the City of Placerville, and, a valid State license for distribution, required by State law to
engage in the business of purchasing cannabis from a licensed cultivator, or cannabis products from a
licensed manufacturer, for sale to a licensed retailer.
DRIED FLOWER: Means all dead cannabis that has been harvested, dried, cured, or otherwise
processed, excluding leaves and stems.
EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCT: Means cannabis product that is intended to be used, in whole or in
part, for human consumption, including, but not limited to, chewing gum, but excluding products set
forth in division 15 (commencing with section 32501) of the Food and Agricultural Code. An edible
cannabis product is not considered food, as defined by section 109935 of the Health and Safety Code,
or a drug, as defined by section 109925 of the Health and Safety Code.
FUND: Means the Cannabis Control Fund established pursuant to section 26210 of the Business and
Professions Code.
KIND: Means applicable type or designation regarding a particular cannabis variant or cannabis
product type, including, but not limited to, strain name or other grower trademark, or growing area
designation.
LABELING: Means any label or other written, printed, or graphic matter upon a cannabis product, upon
its container.
LABOR PEACE AGREEMENT: Means an agreement between a licensee and any bona fide labor
organization that, at a minimum, protects the State's proprietary interests by prohibiting labor
organizations and members from engaging in picketing, work stoppages, boycotts, and any other
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 210/710
economic interference with the applicant's business. This agreement means that the applicant has
agreed not to disrupt efforts by the bona fide labor organization to communicate with, and attempt to
organize and represent the applicant's employees. The agreement shall provide a bona fide labor
organization access at reasonable times to areas in which the applicant's employees work, for the
purpose of meeting with employees to discuss their right to representation, employment rights under
State law, and terms and conditions of employment. This type of agreement shall not mandate a
particular method of election or certification of the bona fide labor organization.
LICENSE: Means a State license issued by the State and includes both an A-license and an M-license,
as well as a testing laboratory license.
LICENSEE: Means any person holding a license under this chapter, regardless of whether the license
held is an A-license or an M-license, and includes the holder of a testing laboratory license.
LICENSING AUTHORITY: Means the City of Placerville who is the agency responsible for the
issuance, renewal, or reinstatement of the local license, and authorized to take disciplinary action
against the licensee.
LIMITED-ACCESS AREA: Means an area in which cannabis is stored or held and is only accessible to
some licensee and authorized personnel.
LIVE PLANTS: Means living cannabis flowers and plants, including seeds, immature plants, and
vegetative stage plants.
LOCAL JURISDICTION: Means a city, county or city and county.
LOT: Means a batch or a specifically identified portion of a batch.
M-LICENSE: Means a State license issued by the State for commercial cannabis activity involving
medicinal cannabis.
M-LICENSEE: Means any person holding a license by the State for commercial cannabis activity
involving medicinal cannabis.
MANUFACTURE: Means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a
cannabis product.
MANUFACTURED CANNABIS: Means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw
agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, extraction or other manufactured product
intended for internal consumption through inhalation or oral ingestion or for topical application.
MANUFACTURER: Means a licensee that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or
compounding of cannabis or cannabis products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or
independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages cannabis or cannabis products or labels or
container.
MANUFACTURING SITE: Means a location that produces, prepares, propagates, or compounds
cannabis or cannabis products, directly or indirectly, by extraction methods, independently by means of
chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis, and is owned and
operated by a person issued a valid commercial cannabis business permit for manufacturing from the
City of Placerville and, a valid State license as required for manufacturing of cannabis products.
MEDICINAL CANNABIS OR MEDICINAL CANNABIS PRODUCT: Means cannabis or a cannabis
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 211/710
product, respectively, intended to be sold for use pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act of 1996
(Proposition 215), found at section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code, by a medicinal cannabis
patient in California who possesses a physician's recommendation.
MICROBUSINESS: Means the cultivation of cannabis on an area less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet, by an entity authorized to act as a licensed distributor, level 1 manufacturer, and retailer
under State law, provided such licensee can demonstrate compliance with all requirements imposed by
State law on licensed cultivators, distributors, level 1 manufacturers, and retailers to the extent the
licensee engages in such activities. Microbusiness licenses that authorize cultivation of cannabis shall
include the license conditions described in subdivision (b) of section 26060.1 of the Business and
Professions Code.
NONVOLATILE SOLVENT: Means any solvent used in the extraction process that is not a volatile
solvent. For purposes of this chapter, a nonvolatile solvent includes carbon dioxide (CO2) used for
extraction and ethanol used for extraction or post-extraction processing.
NURSERY: Means a licensee that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural
products used specifically, for the propagation and cultivation of cannabis.
OPERATION: Means any act for which licensure is required under the provisions of this chapter, or any
commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products.
OWNER: Means any of the following:
(A) A person with an aggregate ownership interest of twenty percent (20%) or more in the person
applying for a license or a licensee, unless the interest is solely a security, lien, or encumbrance.
(B) The manager of a nonprofit or other entity.
(C) A member of the board of directors of a nonprofit.
(D) An individual who will be participating in the direction, control, or management of the business
applying for a license, or who has a financial interest in the business other than a fixed lease of
real property.
PACKAGE: Means any container or receptacle used for holding cannabis or cannabis products.
PATIENT OR QUALIFIED PATIENT: Shall have the same definition as California Health and Safety
Code section 11362.7 et seq., as it may be amended, and which means a person who is entitled to the
protections of California Health and Safety Code section 11362.5.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited
liability company, estate, trust, business, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or
combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.
PERSON WITH AN IDENTIFICATION CARD: Shall have the meaning given that term by California
Health and Safety Code section 11362.7.
PHYSICIAN'S RECOMMENDATION: Means a recommendation by a physician and surgeon that a
patient use cannabis provided in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996 (Proposition
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 212/710
215), found at section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code.
PREMISES: Means the designated structure or structures and land specified in the application that is
owned, leased, or otherwise held under the control of the applicant or licensee where the commercial
cannabis activity will be or is conducted. The premises shall be a contiguous area and shall only be
occupied by one licensee unless the operator is granted an M-license and an A-license for the same
type of activity and such operation is lawful under State and local laws, rules and regulations.
PROCESSING: Means a cultivation site that conducts only trimming, drying, curing, grading,
packaging, or labeling of cannabis and nonmanufactured cannabis products.
PURCHASER: Means the customer who is engaged in a transaction with a licensee for purposes of
obtaining cannabis or cannabis products.
RETAILER: Means a commercial cannabis business facility where cannabis, cannabis products, or
devices for the use of cannabis or cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any
combination, for retail sale, including an establishment (whether fixed or mobile) that delivers, pursuant
to express authorization, cannabis and cannabis products as part of a retail sale, and where the
operator holds a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the City of Placerville authorizing the
operation of a retailer, and a valid State license as required by State law to operate a retailer.
SELL, SALE, AND TO SELL: Include any transaction whereby, for any consideration, title to cannabis
or cannabis products are transferred from one person to another, and includes the delivery of cannabis
or cannabis products pursuant to an order placed for the purchase of the same and soliciting or
receiving an order for the same, but does not include the return of cannabis or cannabis products by a
licensee to the licensee from whom the cannabis or cannabis product was purchased.
STATE LICENSE: Means a permit or license issued by the State of California, or one of its departments
or divisions, under MAUCRSA and any subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same to
engage in commercial cannabis activity.
TESTING LABORATORY: Means a laboratory, facility, or entity in the State that offers or performs tests
of cannabis or cannabis products and that is both of the following:
(A) Accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other persons involved in
commercial cannabis activity in the State.
(B) Licensed by the bureau.
TOPICAL CANNABIS: Means a product intended for external application and/or absorption through the
skin. A topical cannabis product is not considered a drug as defined by section 109925 of the California
Health and Safety Code.
TRANSPORT: Means the transfer of cannabis products from the permitted business location of one
licensee to the permitted business location of another licensee, for the purposes of conducting
commercial cannabis activity authorized by MAUCRSA which may be amended or repealed by any
subsequent State of California legislation regarding the same. Transport does not include deliveries of
cannabis or cannabis products.
UNIQUE IDENTIFIER: Means an alphanumeric code or designation used for reference to a specific
plant on a licensed premises and any cannabis or cannabis product derived or manufactured from that
plant.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 213/710
VOLATILE SOLVENT: Means any solvent that is or produces a flammable gas or vapor that, when
present in the air in sufficient quantities, will create explosive or ignitable mixtures. Examples of volatile
solvents include, but are not limited to, butane, hexane, and propane.
YOUTH CENTER: Means any public or private facility that is primarily used to host recreation or social
activities for minors, including, but not limited to, private youth membership organizations or clubs,
social service teenage club facilities, video arcades where ten (10) or more video games or game
machines or devices are operated, and where minors are legally permitted to conduct business, or
similar amusement park facilities. It shall also include a park, playground or recreational area
specifically designed to be used by children which has play equipment installed, including public
grounds designed for athletic activities such as baseball, softball, soccer, or basketball or any similar
facility located on a public or private school grounds, or on City, County or State parks. This definition
shall not include any private martial arts, yoga, ballet, music, art studio or similar studio of this nature
nor shall it include any private gym, athletic training facility, pizza parlor, dentist office, doctor's office
primarily serving children or a location which is primarily utilized as an administrative office or facility for
youth programs or organizations. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-6: COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT REQUIRED TO ENGAGE IN
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS:
(A) No person may engage in any commercial cannabis business or in any commercial cannabis
activity within the City of Placerville including cultivation, manufacture, processing, laboratory
testing, transporting, dispensing, distribution, or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product unless the
person:
1. Has a valid commercial cannabis business permit from the City of Placerville;
2. Has a valid State of California seller's permit; and
3. Is currently in compliance with all applicable State and local laws and regulations pertaining to
the commercial cannabis business and the commercial cannabis activities, including the duty to
obtain any required State licenses.
(B) No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for outdoor commercial cannabis cultivation,
which is prohibited. It is a violation of this chapter for any person or entity to engage in any outdoor
commercial cannabis cultivation of any kind.
(C) No permit shall be issued pursuant to this chapter for indoor commercial cannabis cultivation,
except for that indoor commercial cultivation that is authorized as a component of a microbusiness.
All other indoor cultivation of a commercial nature is prohibited. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-7: CANNABIS EMPLOYEE PERMIT REQUIRED:
(A) Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works within a commercial cannabis business
must be legally authorized to do so under applicable State law.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 214/710
(B) Any person who is an employee or who otherwise works within a commercial cannabis business
must obtain a commercial cannabis employee work permit from the City prior to performing any
work at any commercial cannabis business.
(C) Applications for a commercial cannabis employee work permit shall be developed, made available,
and processed by the City Manager or his/her designee(s), and shall include, but not be limited to,
the following information:
1. Name, address, and phone number of the applicant;
2. Age and verification of applicant. A copy of a birth certificate, driver's license, government issued
identification card, passport or other proof that the applicant is at least twenty one (21) years of
age must be submitted with the application;
3. Name, address of the commercial cannabis business where the person will be employed, and the
name of the primary manager of that business;
4. A list of any crimes enumerated in California Business and Professions Code section 26057(b)(4)
for which the applicant or employee has been convicted;
5. Name, address, and contact person for any previous employers from which the applicant was
fired, resigned, or asked to leave and the reasons for such dismissal or firing;
6. The application shall be accompanied by fingerprints and a recent photograph of the applicant in
a form and manner as required by the City Manager or his/her designee(s).
7. A signed statement under penalty of perjury that the information provided is true and correct.
8. If applicable, verification that the applicant is a qualified patient or primary caregiver.
9. A fee paid in an amount set by resolution of the City Council in an amount necessary to cover the
costs of administering the employee work permit programs. The fee is non-refundable and shall
not be returned in the event the work permit is denied or revoked.
(D) The City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall review the application for completeness, shall
conduct a background check to determine whether the applicant was convicted of a crime or left a
previous employer for reasons that show the applicant:
1. Has been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit, including but not limited to
fraud, forgery, theft, or embezzlement as those offenses are defined in California Penal Code
sections 186.11, 470, 484, and 504a, respectively; or
2. Has committed a felony or misdemeanor involving fraud, deceit, embezzlement; or
3. Was convicted of a violent felony, a crime of moral turpitude; or
4. The illegal use, possession, transportation, distribution or similar activities related to controlled
substances, as defined in the Federal Controlled Substances Act, except for cannabis related
offenses for which the conviction occurred after the passage of the Compassionate Use Act of
1996.
Discovery of these facts showing that the applicant is dishonest or has been convicted of those
types of crimes are grounds for denial of the permit. Where the applicant's sentence (including
any term of probation, incarceration, or supervised release) for possession of, possession for
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 215/710
sale, sale, manufacture, transportation, or cultivation of a controlled substance is completed, such
underlying conviction shall not be the sole ground for denial of a commercial cannabis work
permit. Furthermore, an applicant shall not be denied a permit if the denial is based solely on any
of the following: a) a conviction for any crime listed in subsection (D)4 of this section for which the
applicant has obtained a certificate of rehabilitation pursuant to chapter 3.5 (commencing with
section 4852.01) of title 6 of part 3 of the California Penal Code or b) a conviction that was
subsequently dismissed pursuant to sections 1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.41 of the California Penal
Code or any other provision of State law allowing for dismissal of a conviction.
(E) The City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall issue the commercial cannabis work permit or a
written denial to the applicant within thirty (30) days of the date the application was deemed
complete. In the event the cannabis work permit cannot be issued within this time period, then the
City Manager or his/her designee(s) may issue a temporary work permit for an employee upon
completing a preliminary background check and if the business can demonstrate to the City
Manager or his/her designee(s) that the employee is necessary for the operation of the business.
The temporary permit may be immediately revoked by the City Manager or his/her designee(s)
upon determination that the applicant has failed the background check or upon the issuance of the
permanent work permit.
(F) A work permit shall be valid for a twelve (12) month period and must be renewed on an annual
basis. Renewal applications shall contain all the information required in subsection (B) of this
section including the payment of a renewal application fee in an amount to be set by resolution of
the City Council.
(G) In the event a person changes employment from one commercial cannabis business in the City to
another, the work permit holder shall notify the City Manager or his/her designee(s) in writing of the
change within ten (10) days, or the work permit shall be suspended or revoked, and such person
shall not be permitted to work at any commercial cannabis business in the City.
(H) The City may immediately revoke the commercial cannabis work permit should the permit holder be
convicted of a crime listed in subsections (C) and (D) of this section or if facts become known to the
City Manager or his/her designee(s) that the permit holder has engaged in activities showing that he
or she is dishonest.
(I) The City Manager or his/her designee(s) is hereby authorized to promulgate all regulations
necessary to implement the work permit process and requirements.
(J) The applicant may appeal the denial or revocation of a commercial cannabis work permit by filing a
notice of appeal with the City Clerk within ten (10) days of the date the applicant received the notice
of denial; which appeal shall be conducted as set forth in section 5-28-15 of this chapter.
(K) The City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall issue a permit in the form of a personal identification
card that can be worn in a prominent and visible location. The identification card shall be
maintained in good and readable condition at all times. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-8: MAXIMUM NUMBER AND TYPE OF AUTHORIZED COMMERCIAL
CANNABIS BUSINESSES PERMITTED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 216/710
The number of each type of commercial cannabis business that shall be permitted to operate in the
City shall be established by resolution by the City Council.
(A) This section is only intended to create a maximum number of commercial cannabis businesses that
may be issued permits to operate in the City under each category. Nothing in this chapter creates a
mandate that the City Council must issue any or all of the commercial cannabis business permits if
it is determined that the applicants do not meet the standards which are established in the
application requirements or further amendments to the application process or that the City Council
upon further deliberation determines that the issuance of any or all commercial cannabis business
permits will impact the public safety, welfare or other policy concerns which may be detrimental in
the issuance of these permits.
(B) Each year following the City Council's initial award of permits, if any, or at any time in the City
Council's discretion, the City Council may reassess the number of commercial cannabis business
permits which are authorized for issuance. The City Council in their discretion, may determine that
the number of commercial cannabis permits should stay the same, decrease or be expanded. (Ord.
1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-9: INITIAL APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
(A) The City Manager shall adopt the procedures to govern the application process, and the manner in
which the decision will ultimately be made regarding the issuance of any commercial cannabis
business permit(s), which shall include or require the City Manager to provide detailed objective
review criteria to be evaluated on a point system or equivalent quantitative evaluation scale tied to
each set of review criteria ("review criteria"). The City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall be
authorized to prepare the necessary forms, adopt any necessary rules to the application,
regulations and processes, solicit applications, conduct initial evaluations of the applicants.
(B) At the time of filing, each applicant shall pay an application fee established by resolution of the City
Council, to cover all costs incurred by the City in the application process.
(C) After the initial review, ranking, and scoring under the review criteria, the City Manager or his/her
designee(s) will make a final determination in accordance with this section.
(D) The application procedure process shall include a component on community benefits. Any
community benefits that a commercial cannabis business agrees to provide shall be incorporated
into the terms and conditions under which the commercial cannabis business will operate with the
City's approval. If and when an operating permit is issued, such terms and conditions shall be in
addition to the requirements of this chapter. Community benefits shall primarily be an agreed-upon
percentage of gross revenues of the commercial cannabis business but may also include, but not
be limited to: in-kind donations; sponsorship of community events; support, financial or otherwise,
for community-based organizations. Payments of any kind made to the City pursuant to the
Community Benefits Agreement shall be deposited into a Community Benefits Fund, to be
administered by the City Manager with the approval of the City Council. Allocations from the
Community Benefits Fund shall periodically be made by the City Council at its discretion by majority
vote, for the benefit of public safety, youth education, community events, community-based
organizations, or for other uses benefiting the community as deemed appropriate by the Council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 217/710
(E) The City reserves the right to reject any or all applications. Prior to permit issuance, the City may
also modify, postpone, or cancel any request for applications, or the entire program under this
chapter, at any time without liability, obligation, or commitment to any party, firm, or organization, to
the extent permitted under California State law. Persons submitting applications assume the risk
that all or any part of the program, or any particular category of permit potentially authorized under
this chapter, may be cancelled at any time prior to permit issuance. The City further reserves the
right to request and obtain additional information from any candidate submitting an application. In
addition to any other justification provided a failure to comply with other requirements in this
chapter, an application risks being rejected for any of the following reasons:
1. Proposal received after designated time and date.
2. Proposal not containing the required elements, exhibits, nor organized in the required format.
3. Proposal considered not fully responsive to this request for permit application. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-
2018)
5-28-10: PERSONNEL PROHIBITED FROM HOLDING A LICENSE OR EMPLOYEE
WORK PERMIT:
(A) Any person, including but not limited to any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other
group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular in which any of the
following actions or notices have been issued in non-compliance, shall be prohibited from holding a
cannabis commercial license or employee work permit in the City of Placerville. In addition, the
following shall be grounds for denial of a local license or employee work permit:
1. The applicant has been denied a license or has had a license suspended or revoked by any city,
county, city and county or any other State cannabis licensing authority;
2. The applicant was notified that they were conducting commercial cannabis activity in noncompliance
with this chapter or other City of Placerville ordinances, codes and requirements and
the applicant failed to discontinue operations in a timely manner;
3. Evidence that the applicant was in non-compliance of properly paying Federal, State or local
taxes and/or fees when notified by the appropriate agencies;
4. As of October 25, 2018, applicant was conducting commercial cannabis activity in the City of
Placerville in violation of local or State law.
5. No person shall be issued a commercial cannabis permit to operate who enters into an
agreement to lease, sublease or any other agreement, regardless of whether it is verbally or in
writing to any terms of use of the premises from a property owner, commercial broker or any third
party, that is in violation of this section unless that property is leased at fair market value and such
lease, sublease or agreement does not have any terms or conditions for the cannabis permit
licensee to pay the property owner, commercial broker, or any third party a percentage of gross
receipts, royalties, equity, or other unreasonable compensation as determined by the City. In
addition, all leases, subleases, or other agreements must be based on a monthly rate. (Ord.
1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-11: EXPIRATION OF COMMERCIAL CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMITS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 218/710
Each commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire twelve (12)
months after the date of its issuance. Commercial cannabis permits may be renewed as provided in
section 5-28-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-12: REVOCATION OF PERMITS:
Commercial cannabis business permits may be revoked for any violation of any law and/or any rule,
regulation and/or standard adopted pursuant to any policy, procedure or regulation in this chapter. (Ord.
1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-13: RENEWAL APPLICATIONS:
(A) An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit shall be filed at least sixty (60)
calendar days prior to the expiration date of the current permit.
(B) The renewal application shall contain all the information required for new applications.
(C) The applicant shall pay a fee in an amount to be set by the City Council to cover the costs of
processing the renewal permit application, together with any costs incurred by the City to administer
the program created under this chapter.
(D) An application for renewal of a commercial cannabis business permit shall be rejected if any of the
following exists:
1. The application is filed less than sixty (60) days before its expiration.
2. The commercial cannabis business permit is suspended or revoked at the time of the application.
3. The commercial cannabis business has not been in regular and continuous operation in the four
(4) months prior to the renewal application.
4. The commercial cannabis business has failed to conform to the requirements of this chapter, or
of any regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.
5. The permittee fails or is unable to renew its State of California license.
6. If the City or State has determined, based on substantial evidence, that the permittee or applicant
is in violation of the requirements of this chapter, of the City ordinance, or of the State rules and
regulations, and the City or State has determined that the violation is grounds for termination or
revocation of the commercial cannabis business permit.
(E) The City Manager or his/her designee(s) is authorized to make all decisions concerning the
issuance of a renewal permit. In making the decision, the City Manager or his/her designee(s) is
authorized to impose additional conditions to a renewal permit, if it is determined to be necessary to
ensure compliance with State or local laws and regulations or to preserve the public health, safety
or welfare. Appeals from the decision of the City Manager or his/her designee(s) shall be handled
pursuant to sections 5-28-15 through 5-28-17 of this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 219/710
(F) If a renewal application is rejected, a person may file a new application pursuant to this chapter no
sooner than one year from the date of the rejection. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-14: EFFECT OF STATE LICENSE SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR
TERMINATION:
Suspension of a license issued by the State of California, or by any of its departments or divisions,
shall immediately suspend the ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate within the City, until
the State of California, or its respective department or division, reinstates or reissues the State license.
Should the State of California, or any of its departments or divisions, revoke or terminate the license of
a commercial cannabis business, such revocation or termination shall also revoke or terminate the
ability of a commercial cannabis business to operate within the City of Placerville. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-
2018)
5-28-15: APPEALS:
Unless specifically provided elsewhere to the contrary, whenever an appeal is provided for in this
chapter from a decision of the City Manager or his/her designee(s), the appeal shall be conducted as
prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-16: WRITTEN REQUEST FOR APPEAL:
(A) Within ten (10) calendar days after the date of a decision of the City Manager or his/her designee(s)
to revoke, suspend or deny a permit, or to add conditions to a permit, an aggrieved party may
appeal such action by filing a written appeal with the City Clerk setting forth the reasons why the
decision was not proper.
(B) At the time of filing the appellant shall pay the designated appeal fee, established by resolution of
the City Council from time to time. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-17: APPEAL HEARING:
(A) Upon receipt of the written appeal, the City Clerk shall set the matter for a hearing before the City
Council. The City Council shall hear the matter de novo and shall conduct the hearing pursuant to
the procedures set forth by the City.
(B) The appeal shall be held within a reasonable time after the filing of the appeal, but in no event later
than ninety (90) days from the date of such filing. The City shall notify the appellant of the time and
location at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing.
(C) At the hearing, the appellant may present any information they deem relevant to the decision
appealed. The formal rules of evidence and procedure applicable in a court of law shall not apply to
the hearing.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 220/710
(D) The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-18: PERMITTEE SELECTION PROCESS:
(A) The City Manager shall adopt a procedure guideline and review criteria by which the top applicants
in each category of each commercial cannabis business shall be evaluated in a final determination
by the City Manager.
(B) At least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing, notice of the public hearing shall be sent to all
property owners located within six hundred feet (600') of the proposed business locations of each of
the finalists to be considered by the City Manager. The applicant shall also post a sign on the
property where the proposed cannabis business is to be located. The size and location of the sign
shall be determined by the Development Services Department and shall state that there is an
application pending for the operation of a cannabis business on that property. The notification shall
include the type of cannabis business being proposed, and contact information for the Development
Services Department for more information including the date, time and location of the public hearing
on the application.
(C) Official issuance of the commercial cannabis business permit(s), however, is conditioned upon the
prevailing candidate(s) obtaining all required land use approvals. Following the City Manager's
selection, the prevailing candidate(s) shall apply to the City's Development Services Department to
obtain any required land use approvals or entitlements for the permittee's location, if any. Land use
approvals shall include compliance with all applicable provisions of CEQA. The City Manager or
his/her designee(s) shall formally issue the commercial cannabis business permit(s) once the
Development Services Director or his/her designee(s) affirms that all of the required land use
approvals have been obtained.
(D) The City Manager shall either deny or approve the final candidates and shall select the top
candidates in each category of the commercial cannabis businesses. The City Manager's decision
as to the selection of the prevailing candidates shall be final, pending an appeal to the City Council,
if such an appeal is filed.
(E) Issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit does not create a land use entitlement. The
commercial cannabis business permit shall only be for a term of twelve (12) months and shall expire
at the end of the twelve (12) month period unless it is renewed as provided herein. Furthermore, no
permittee may begin operations, notwithstanding the issuance of a permit, unless all of the State
and local laws and regulations, including but not limited to the requirements of this chapter and of
the permit, have been complied with and until a State license is available and obtained by the
permitted operator as set forth in section 5-28-16 of this chapter.
(F) Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, the City Manager reserves the right to
reject any or all applications if it determines it would be in the best interest of the City, taking into
account any health, safety and welfare impacts on the community. Applicants shall have no right to
a commercial cannabis business permit until a permit is actually issued, and then only for the
duration of the permit's term. Each applicant assumes the risk that, at any time prior to the issuance
of a permit, the City Council may terminate or delay the program created under this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 221/710
(G) If an application is denied, a new application may not be filed for one year from the date of the
denial.
(H) Each person granted a commercial cannabis business permit shall be required to pay the permit
fee established by resolution of the City Council, to cover the costs of administering the commercial
cannabis business permit program created in this chapter. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-19: CHANGE IN LOCATION; UPDATED REGISTRATION FORM:
(A) Any time the dispensing, cultivation, manufacturing, transportation and distribution location
specified in the regulatory permit is changed, the applicant shall re-register with the City Manager or
his/her designee(s). The process and the fees for re-registration shall be the same as the process
and fees set forth for registration in subsections 5-28-13(C) and 5-28-20(A) of this chapter.
(B) Within fifteen (15) calendar days of any other change in the information provided in the registration
form or any change in status of compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including any change
in the commercial cannabis business ownership or management members, the applicant shall file
an updated registration form with the City Manager or his/her designee(s) for review along with a
registration amendment fee, as set forth in subsections 5-28-13(C) and 5-28-20(A) of this chapter.
(Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-20: TRANSFER OF CANNABIS BUSINESS PERMIT:
(A) The owner of a cannabis business permit shall not transfer ownership or control of the permit to
another person or entity unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from
the City Manager or his/her designee stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an
amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the City Manager or
his/her designee in accordance with all provisions of this chapter (as though the transferee were
applying for an original cannabis business permit) accompanied by a transfer fee in an amount set
by resolution of the City Council (or if not set, shall be the same amount as the application fee), and
the City Manager or his/her designee determines, after hearing, in accordance with this section that
the transferee passed the background check required for permittees and meets all other
requirements of this chapter.
(B) Commercial cannabis business permits issued through the grant of a transfer by the City Manager
or his/her designee shall be valid for a period of one year beginning on the day the City Manager or
his/her designee approves the transfer of the permit. Before the transferee's permit expires, the
transferee shall apply for a renewal permit in the manner required by this chapter.
(C) Changes in ownership of a permittee's business structure or a substantial change in the ownership
of a permittee business entity (changes that result in a change of more than 51 percent of the
original ownership), must be approved by the City Manager or his/her designee through the transfer
process contained in subsection (A) of this section. Failure to comply with this provision is grounds
for permit revocation.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 222/710
(D) A permittee may change the form of business entity without applying to the City Manager or his/her
designee for a transfer of permit, provided that either:
1. The membership of the new business entity is substantially similar to original permit holder
business entity (at least 51 percent of the membership is identical), or
2. If the original permittee is an unincorporated association, mutual or public benefit corporation,
agricultural or consumer cooperative corporation and subsequently transitions to or forms a new
business entity as allowed under the MAUCRSA and to comply with section 5-28-6 of this
chapter, provided that the board of directors (or in the case of an unincorporated association, the
individual(s) listed on the City permit application) of the original permittee entity are the same as
the new business entity.
Although a transfer is not required in these two (2) circumstances, the permit holder is required to
notify the City Manager in writing of the change within ten (10) days of the change. Failure to
comply with this provision is grounds for permit revocation.
(E) No commercial cannabis business permit may be transferred when the City Manager or his/her
designee has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.
(F) Any attempt to transfer a commercial cannabis business permit either directly or indirectly in
violation of this section is hereby declared void, and such a purported transfer shall be deemed a
ground for revocation of the permit. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-21: CITY BUSINESS LICENSE:
Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall obtain a City of Placerville
business license. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-22: BUILDING PERMITS AND INSPECTION:
Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business shall be subject to a mandatory
building inspection and must obtain all required permits and approvals which would otherwise be
required for any business of the same size and intensity operating in that zone. This includes but is not
limited to obtaining any required building permit(s), the Fire Department (also known as El Dorado
County Fire Protection District) approvals, Health Department approvals and other zoning and land use
permit(s) and approvals. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-23: CERTIFICATION FROM THE DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR:
Prior to commencing operations, a commercial cannabis business must obtain a certification from the
Development Services Director or his/her designee(s) certifying that the business is located on a site
that meets all of the requirements of title 10 of this Code. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-24: RIGHT TO OCCUPY AND TO USE PROPERTY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 223/710
As a condition precedent to the City's issuance of a commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to
this chapter, any person intending to open and to operate a commercial cannabis business shall
provide sufficient evidence of the legal right to occupy and to use the proposed location. In the event
the proposed location will be leased from the property owner, the applicant shall be required to provide
a signed and notarized statement from the owner of the property, acknowledging that the property
owner has read this chapter and consents to the operation of the commercial cannabis business on the
owner's property. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-25: LOCATION AND DESIGN OF CANNABIS BUSINESSES:
Cannabis businesses permitted to engage in retail storefront, retail non-storefront, microbusiness,
microbusiness-cultivation, microbusiness-distribution, microbusiness-manufacturing, testing labs, for
cannabis and cannabis products (collectively referred to in this section as "cannabis businesses") shall
only be operated within Heavy Commercial (HC), Commercial (C), Highway Commercial (HWC),
Central Business District (CBD) and Industrial (I) Zones at those locations where such activities are
permitted pursuant to title 10 of this Code.
(A) All properties in which cannabis businesses are located must also meet all of the following distance
requirements:
1. It shall be no closer than two hundred fifty feet (250') from any zoned parcel in the City
designated by State law pursuant to California Business and Professions Code section 26054(b)
and Health and Safety Code section 11362.768 as a sensitive use. The distance measured shall
be the horizontal distance measured in a straight line from the property line of those parcels in
subsection (A)2 of this section to the closest property line of the lot on which the cannabis
business is located.
2. It shall be no closer than two hundred fifty feet (250') from any parcel containing any of the
following:
(a) A school providing instruction in kindergarten or any grades 1 through 12, (whether public,
private, or charter, including pre-school, transitional kindergarten, and K - 12);
(b) A commercial daycare center licensed by the State, City or County that is in existence at the
time the license is issued, unless the State licensing authority or the City specifies a different
radius.
(c) A youth center that is in existence at the time the license is issued, unless the State licensing
authority or the City specifies a different radius.
(B) Each proposed cannabis business project shall:
1. Conform with the City 's general plan, any applicable specific plans, master plans, and design
requirements.
2. Comply with all applicable zoning and related development standards.
3. Be constructed in a manner that minimizes odors to surrounding uses, and promotes quality
design and construction.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 224/710
4. Be adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading
facilities, landscaping and all items required for the development.
5. Be served by highways adequate in width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and
quantity of traffic such use will generate.
6. Be provided with adequate electricity, sewerage, disposal, water, fire protection and storm
drainage facilities for the intended purpose. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-26: LIMITATIONS ON CITY'S LIABILITY:
To the fullest extent permitted by law, the City of Placerville shall not assume any liability whatsoever
with respect to having issued a commercial cannabis business permit pursuant to this chapter or
otherwise approving the operation of any commercial cannabis business. As a condition to the
approval of any commercial cannabis business permit, the applicant shall be required to meet all of the
following conditions before they can receive the commercial cannabis business permit:
(A) Execute an agreement, in a form approved by the City Attorney, agreeing to indemnify, defend (at
applicant's sole cost and expense), and hold the City of Placerville, and its officers, officials,
employees, representatives, and agents, harmless, from any and all claims, losses, damages,
injuries, liabilities or losses which arise out of, or which are in any way related to, the City's issuance
of the commercial cannabis business permit, the City's decision to approve the operation of the
commercial cannabis business or activity, the process used by the City in making its decision, or the
alleged violation of any Federal, State or local laws by the commercial cannabis business or any of
its officers, employees or agents, including any and all claims, injuries, damages or liabilities of any
kind arising from: 1) any repeal or amendment of this chapter or any provision of this Code relating
to cannabis, and 2) any arrest or prosecution of its managers, employees or members for violation
of State and Federal laws; 3) brought by adjacent or nearby property owners or any other parties for
any damages, injuries or other liabilities of any kind arising from commercial cannabis operations;
and 4) brought by any party for any problems, injuries, damages or other liabilities of any kind
arising out of the distribution of cannabis produced or processed by a business permitted by the
City of Placerville.
(B) Maintain insurance at coverage limits, and with conditions thereon determined necessary and
appropriate from time to time by the City Manager.
(C) Reimburse the City of Placerville for all costs and expenses, including but not limited to legal fees
and costs and court costs, which the City of Placerville may be required to pay as a result of any
legal challenge related to the City's approval of the applicant's commercial cannabis business
permit, or related to the City's approval of a commercial cannabis activity. The City of Placerville
may, at its sole discretion, participate at its own expense in the defense of any such action, but such
participation shall not relieve any of the obligations imposed hereunder. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-27: RECORDS AND RECORDKEEPING:
(A) Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain accurate books and
records in an electronic format, detailing all of the revenues and expenses of the business, and all
of its assets and liabilities. On no less than an annual basis (at or before the time of the renewal of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 225/710
a commercial cannabis business permit issued pursuant to this chapter), or at any time upon
reasonable request of the City, each commercial cannabis business shall file a sworn statement
detailing the number of sales by the commercial cannabis business during the previous twelvemonth
period (or shorter period based upon the timing of the request), provided on a per-month
basis. The statement shall also include gross sales for each month, and all applicable taxes paid or
due to be paid. On an annual basis, each owner and operator shall submit to the City a financial
audit of the business's operations conducted by an independent certified public accountant. Each
permittee shall be subject to a regulatory compliance review and financial audit as determined by
the City Manager or his/her designee(s).
(B) Each owner and operator of a commercial cannabis business shall maintain a current register of
the names and the contact information (including the name, address, and telephone number) of
anyone owning or holding an interest in the commercial cannabis business, and separately of all the
officers, managers, employees, agents and volunteers currently employed or otherwise engaged by
the commercial cannabis business. The register required by this paragraph shall be provided to the
City Manager or his/her designee(s) upon a reasonable request.
(C) Prior to State licensing, each commercial cannabis business shall maintain a record of all persons,
patients, collectives and primary caregivers served by the commercial cannabis business, for a
period of no less than four (4) years. Once a State license is obtained, the commercial cannabis
business must maintain such records only to the extent permitted or required by MAUCRSA.
(D) All commercial cannabis businesses shall maintain an inventory control and reporting system that
accurately documents the present location, amounts, and descriptions of all cannabis and cannabis
products for all stages of the growing and production or manufacturing, laboratory testing and
distribution processes until purchase as set forth in MAUCRSA.
(E) Each commercial cannabis business shall allow the City of Placerville officials to have access to the
business's books, records, accounts, together with any other data or documents relevant to its
permitted commercial cannabis activities, for the purpose of conducting an audit or examination.
Books, records, accounts, and any and all relevant data or documents will be produced no later
than twenty four (24) hours after receipt of the City's request, unless otherwise stipulated by the
City. The City may require the materials to be submitted in an electronic format that is compatible
with the City's software and hardware. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-28: SECURITY MEASURES:
(A) A permitted commercial cannabis business shall implement sufficient security measures to deter
and prevent the unauthorized entrance into areas containing cannabis or cannabis products, and to
deter and prevent the theft of cannabis or cannabis products at the commercial cannabis business.
Except as may otherwise be determined by the City Manager or his/her designee(s), these security
measures shall include, but shall not be limited to, all of the following:
1. Alarm system (perimeter, fire, and panic buttons).
2. Remote monitoring of alarm systems by licensed security professionals.
3. Perimeter lighting systems (including motion sensors) for after-hours security.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 226/710
4. Perimeter security and lighting as approved by the Police Chief and Director of the Development
Services Department or his/her designee.
5. Preventing individuals from remaining on the premises of the commercial cannabis business if
they are not engaging in an activity directly related to the permitted operations of the commercial
cannabis business.
6. Establishing limited access areas accessible only to authorized commercial cannabis business
personnel.
7. Except for live growing plants which are being cultivated at a cultivation operation that is a
component of a microbusiness, all cannabis and cannabis products shall be stored in a secured
and locked vault or vault equivalent. All safes and vaults shall be compliant with Underwriter
Laboratories burglary-resistant and fire-resistant standards. All cannabis and cannabis products,
including live plants that are being cultivated, shall be kept in a manner as to prevent diversion,
theft, and loss.
8. Installing 24-hour security surveillance cameras of at least HD-quality to monitor all entrances
and exits to and from the premises, all interior spaces within the commercial cannabis business
which are open and accessible to the public, all interior spaces where cannabis, cash or currency,
is being stored for any period of time on a regular basis and all interior spaces where diversion of
cannabis could reasonably occur. All cameras shall record in color. All exterior cameras shall be
in weather-proof enclosures, shall be located so as to minimize the possibility of vandalism, and
shall have the capability to automatically switch to black and white in low light conditions. The
commercial cannabis business shall be responsible for ensuring that the security surveillance
camera's footage is remotely accessible by the City Manager or his/her designee(s), and that it is
compatible with the City's software and hardware. In addition, remote and real-time, live access
to the video footage from the cameras shall be provided to the City Manager or his/her
designee(s). Video recordings shall be maintained for a minimum of ninety (90) days and shall be
made available to the City Manager or his/her designee(s) upon request. Video shall be of
sufficient quality for effective prosecution of any crime found to have occurred on the site of the
commercial cannabis business, and shall be capable of enlargement via projection or other
means. Internet protocol address information shall be provided to the Placerville Police
Department by the commercial cannabis business, to facilitate remote monitoring of security
cameras by the department or its designee.
9. Sensors shall be installed to detect entry and exit from all secure areas, and shall be monitored
in real time by a security company licensed by the State of California Bureau of Security and
Investigative Services.
10. Panic buttons shall be installed in all commercial cannabis businesses with direct notification to
Placerville Police Department dispatch, and shall be configured to immediately alert dispatch for
the Placerville Police Department.
11. Having a professionally installed, maintained, and monitored real-time alarm system by a
security company licensed by the State of California Bureau of Security and Investigative
Services.
12. Any bars installed on the windows or the doors of the commercial cannabis business shall be
installed only on the interior of the building.
13. Security personnel shall be on-site twenty four (24) hours a day or alternative security as
authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee(s), and must have a verified response
security patrol when closed. Security personnel must be licensed by the State of California
Bureau of Security and Investigative Services personnel and shall be subject to the prior review
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 227/710
and approval of the City Manager or his/her designee(s), with such approval not to be
unreasonably withheld. Firearms may be carried by security personnel while they are on duty if
authorized by the Chief of Police.
14. Each commercial cannabis business shall have the capability to remain secure during a power
outage and shall ensure that all access doors are not solely controlled by an electronic access
panel to ensure that locks are not released during a power outage.
15. Entrance areas are to be locked at all times and under the control of a designated responsible
party that is either: a) an employee of the commercial cannabis business; or b) a licensed security
professional.
16. Each commercial cannabis business shall have an accounting software system in place to
provide point of sale data as well as audit trails or both product and cash, where applicable.
17. Each commercial cannabis business shall demonstrate to the Chief of Police, City Manager or
their designees, compliance with the State's track and trace system for cannabis and cannabis
products, as soon as it is operational.
18. Each commercial cannabis business shall have state of the art network security protocols in
place to protect computer information and all digital data.
19. Exterior vegetation shall be planted, altered and maintained in a fashion that precludes its use
as a hiding place for persons on the premises.
20. Emergency access and emergency evacuation plans that are in compliance with State and local
fire safety standards.
(B) Each commercial cannabis business shall identify a designated security representative/liaison to
the City of Placerville, who shall be reasonably available to meet with the City Manager or his/her
designee(s) regarding any security related measures and/or operational issues. The designated
security representative/liaison shall, on behalf of the commercial cannabis business, annually
maintain a copy of the current security plan on the premises of the business, to present to the City
Manager or his/her designee upon request that meets the following requirements:
1. Confirms that a designated manager will be on duty during business hours and will be
responsible for monitoring the behavior of employees.
2. Identifies all managers of the commercial cannabis business and their contact phone numbers.
3. Confirms that first aid supplies and operational fire extinguishers are located in the service areas
and the manager's office.
4. Confirms that burglar, fire, and panic alarms are operational and monitored by a licensed security
company twenty four (24) hours a day, seven (7) days a week, and provides contact information
for each licensed security company.
5. Identify a sufficient number of licensed, interior and exterior security personnel who will monitor
individuals inside and outside the commercial cannabis business, the parking lot, and any
adjacent property under the business' control.
6. Confirm that the licensed security personnel shall regularly monitor the parking lot and any
adjacent property to ensure that these areas are:
(a) Free of individuals loitering or causing a disturbance;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 228/710
(b) Cleared of employees and their vehicles one-half (1/2) hour after closing.
(C) As part of the application and permitting process each commercial cannabis business shall have a
storage and transportation plan, which describes in detail the procedures for safely and securely
storing and transporting all cannabis, cannabis products, and any currency.
(D) The commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with the City whenever the City Manager or
his/her designee(s) makes a request, without prior notice, to inspect or audit the effectiveness of
any security plan or of any other requirement of this chapter.
(E) A commercial cannabis business shall notify the City Manager or his/her designee(s) within twenty
four (24) hours after discovering any of the following:
1. Significant discrepancies identified during inventory. The level of significance shall be determined
by the regulations promulgated by the City Manager or his/her designee(s).
2. Diversion, theft, loss, or any criminal activity involving the commercial cannabis business or any
agent or employee of the commercial cannabis business.
3. The loss or unauthorized alteration of records related to cannabis, customers or employees or
agents of the commercial cannabis business.
4. Any other breach of security.
(F) Compliance with the foregoing requirements shall be verified by the City Manager or his/her
designee prior to commencing business operations. The City Manager or his/her designee may
supplement these security requirements once operations begin, subject to review by the City
Manager if requested by the business owner. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-29: RESTRICTION ON ALCOHOL AND TOBACCO SALES:
(A) No person shall cause or permit the sale, dispensing, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on or
about the premises of the commercial cannabis business.
(B) No person shall cause or permit the sale of tobacco products on or about the premises of the
commercial cannabis business.
(C) No person shall consume cannabis, cannabis products, or alcohol on the premises of any
commercial cannabis business. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-30: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-31: FEES AND CHARGES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 229/710
(A) No person may commence or continue any commercial cannabis activity in the City, without timely
paying in full all fees and charges required for the operation of a commercial cannabis activity. Fees
and charges associated with the operation of a commercial cannabis activity shall be established by
resolution of the City Council which may be amended from time to time.
(B) All commercial cannabis businesses authorized to operate under this chapter shall pay all Sales,
Use, Business and other applicable Taxes, and all license, registration, and other fees required
under Federal, State and local law. Each commercial cannabis business shall cooperate with City
with respect to any reasonable request to audit the commercial cannabis business' books and
records for the purpose of verifying compliance with this section, including but not limited to a
verification of the amount of taxes required to be paid during any period.
(C) Prior to operating in the City and as a condition of issuance of a regulatory permit, the operator of
each cannabis facility shall enter into an operational or community benefit agreement with the City
setting forth the terms and conditions under which the cannabis facility will operate that are in
addition to the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, public outreach and
education, community service, payment of fees and other charges as mutually agreed, and such
other terms and conditions that will protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord.
1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-32: GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Hours; Age Of Operator Or Permittee: Commercial cannabis businesses may operate only during
the hours specified in the commercial cannabis business permit issued by the City. No person under
the age of twenty one (21) shall operate, or be issued a permit for, a commercial cannabis business
of any kind.
(B) Restriction On Consumption: Cannabis shall not be consumed by any employee or any other
person on the premises of any commercial cannabis business.
(C) Visibility; Outdoor Storage: No cannabis or cannabis products or graphics depicting cannabis or
cannabis products shall be visible from the exterior of any property issued a commercial cannabis
business permit, or on any of the vehicles owned or used as part of the commercial cannabis
business. No outdoor storage of cannabis or cannabis products is permitted at any time.
(D) Reporting And Tracking Of Product And Of Gross Sales: Each commercial cannabis business shall
have in place a point-of-sale or management inventory tracking system to track and report on all
aspects of the commercial cannabis business including, but not limited to, such matters as cannabis
tracking, inventory data, gross sales (by weight and by sale) and other information which may be
deemed necessary by the City. The commercial cannabis business shall ensure that such
information is compatible with the City's record-keeping systems. In addition, the system must have
the capability to produce historical transactional data for review. Furthermore, any system selected
must be approved and authorized by the City Manager or his/her designee(s) prior to being used by
the permittee.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 230/710
(E) Licensed Facilities: All cannabis and cannabis products sold, distributed or manufactured shall be
cultivated, manufactured, and transported by licensed facilities that maintain operations in full
conformance with the State and local regulations.
(F) Emergency Contact: Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the City Manager or his/her
designee(s) with the name, telephone number (both land line and mobile, if available) of an on-site
employee or owner to whom emergency notice can be provided at any hour of the day.
(G) Signage And Notices:
1. In addition to the requirements otherwise set forth in this section, business identification signage
for a commercial cannabis business shall conform to the requirements of the City of Placerville
ordinance, including, but not limited to, seeking the issuance of a City sign permit.
2. No signs placed on the premises of a commercial cannabis business shall obstruct any entrance
or exit to the building or any window.
3. Each entrance to a commercial cannabis business shall be visibly posted with a clear and legible
notice indicating that smoking, ingesting, or otherwise consuming cannabis on the premises or in
the areas adjacent to the commercial cannabis business is prohibited.
4. Business identification signage shall be limited to that needed for identification only and shall not
contain any logos or information that identifies, advertises, or lists the services or the products
offered. No commercial cannabis business shall advertise by having a person holding a sign and
advertising the business to passersby, whether such person is on the premises of the commercial
cannabis business or elsewhere including, but not limited to, the public right-of-way.
5. Signage shall not be directly illuminated, internally or externally. No banners, flags, billboards or
other prohibited signs may be used at any time.
6. In accordance with State law and regulations or as stipulated in the City of Placerville regulatory
permit, holders of a commercial cannabis business permit shall agree that, as an express and
ongoing condition of permit issuance and subsequent renewal, the holder of the permit shall be
prohibited from advertising any commercial cannabis business located in the City of Placerville
utilizing a billboard (fixed or mobile), bus shelter, placard, aircraft, or other similar forms of
advertising. This paragraph is not intended to place limitations on the ability of a commercial
cannabis business to advertise in other legally authorized forms, including on the internet, in
magazines, or in other similar ways.
(H) Minors:
1. Persons under the age of twenty one (21) years shall not be allowed on the premises of a
commercial cannabis business and shall not be allowed to serve as a driver for a mobile delivery
service. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to employ any person at
a commercial cannabis business who is not at least twenty one (21) years of age.
2. The entrance to the commercial cannabis business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a
notice that no person under the age of twenty one (21) years of age is permitted to enter upon the
premises of the commercial cannabis business.
(I) Odor Control: Odor control devices and techniques shall be incorporated in all commercial cannabis
businesses to ensure that odors from cannabis are not detectable off-site. Commercial cannabis
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 231/710
businesses shall provide a sufficient odor absorbing ventilation and exhaust system so that odor
generated inside the commercial cannabis business that is distinctive to its operation is not
detected outside of the facility, anywhere on adjacent property or public rights-of-way, on or about
the exterior or interior common area walkways, hallways, breezeways, foyers, lobby areas, or any
other areas available for use by common tenants or the visiting public, or within any other unit
located inside the same building as the commercial cannabis business. As such, commercial
cannabis businesses must install and maintain the following equipment, or any other equipment
which the Development Services Director or his/her designee(s) determine is a more effective
method or technology:
1. An exhaust air filtration system with odor control that prevents internal odors from being emitted
externally;
2. An air system that creates negative air pressure between the commercial cannabis business's
interior and exterior, so that the odors generated inside the commercial cannabis business are
not detectable on the outside of the commercial cannabis business.
(J) Display Of Permit And City Business License: The original copy of the commercial cannabis
business permit issued by the City pursuant to this chapter and the City issued business license
shall be posted inside the commercial cannabis business in a location readily-visible to the public.
(K) Background Check: Pursuant to California Penal Code sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11),
which authorizes City authorities to access State and local summary criminal history information for
employment, licensing, or certification purposes; and authorizes access to Federal level criminal
history information by transmitting fingerprint images and related information to the Department of
Justice to be transmitted to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, every person listed as an owner,
manager, supervisor, employee, contract employee or who otherwise works in a commercial
cannabis business must submit fingerprints and other information deemed necessary by the Chief
of Police or his/her designee(s) for a background check by the City of Placerville's Police
Department. Pursuant to California Penal Code sections 11105(b)(11) and 13300(b)(11), which
requires that there be a requirement or exclusion from employment, licensing or certification based
on specific criminal conduct on the part of the subject of the record. No person shall be issued a
permit to operate a commercial cannabis business or a related work permit unless they have first
cleared the background check, as determined by the Chief of Police or his/her designee(s), as
required by this section. A fee for the cost of the background investigation, which shall be the actual
cost to the City of Placerville to conduct the background investigation as it deems necessary and
appropriate, shall be paid at the time the application for a commercial cannabis business permit is
submitted.
(L) Loitering: The owner and/or operator of a commercial cannabis business shall prohibit loitering by
persons outside the facility both on the premises and within fifty feet (50') of the premises.
(M) Permits And Other Approvals: Prior to the establishment of any commercial cannabis business or
the operation of any such business, the person intending to establish a commercial cannabis
business must first obtain all applicable planning, zoning, building, and other applicable permits
from the relevant governmental agency which may be applicable to the zoning district in which such
commercial cannabis business intends to establish and to operate.
(N) Training: Each commercial cannabis operator shall establish minimum training standards for all
employees. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 232/710
5-28-33: OTHER OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS:
The City Manager or his/her designee may develop other commercial cannabis business operational
requirements or regulations as are determined to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-34: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR STORE FRONT/RETAIL FACILITIES:
(A) Number Of Retailers: No more than the number of cannabis retailers adopted by resolution may
operate within the City of Placerville at any one time and shall be issued a permit by the City of
Placerville.
(B) Deliveries: Retailers may only deliver to customers within a county or city that does not expressly
prohibit delivery by ordinance. Should subsequent State law preempt local jurisdictions from
prohibiting deliveries, the City shall reserve the right to regulate deliveries and require prior
authorization in the form of a permit, pursuant to its land use and police powers under article XI,
section 7 of the California Constitution.
(C) Age Verification: Retailers shall verify the age and all necessary documentation of each individual
to ensure the customer is not under the age of eighteen (18) years and proper identification is
checked and that the potential customer has a valid doctor's recommendation and/or Health and
Safety Code section 11362.71 identification card. For adult-use purchases they shall verify that all
customers are twenty one (21) years of age or older for the purchase of cannabis or cannabis
products.
(D) Entrances: Entrances into the retailer shall be locked at all times with entry strictly controlled. A
"buzz-in" electronic/mechanical entry system shall be utilized to limit access to and entry to the
retailer to separate it from the reception/lobby area. Individuals must show their physician's
recommendation, or a cannabis card issued pursuant to Health and Safety Code section 11362.71
in order to gain access into the retailer. Doctor recommendations are not to be obtained or provided
at the retail location.
(E) Security: Uniformed licensed security personnel shall be employed to monitor site activity, control
loitering and site access, and to serve as a visual deterrent to unlawful activities. Security personnel
may be allowed to carry firearms if authorized by the Chief of Police.
(F) Quantity Of Product: Retailers may have only that quantity of cannabis and cannabis products to
meet the daily demand readily available for sale on-site in the retail sales area of the retailer.
(G) Restrooms: All restroom facilities shall remain locked and under the control of management.
(H) Customers: Retailers and microbusinesses authorized to conduct retail activities shall only serve
customers who are within the licensed premises, or at a delivery address that meets the
requirements of this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 233/710
1. The sale and delivery of cannabis goods shall not occur through a pass-through window or a
slide-out tray to the exterior of the premises.
2. Retailers or microbusinesses shall not operate as or with a drive-in or drive-through at which
cannabis goods are sold to persons within or about a motor vehicle.
3. No cannabis goods shall be sold and/or delivered by any means or method to any person within
a motor vehicle.
4. All cannabis goods sold by a retail business shall be contained in child-resistant packaging.
5. Retailers shall record point-of-sale areas and areas where cannabis goods are displayed for sale
on the video surveillance system. At each point-of-sale location, camera placement must allow for
the recording of the facial features of any person purchasing or selling cannabis goods, or any
person in the retail area, with sufficient clarity to determine identity.
6. A retail licensee or microbusiness licensee who is engaged in retail sale shall hire or contract for
security personnel who are at least twenty one (21) years of age to provide security services for
the licensed retail premises. All security personnel hired or contracted for by the licensee shall be
licensed by the Bureau of Security and Investigative Services and shall comply with chapters 11.4
and 11.5 of division 3 of the Business and Professions Code.
(I) Access To Retailer Premises:
1. Access to the premises of a retail licensee/permittee shall be limited to individuals who are at
least twenty one (21) years of age.
2. Notwithstanding subsection (I)1 of this section, individuals who are at least eighteen (18) years of
age and in possession of a valid physician's recommendation shall be granted access to the
premises of a retail licensee/permittee for the sole purpose of purchasing medicinal cannabis
consistent with the physician's recommendation.
(J) Authorized Sales: A retailer shall only sell adult-use cannabis and adult-use cannabis products to
individuals who are at least twenty one (21) years of age. A retailer shall only sell medicinal
cannabis or medicinal cannabis products to individuals who are at least eighteen (18) years of age,
but not yet twenty one (21), if those individuals are in possession of a valid physician's
recommendation. Medicinal cannabis sales to individuals twenty one (21) years of age and older
are unrestricted.
(K) Limited Access Areas: A retailer shall establish limited-access areas and permit only authorized
individuals to enter the limited-access areas. Authorized individuals include individuals employed by
the retailer as well as any outside vendors, contractors, or other individuals conducting business
that requires access to the limited access area. All individuals granted access to the limited access
area shall be at least twenty one (21) years of age, and if not employed by the retailer, shall be
escorted at all times by an employee of the licensee/permittee. A retailer shall maintain a log of all
individuals who are not employees who are granted access to the limited access area. These logs
shall be made available to the Chief of Police or the Development Services Director upon request.
(L) Microbusiness - Commercial Activity: All cultivation, manufacturing, distribution, and retail activities
performed by a licensee under a type 12-microbusiness permit shall occur on the same licensed
premises. Areas of the premises for manufacturing and cultivation shall be separated from the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 234/710
distribution and retail areas by a wall and all doors between the areas shall remain closed when not
in use.
(M) Hours: Operating hours of the store front retailer license shall be limited to the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. through nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., seven (7) days a week.
(N) Store Front/Retail Security Requirements: All provisions incorporated within section 5-28-28,
"Security Measures", of this chapter are directly applicable to and binding on all commercial
cannabis businesses, including all store front/retail businesses. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-35: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-STORE FRONT RETAILER:
(A) Non-store front retailer (delivery) license owners and operators are required to verify the age and
the necessary documentation of each medical customer to ensure the customer is not under the
age of eighteen (18) years, and to verify that the potential customer has a valid doctor's
recommendation. Doctor recommendations are not to be obtained or provided at the retail location.
(B) All store front retailers, non-store front retailers (delivery) and microbusinesses which conduct
deliveries into or within the City of Placerville shall be required to obtain a permit from the City of
Placerville in order to conduct retail sales regardless if they are located in the City or another local
jurisdiction.
(C) Operating hours of the non-store front retailer license shall be limited to the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. through nine o'clock (9:00) P.M., seven (7) days a week.
(D) The commercial non-store front retailer shall only sell cannabis or cannabis products to a natural
person twenty one (21) years of age or older, or a natural person eighteen (18) years of age or
older who possesses a physician's recommendation for cannabis medical use only.
(E) The commercial cannabis non-store front retailer may only have on-site that quantity of cannabis
and cannabis products reasonably anticipated to meet the weekly demand for which they may need
to be readily available for sale. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-36: NON-STORE FRONT RETAILER VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS:
Prior to commencing operations, a cannabis non-store front retailer shall provide the following
information to the City.
(A) Proof of ownership of the vehicle or a valid lease for any and all vehicles that will be used to deliver
cannabis or cannabis products.
(B) The year, make, model, license plate number, and numerical vehicle identification number (VIN) for
any and all vehicles that will be used to deliver cannabis goods.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 235/710
(C) Proof of insurance as required in subsection 5-28-26(B) of this chapter for any and all vehicles
being used to deliver cannabis goods.
(D) The licensee shall provide the City with the information required by this section in writing for any
new vehicle that will be used to deliver cannabis goods prior to using the vehicle to deliver cannabis
goods.
(E) The licensee shall provide the City with any changes to the information required by this section in
writing within thirty (30) calendar days. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-37: PERMISSIBLE DELIVERY LOCATIONS AND CUSTOMERS:
Non-store front businesses permitted to engage in delivery of cannabis and cannabis products are
subject to the following requirements:
(A) A cannabis business must be authorized by the City of Placerville to deliver cannabis goods to a
residential address in the City of Placerville and/or to other jurisdictions in which it is not prohibited
to conduct deliveries of cannabis goods;
(B) A licensed cannabis business shall not deliver cannabis goods to an address located on publicly
owned land or any address on land or in a building leased by a public agency.
(C) A licensed cannabis business shall comply with all requirements of State and local law pertaining to
the cannabis permit and all subsequent policies, procedures and regulations which may be
amended by the City Manager from time to time in order to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-
2018)
5-28-38: RESTRICTION ON STORE FRONT RETAIL FACILITIES:
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person, limited liability company, corporation, collective, cooperative or
any other entity to manage or operate a store front facility in which customers are permitted on the
premises for which it will sell, exchange, barter, transfer, and/or promote, any cannabis or cannabis
products in the City for commercial purpose unless they have been issued a commercial cannabis
permit pursuant to this chapter and authorized to conduct such activities. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-39: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR A MICROBUSINESS-CULTIVATION
FACILITY AND ANY OTHER CULTIVATION:
(A) Outdoor cultivation is prohibited. The only indoor commercial cultivation that is authorized, if duly
permitted by the City pursuant to this chapter, is indoor commercial cultivation that is a component
of a microbusiness.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 236/710
(B) In no case, shall cannabis plants be visible from a public or private road, sidewalk, park or any
common public viewing area.
(C) Commercial cannabis cultivation which is permitted in the City of Placerville shall not exceed ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of canopy space permitted by State law as part of a microbusiness
license.
(D) Cannabis cultivation shall be conducted in accordance with State and local laws related to land
conversion, grading, electricity, water usage, water quality, woodland and riparian habitat protection,
agricultural discharges, and similar matters.
(E) Pesticides and fertilizers shall be properly labeled and stored to avoid contamination through
erosion, leakage or inadvertent damage from pests, rodents or other wildlife.
(F) The cultivation of cannabis shall at all times be operated in such a way as to ensure the health,
safety, and welfare of the public, the employees working at the commercial cannabis business,
visitors to the area, neighboring properties, and the end users of the cannabis being cultivated, to
protect the environment from harm to streams, fish, and wildlife; to ensure the security of the
cannabis being cultivated; and to safeguard against the diversion of cannabis.
(G) All applicants for a cannabis cultivation permit shall submit to the following in addition to the
information generally otherwise required for a commercial cannabis business:
1. A cultivation and operations plan that meets or exceeds minimum legal standards for water
usage, conservation and use; drainage, runoff, and erosion control; watershed and habitat
protection; and proper storage of fertilizers, pesticides, and other regulated products to be used
on the parcel, and a description of the cultivation activities and schedule of activities during each
month of growing and harvesting, or explanation of growth cycles and anticipated harvesting
schedules for all-season harvesting.
2. A description of a legal water source, irrigation plan, and projected water use.
3. Identification of the source of electrical power and plan for compliance with applicable Building
Codes and related codes.
4. Plan for addressing odor and other public nuisances that may derive from the cultivation site.
(H) Persons who cultivate cannabis for their sole personal use, or qualified primary caregivers who
cultivate medical cannabis on behalf of their qualified patient(s) may do so in quantities authorized
by State law and in accordance with all State and local regulations without submitting any
application or permit. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance may also be
deemed to exist if such activity is determined to be related to the cultivation of cannabis and
produces:
1. Odors which are disturbing to people residing or present on adjacent or nearby property or areas
open to the public.
2. Repeated responses to the property from law enforcement or other Code Enforcement Officers
(more than 3 times in a 1-year period).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 237/710
3. Repeated disruption to the free passage of persons or vehicles in the neighborhood (more than 3
times in a 1-year period) as reported to law enforcement officers or the City Code Enforcement
Officer.
4. Any other impact which adversely impacts the health, safety or general welfare of people on
adjacent or nearby property or areas open to the public.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the City's authority to abate any
nuisance which may exist from the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, processing or storage of
cannabis plants or any part thereof from any location.
All cannabis cultivation shall be subject to title 1, chapters 4, 4A and 4B of this Code (public
nuisance) and the State Housing Code3 and other applicable provisions of local and State law.
(Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-39.5: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR DISTRIBUTORS:
(A) A distributor shall not store non-cannabis goods or non-cannabis accessories that are to be sold to
another party on any licensed premises. Additionally, a distributor shall not distribute non-cannabis
goods or non-cannabis accessories at a licensed premises. For the purposes of this section, noncannabis
goods are any goods that do not meet the definition of cannabis goods as defined in
section 5000(c) of the California Code of Regulations.
(B) After taking physical possession of a cannabis goods batch, the distributor shall contact a testing
laboratory and arrange for a laboratory employee to come to the distributor's licensed premises to
select a representative sample for laboratory testing.
(C) A distributor shall ensure that all cannabis goods batches are stored separately and distinctly from
other cannabis goods batches on the distributor's premises.
(D) The distributor shall ensure that the batch size from which the sample is taken meets the
requirements of State law, specifically the testing provisions within the California Code of
Regulations.
(E) A distributor or an employee of the distributor shall be physically present to observe the laboratory
employee obtain the sample of cannabis goods for testing and shall ensure that the increments are
taken from throughout the batch. The sampling shall be video-recorded and the recording kept
available to State and local authorities for a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days, pursuant to
section 5305 of the California Code of Regulations.
(F) A distributor shall not transport cannabis or cannabis products to a licensed retail facility until and
unless it has verified that the cannabis or cannabis products have been tested and certified by a
testing lab as being in compliance with State health and safety requirements pursuant to sections
5705, 5710 and 5714 of the California Code of Regulations. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-40: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS FOR TESTING LABS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 238/710
(A) Testing labs shall be required to conduct all testing in a manner pursuant to Business and
Professions Code section 26100 and shall be subject to State and local law. Each testing lab shall
be subject to additional regulations as determined from time to time as more regulations are
developed under this chapter and any subsequent State of California legislation regarding the
same.
(B) Testing labs shall conduct all testing in a manner consistent with general requirements for the
competence of testing and calibrations activities, including sampling using verified methods.
(C) All cannabis testing laboratories performing testing shall obtain and maintain ISO/IEC 17025
accreditation as required by the Bureau of Cannabis Control.
(D) Testing labs shall destroy any harvest batch whose testing sample indicates noncompliance with
health and safety standards required by the bureau unless remedial measures can bring the
cannabis or cannabis products into compliance with quality standards as specified by law and
implemented by the bureau.
(E) Each operator shall ensure that a testing laboratory employee takes the sample of cannabis or
cannabis products from the distributor's premises for testing required by State law and that the
testing laboratory employee transports the sample to the testing laboratory.
(F) Except as provided by State law, a testing laboratory shall not acquire or receive cannabis or
cannabis products except from a licensee in accordance with State law, and shall not distribute,
sell, or dispense cannabis, or cannabis products, from the licensed premises from which the
cannabis or cannabis products were acquired or received. All transfer or transportation shall be
performed pursuant to a specified chain of custody protocol.
(G) A testing laboratory may receive and test samples of cannabis or cannabis products from a
qualified patient or primary caregiver only if the qualified patient or primary caregiver presents the
qualified patient's valid physician's recommendation for cannabis for medicinal purpose. A testing
lab shall not certify samples from a qualified patient or primary caregiver for resale or transfer to
another party or licensee. All tests performed by a testing laboratory for a qualified patient or
primary caregiver shall be recorded with the name of the qualified patient or primary caregiver and
the amount of the cannabis or cannabis products received. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-41: CANNABIS MANUFACTURING; EDIBLES AND OTHER CANNABIS
PRODUCTS; SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF EDIBLE AND OTHER CANNABIS
PRODUCTS:
(A) Cannabis manufacturing shall only be permitted as part of a microbusiness pursuant to section 5-
28-39 of this chapter or any subsequent created manufacturing State license (using non-volatile
solvents) as defined in MAUCRSA, may be permitted to operate within those zone districts as
defined in title 10 of this Code.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 239/710
(B) Any compressed gases used in the manufacturing process shall not be stored on any property
within the City of Placerville in containers that exceeds the amount which is approved by the
Placerville Fire Protection District and authorized by the regulatory permit. Each site or parcel
subject to a commercial cannabis business permit shall be limited to a total number of tanks as
authorized by the Placerville Fire District on the property at any time.
(C) Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use heat, screens, presses, steam distillation, ice water,
ethanol and other methods without employing solvents or gases to create keef, hashish, bubble
hash, or infused dairy butter, or oils or fats derived from natural sources, and other extracts.
(D) If an extraction process uses a professional grade closed loop CO2 gas extraction system every
vessel must be certified by the manufacturer for its safe use. The CO2 must be of at least ninety
nine percent (99%) purity.
(E) Closed loop systems for compressed gas extraction systems must be commercially manufactured
and bear a permanently affixed and visible serial number.
(F) Certification from an engineer licensed by the State of California, or by a certified industrial
hygienist, must be provided to the Development Service Department for a professional grade
closed loop system used by any commercial cannabis manufacturing manufacturer to certify that
the system was commercially manufactured, is safe for its intended use, and was built to codes of
recognized and generally accepted good engineering practices, including but not limited to:
1. The American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME);
2. American National Standards Institute (ANSI);
3. Underwriters Laboratories (UL); or
4. The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM).
(G) The certification document must contain the signature and stamp of the professional engineer or
industrial hygienist and serial number of the extraction unit being certified.
(H) Professional closed loop systems, other equipment used, the extraction operation, and facilities
must be approved for their use by the Fire Department and meet any required Fire, Safety, and
Building Code requirements specified in the California Building Reference Codes.
(I) Cannabis manufacturing facilities may use food grade glycerin, ethanol, and propylene glycol
solvents to create or refine extracts. Ethanol should be removed from the extract in a manner to
recapture the solvent and ensure that it is not vented into the atmosphere.
(J) Cannabis manufacturing facilities creating cannabis extracts must develop standard operating
procedures, good manufacturing practices, and a training plan prior to producing extracts for the
marketplace.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 240/710
(K) Any person using solvents or gases in a closed looped system to create cannabis extracts must be
fully trained on how to use the system, have direct access to applicable material safety data sheets
and handle and store the solvents and gases safely.
(L) Parts per million for one gram (1 g) of finished extract cannot exceed State standards for any
residual solvent or gas when quality assurance tested. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-42: PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS, STANDARDS AND OTHER LEGAL
DUTIES:
(A) In addition to any regulations adopted by the City Council, the City Manager or his/her designee is
authorized to establish any additional rules, regulations and standards governing the issuance,
denial or renewal of commercial cannabis business permits, the ongoing operation of commercial
cannabis businesses and the City's oversight, or concerning any other subject determined to be
necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
(B) Regulations shall be published on the City's website.
(C) Regulations promulgated by the City Manager shall become effective upon date of publication.
Commercial cannabis businesses shall be required to comply with all State and local laws and
regulations, including but not limited to any rules, regulations or standards adopted by the City
Manager or his/her designee.
(D) Testing labs, distribution facilities and special events shall be subject to State law and shall be
subject to additional regulations as determined from time to time as more regulations are developed
under subsection 5-28-41(A) of this chapter and any subsequent State of California legislation
regarding the same. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-43: COMMUNITY RELATIONS:
(A) Each commercial cannabis business shall provide the name, telephone number, and email address
of a community relations contact to whom notice of problems associated with the commercial
cannabis business can be provided. Each commercial cannabis business shall also provide the
above information to all businesses and residences located within two hundred fifty feet (250') of the
commercial cannabis business.
(B) During the first year of operation pursuant to this chapter, the owner, manager, and community
relations representative from each commercial cannabis business holding a permit issued pursuant
to this chapter shall attend meetings with the City Manager or his/her designee(s), and other
interested parties as deemed appropriate by the City Manager or his/her designee(s), to discuss
costs, benefits, and other community issues arising as a result of implementation of this chapter.
After the first year of operation, the owner, manager, and community relations representative from
each such commercial cannabis business shall meet with the City Manager or his/her designee(s)
when and as requested by the City Manager or his/her designee(s).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 241/710
(C) Commercial cannabis businesses to which a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall develop
a City approved public outreach and educational program for youth organizations and educational
institutions that outlines the risks of youth addiction to cannabis, and that identifies resources
available to youth related to drugs and drug addiction. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-44: FEES DEEMED DEBT TO THE CITY OF PLACERVILLE:
The amount of any fee, cost or charge imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the
City of Placerville that is recoverable via an authorized administrative process as set forth in the City
ordinance, or in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-45: PERMIT HOLDER RESPONSIBLE FOR VIOLATIONS:
The person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter shall be responsible for all violations of
the laws of the State of California or of the regulations and/or the ordinances of the City of Placerville,
whether committed by the permittee or any employee or agent of the permittee, which violations occur
in or about the premises of the commercial cannabis business whether or not said violations occur
within the permit holder's presence. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-46: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT:
(A) The City Manager, or his/her designee(s) charged with enforcing the provisions of this Code, or any
provision thereof, may enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time, without
notice, and inspect the location of any commercial cannabis business as well as any recordings and
records required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter or under applicable provisions of State
law.
(B) It is unlawful for any person having responsibility over the operation of a commercial cannabis
business, to impede, obstruct, interfere with, or otherwise not to allow, the City to conduct an
inspection, review or copy records, recordings or other documents required to be maintained by a
commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under State or local law. It is also unlawful for a
person to conceal, destroy, deface, damage, or falsify any records, recordings or other documents
required to be maintained by a commercial cannabis business under this chapter or under State or
local law.
(C) The City Manager, or his/her designee(s) charged with enforcing the provisions of this chapter may
enter the location of a commercial cannabis business at any time during the hours of operation and
without notice to obtain samples of the cannabis to test for public safety purposes. Any samples
obtained by the City of Placerville shall be logged, recorded, and maintained in accordance with
established procedures by the City of Placerville City Manager or these regulations. (Ord. 1694, 10-
9-2018)
5-28-47: COMPLIANCE WITH STATE REGULATION:
It is the stated intent of this chapter to regulate commercial cannabis activity in the City of Placerville in
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 242/710
compliance with all provisions MAUCRSA and any subsequent State legislation. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-
2018)
5-28-48: VIOLATIONS DECLARED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter is hereby deemed unlawful and a public
nuisance. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-49: EACH VIOLATION A SEPARATE OFFENSE:
Each and every violation of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation and shall be subject to all
remedies and enforcement measures authorized by the City of Placerville. Additionally, as a nuisance
per se, any violation of this chapter shall be subject to injunctive relief, any permit issued pursuant to
this chapter being deemed null and void, disgorgement and payment to the City for any monies
unlawfully obtained, costs of abatement, costs of investigation, attorney fees, and any other relief or
remedy available at law or in equity. The City of Placerville may also pursue any and all remedies and
actions available and applicable under State and local laws for any violations committed by the
commercial cannabis business or persons related to, or associated with, the commercial cannabis
activity. Additionally, when there is determined to be an imminent threat to public health, safety or
welfare, the City Manager, or his/her designee(s), may take immediate action to temporarily suspend a
commercial cannabis business permit issued by the City, pending a hearing before the City Manager,
or his/her designee(s). (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-50: CRIMINAL PENALTIES:
Each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter may in the discretion of the District Attorney
or City Attorney be prosecuted as a misdemeanor and upon conviction be subject to a fine not to
exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more
than twelve (12) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
5-28-51: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE AND NOT EXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided herein are not to be construed as exclusive remedies. The City is authorized to
pursue any proceedings or remedies provided by law. (Ord. 1694, 10-9-2018)
Chapter 29
CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX
5-29-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 243/710
5-29-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt a tax, for revenue purposes, pursuant to sections 37101 and
37100.5 of the California Government Code, upon cannabis businesses that engage in business in the
City. The Cannabis Business Tax is levied based upon business gross receipts and square footage of
plant canopy. It is not a Sales and Use Tax, a tax upon income, or a tax upon real property.
The Cannabis Business Tax is a general tax enacted solely for general governmental purposes of the
City and not for specific purposes. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be
placed in the City's General Fund and be available for any legal Municipal purpose. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-
2018)
5-29-3: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to levy a tax on all cannabis businesses that operate in the City, regardless
of whether such business would have been legal at the time this chapter was adopted. Nothing in this
chapter shall be interpreted to authorize or permit any business activity that would not otherwise be
legal or permissible under laws applicable to the activity at the time the activity is undertaken. (Ord.
1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below when used in this chapter:
BUSINESS: Shall include all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the City, including
any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling, or livelihood,
whether or not carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include the services rendered by an employee
to his or her employer.
CALENDAR YEAR: Means January 1 through December 31.
CANNABIS: Means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis
ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted
from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation
of the plant, its seeds, or resin. "Cannabis" also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified,
obtained from cannabis. "Cannabis" also means marijuana as defined by section 11018 of the
California Health and Safety Code and is not limited to medical cannabis.
CANNABIS BUSINESS: Means any business activity involving cannabis, including but not limited to
cultivating, transporting, distributing, manufacturing, compounding, converting, processing, preparing,
storing, packaging, delivering, testing, dispensing, retailing and wholesaling of cannabis, of cannabis
products or of ancillary products and accessories, whether or not carried on for gain or profit.
CANNABIS BUSINESS TAX OR BUSINESS TAX: Means the tax due pursuant to this chapter for
engaging in cannabis business in the City.
CANNABIS PRODUCT: Means raw cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the raw
agricultural product has been transformed into a concentrate, an edible product, or a topical product.
"Cannabis product" also means marijuana products as defined by section 11018.1 of the California
Health and Safety Code and is not limited to medical cannabis products.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 244/710
CANOPY: Means all areas occupied by any portion of a cannabis plant whether contiguous or
noncontiguous on any one site. When plants occupy multiple horizontal planes (as when plants are
placed on shelving above other plants) each plane shall be counted as a separate canopy area.
CITY PERMIT: Means a permit issued by the City to a person to authorize that person to operate or
engage in a cannabis business.
COMMERCIAL CANNABIS CULTIVATION: Means cultivation in the course of conducting a cannabis
business.
CULTIVATION: Means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading,
or trimming of cannabis and includes, but is not limited to, the operation of a nursery.
EMPLOYEE: Means each and every person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business,
whether as owner, member of the owner's family, partner, associate, agent, manager or solicitor, and
each and every other person employed or working in such business for a wage, salary, commission,
barter or any other form of compensation.
ENGAGED IN BUSINESS AS A CANNABIS BUSINESS: Means the commencing, conducting,
operating, managing or carrying on of a cannabis business, whether done as owner, or by means of an
officer, agent, manager, employee, or otherwise, whether operating from a fixed location in the City or
coming into the City from an outside location to engage in such activities. A person shall be deemed
engaged in business within the City if:
(A) Such person or person's employee maintains a fixed place of business within the City for the
benefit or partial benefit of such person;
(B) Such person or person's employee owns or leases real property within the City for business
purposes;
(C) Such person or person's employee regularly maintains a stock of tangible personal property in
the City for sale in the ordinary course of business;
(D) Such person or person's employee regularly conducts solicitation of business within the City; or
(E) Such person or person's employee performs work or renders services in the City.
The foregoing specified activities shall not be a limitation on the meaning of "engaged in
business".
EVIDENCE OF DOING BUSINESS: Means evidence such as, without limitation, use of signs, circulars,
cards or any other advertising media, including the use of internet or telephone solicitation, or
representation to a government agency or to the public that such person is engaged in a cannabis
business in the City.
GROSS RECEIPTS: Except as otherwise specifically provided, means, whether designated a sales
price, royalty, rent, commission, dividend, or other designation, the total amount (including all receipts,
cash, credits, services and property of any kind or nature) received or payable for sales of goods,
wares or merchandise or for the performance of any act or service of any nature for which a charge is
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 245/710
made or credit allowed (whether such service, act or employment is done as part of or in connection
with the sale of goods, wares, merchandise or not), without any deduction therefrom on account of the
cost of the property sold, the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, interest paid or payable,
losses or any other expense whatsoever. However, the following shall be excluded from the definition
of gross receipts:
(A) Cash discounts where allowed and taken on sales;
(B) Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the
consumer or purchaser;
(C) Such part of the sale price of any property returned by purchasers to the seller as refunded by
the seller by way of cash or credit allowances or return of refundable deposits previously included
in gross receipts;
(D) Receipts derived from the occasional sale of used, obsolete or surplus trade fixtures, machinery
or other equipment used by the taxpayer in the regular course of the taxpayer's business;
(E) Cash value of sales, trades or transactions between departments or units of the same business;
(F) Whenever there are included within the gross receipts amounts which reflect sales for which
credit is extended and such amount proved uncollectible in a subsequent year, those amounts
may be excluded from the gross receipts in the year they prove to be uncollectible; provided,
however, if the whole or portion of such amounts excluded as uncollectible are subsequently
collected they shall be included in the amount of gross receipts for the period when they are
recovered;
(G) Receipts of refundable deposits, except that such deposits when forfeited and taken into
income of the business shall not be excluded when in excess of one dollar ($1.00);
(H) Amounts collected for others where the business is acting as an agent or trustee and to the
extent that such amounts are paid to those for whom collected. These agents or trustees must
provide the City's Finance Department with the names and the addresses of the others and the
amounts paid to them. This exclusion shall not apply to any fees, percentages, or other payments
retained by the agent or trustees.
(I) Retail sales of t-shirts, sweaters, hats, stickers, key chains, bags, books, posters, rolling papers,
cannabis accessories such as pipes, pipe screens, vape pen batteries (without cannabis) or other
personal tangible property which the Tax Administrator has excluded in writing by issuing an
administrative ruling per section 5-29-14 of this chapter shall not be subject to the Cannabis
Business Tax under this chapter. However, any business activities not subject to this chapter as a
result of the administrative ruling shall be subject to the appropriate Business Tax provisions of
chapter 1 of this title or any other chapter or title as determined by the Tax Administrator.
LIGHTING: Means a source of light that is primarily used for promoting the biological process of plant
growth. Lighting does not include sources of light that primarily exist for the safety or convenience of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 246/710
staff or visitors to the facility, such as emergency lighting, walkway lighting, or light admitted via small
skylights, windows or ventilation openings.
NURSERY: Means a facility or part of a facility that is used only for producing clones, immature plants,
seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of
cannabis.
PERSON: Means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability
company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as
a unit, whether organized as a nonprofit or for-profit entity, and includes the plural as well as the
singular number.
SALE: Means and includes any sale, exchange, or barter.
STATE: Means the State of California.
STATE LICENSE, LICENSE, OR REGISTRATION: Means a State license issued pursuant to California
Business and Professions Code sections 26050, et seq., or other applicable State law.
TAX ADMINISTRATOR: Means the Director of Finance of the City of Placerville or his or her designee.
TESTING LABORATORY: Means a cannabis business that: a) offers or performs tests of cannabis or
cannabis products, b) offers no service other than such tests, c) sells no products, excepting only
testing supplies and materials, d) is accredited by an accrediting body that is independent from all other
persons involved in the cannabis industry in the State and e) is registered with the State Department of
Public Health. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-5: TAX IMPOSED:
(A) Beginning January 1, 2019, there is imposed upon each person who is engaged in business as a
cannabis business a Cannabis Business Tax. Such tax is payable regardless of whether the
business has been issued a cannabis business license or permit to operate lawfully in the City or is
operating unlawfully. The City's acceptance of a Cannabis Business Tax payment from a cannabis
business operating illegally will not constitute the City's approval or consent to such illegal
operations.
(B) The initial rate of the Cannabis Business Tax shall be as follows:
1. For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the City:
(a) Seven dollars ($7.00) annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses
exclusively artificial lighting.
(b) Four dollars ($4.00) annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses a
combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting.
(c) Two dollars ($2.00) annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses no artificial
lighting.
(d) One dollar ($1.00) annually per square foot of canopy space for any nursery.
For purposes of this subsection (B), the square feet of canopy space for a business shall be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 247/710
rebuttably presumed to be the maximum square footage of canopy allowed by the business's
City permit for commercial cannabis cultivation, or, in the absence of a City permit, the square
footage shall be the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation
allowed by the State license type. Should a City permit be issued to a business which cultivates
only for certain months of the year, the City shall prorate the tax as to sufficiently reflect the
period in which cultivation is occurring at the business. In no case shall canopy square footage
which is authorized by the City commercial cannabis permit but not utilized for cultivation be
deducted for the purpose of determining the tax for cultivation, unless the Tax Administrator is
informed in writing and authorizes such reduction for the purpose of relief from the tax prior to
the period for which the space will not be used, that such space will not be used.
2. For every person who engages in the operation of a testing laboratory: One percent (1%) of
gross receipts.
3. For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a retailer (dispensary) or nonstore
front retailer (delivery) or microbusiness (retail sales): Four percent (4%) of gross receipts.
4. For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business: Two percent (2%) of gross
receipts.
5. For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing, processing, or microbusiness (nonretail),
or any other type of cannabis business not described in subsection (B)1, (B)2, (B)3 or (B)4
of this section: Two and one-half percent (2.5%) of gross receipts.
(C) The City Council may, by resolution or ordinance, adjust the rate of the Cannabis Business Tax.
However, in no event may the City Council set any adjusted rate that exceeds the maximum rate
calculated pursuant to subsection (D) of this section for the date on which the adjusted rate will
commence.
(D) The maximum rate shall be calculated as follows:
1. For every person who is engaged in commercial cannabis cultivation in the City:
(a) Through January 1, 2021, the maximum rate shall be:
(1) Ten dollars ($10.00) annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses
exclusively artificial lighting.
(2) Seven dollars ($7.00) annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses a
combination of natural and supplemental artificial lighting.
(3) Four dollars ($4.00) annually per square foot of canopy space in a facility that uses no
artificial lighting.
(4) Two dollars ($2.00) annually per square foot of canopy space for any nursery.
(b) On January 1, 2022 and on each January 1 thereafter, the maximum annual tax rate per
square foot of each type of canopy space shall increase by the annual percentage change in
the Consumer Price Index ("CPI") for all urban consumers in the San Francisco-Oakland-
Hayward area as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics as of
October of the previous calendar year. However, no CPI adjustment resulting in a decrease of
any tax imposed by this subsection shall be made.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 248/710
2. For every person who engages in the operation of a testing laboratory, the maximum tax rate
shall not exceed two and a half percent (2.5%) of gross receipts.
3. For every person who engages in the retail sales of cannabis as a retailer (dispensary) or nonstore
front retailer (delivery business), or microbusiness (retail sales activity) the maximum tax
rate shall not exceed eight percent (8%) of gross receipts.
4. For every person who engages in a cannabis distribution business, the maximum tax rate shall
not exceed three percent (3%) of gross receipts.
5. For every person who engages in a cannabis manufacturing, processing, or microbusiness (nonretail
activity) or any other type of cannabis business not described in subsection (D)1, (D)2, (D)3
or (D)4 of this section, the maximum tax rate shall not exceed four percent (4%) of gross receipts.
(Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-6: REPORTING AND REMITTANCE OF TAX:
(A) The Cannabis Business Tax imposed by this chapter shall be paid, in arrears, on a quarterly basis.
For commercial cannabis cultivation, the tax due for each calendar quarter shall be based on the
square footage of the business's canopy space during the quarter and the rate shall be twenty five
percent (25%) of the applicable annual rate. For all other cannabis businesses activities, the tax
due for each calendar quarter shall be based on the gross receipts for the quarter.
(B) Each person owing Cannabis Business Tax for a calendar quarter shall, no later than the last day of
the month following the close of the calendar quarter, file with the Tax Administrator a statement of
the tax owed for that calendar quarter and the basis for calculating that tax. The Tax Administrator
may require that the statement be submitted on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The tax
for each calendar quarter shall be due and payable on that same date that the statement for the
calendar quarter is due.
(C) Upon cessation of a cannabis business, tax statements and payments shall be immediately due for
all calendar quarters up to the calendar quarter during which cessation occurred.
(D) The Tax Administrator may, at his or her discretion, establish shorter report and payment periods
for any taxpayer as the Tax Administrator deems necessary to ensure collection of the tax. The Tax
Administrator may also require that a deposit, to be applied against the taxes for a calendar quarter,
be made by a taxpayer at the beginning of that calendar quarter. In no event shall the deposit
required by the Tax Administrator exceed the tax amount he or she projects will be owed by the
taxpayer for the calendar quarter. The Tax Administrator may require that a taxpayer make
payments via a cashier's check, money order, wire transfer, or similar instrument.
(E) For purposes of this section, the square feet of canopy space for a business shall be rebuttably
presumed to be no less than the maximum square footage of canopy allowed by the business's City
permit for commercial cannabis cultivation, or, in the absence of a City permit, the square footage
shall be the maximum square footage of canopy for commercial cannabis cultivation allowed by the
State license type. In no case shall canopy square footage which is authorized by the permit or
license but not utilized for cultivation be excluded from taxation unless the Tax Administrator is
informed in writing, prior to the period for which the space will not be used, that such space will not
be used. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 249/710
5-29-7: PAYMENTS AND COMMUNICATIONS - TIMELY REMITTANCE:
Whenever any payment, statement, report, request or other communication is due, it must be received
by the Tax Administrator on or before the final due date. A postmark will not be accepted as timely
remittance. If the due date would fall on a Saturday, Sunday or a holiday observed by the City, the due
date shall be the next regular business day on which the City is open to the public. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-
2018)
5-29-8: PAYMENT - WHEN TAXES DEEMED DELINQUENT:
Unless otherwise specifically provided under other provisions of this chapter, the taxes required to be
paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deemed delinquent if not received by the Tax Administrator on or
before the due date as specified in sections 5-29-6 and 5-29-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-9: NOTICE NOT REQUIRED BY THE CITY:
The City may as a courtesy send a tax notice to the business. However, the Tax Administrator is not
required to send a delinquency or other notice or bill to any person subject to the provisions of this
chapter. Failure to send such notice or bill shall not affect the validity of any tax or penalty due under
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-10: PENALTIES AND INTEREST:
(A) Any person who fails or refuses to pay any Cannabis Business Tax required to be paid pursuant to
this chapter on or before the due date shall pay penalties and interest as follows:
1. A penalty equal to ten percent (10%) of the amount of the tax, in addition to the amount of the
tax, plus interest on the unpaid tax calculated from the due date of the tax at the rate of one
percent (1.0%) per month.
2. If the tax remains unpaid for a period exceeding one calendar month beyond the due date, an
additional penalty equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax, plus interest at the
rate of one percent (1.0%) per month on the unpaid tax and on the unpaid penalties.
3. Interest shall be applied at the rate of one percent (1.0%) per month on the first day of the month
for the full month and will continue to accrue monthly on the tax and penalty until the balance is
paid in full.
(B) Whenever a check or electronic payment is submitted in payment of a Cannabis Business Tax and
the payment is subsequently returned unpaid by the bank for any reason, the taxpayer will be liable
for the tax amount due plus any fees, penalties and interest as provided for in this section, and any
other amount allowed under State law. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-11: REFUNDS AND CREDITS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 250/710
(A) No refund shall be made of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter, except as provided in section
5-29-12 of this chapter.
(B) No refund of any tax collected pursuant to this chapter shall be made because of the
discontinuation, dissolution, or other termination of a business. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-12: REFUNDS AND PROCEDURES:
(A) Whenever the amount of any Cannabis Business Tax, penalty or interest has been overpaid, paid
more than once, or has been erroneously collected or received by the City under this chapter, it
may be refunded to the claimant who paid the tax provided that a written claim for refund is filed
with the Tax Administrator within one year of the date the tax was originally due and payable.
(B) The Tax Administrator, his or her designee or any other City officer charged with the administration
of this chapter shall have the right to examine and audit all the books and business records of the
claimant in order to determine the eligibility of the claimant to the claimed refund. No claim for
refund shall be allowed if the claimant refuses to allow such examination of claimant's books and
business records after request by the Tax Administrator to do so.
(C) In the event that the Cannabis Business Tax was erroneously paid, and the error is attributable to
the City, the City shall refund the amount of tax erroneously paid up to one year from the date that
the tax was paid. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-13: PERSONAL CULTIVATION NOT TAXED:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to personal cannabis cultivation as defined in the
"Medicinal and Adult Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act". This chapter shall not apply to
personal use of cannabis that is specifically exempted from City and State licensing requirements, that
meets the definition of personal use or equivalent terminology under State law, and for which the
individual receives no compensation whatsoever related to that personal use. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-14: ADMINISTRATION OF THE TAX:
(A) It shall be the duty of the Tax Administrator to collect the taxes, penalties, fees, and perform the
duties required by this chapter.
(B) For purposes of administration and enforcement of this chapter generally, the Tax Administrator
may from time to time promulgate such administrative interpretations, rules, and procedures
consistent with the purpose, intent, and express terms of this chapter as he or she deems
necessary to implement or clarify such provisions or aid in enforcement.
(C) The Tax Administrator may take such administrative actions as needed to administer the tax,
including but not limited to:
1. Provide to all cannabis business taxpayers forms for the reporting of the tax;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 251/710
2. Provide information to any taxpayer concerning the provisions of this chapter;
3. Receive and record all taxes remitted to the City as provided in this chapter;
4. Maintain records of taxpayer reports and taxes collected pursuant to this chapter;
5. Assess penalties and interest to taxpayers pursuant to this chapter;
6. Determine amounts owed and enforce collection pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-15: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any taxpayer aggrieved by any decision of the Tax Administrator with respect to the amount of tax,
interest, penalties and fees, if any, due under this chapter may appeal to the City Council by filing a
notice of appeal with the City Clerk within thirty (30) calendar days of the serving or mailing of the
determination of tax due. The City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall fix a time and place for hearing
such appeal, and the City Clerk, or his or her designee, shall give notice in writing to such operator at
the last known place of address. The finding of the City Council shall be final and conclusive and shall
be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed by this chapter for service of notice of hearing.
Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of the notice.
(Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-16: ENFORCEMENT - ACTION TO COLLECT:
Any taxes, penalties and/or fees required to be paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be
deemed a debt owed to the City. Any person owing money to the City under the provisions of this
chapter shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the City for the recovery of such debt. The
provisions of this section shall not be deemed a limitation upon the right of the City to bring any other
action including criminal, civil and equitable actions, based upon the failure to pay the tax, penalties
and/or fees imposed by this chapter or the failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-17: APPORTIONMENT:
If a business subject to the tax is operating both within and outside the City, it is the intent of the City to
apply the Cannabis Business Tax so that the measure of the tax fairly reflects the proportion of the
taxed activity actually carried on in the City. To the extent Federal or State law requires that any tax due
from any taxpayer be apportioned, the taxpayer may indicate said apportionment on his or her tax
return. The Tax Administrator may promulgate administrative procedures for apportionment as he or
she finds useful or necessary. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-18: CONSTITUTIONALITY AND LEGALITY:
This tax is intended to be applied in a manner consistent with the United States and California
Constitutions and State law. None of the tax provided for by this chapter shall be applied in a manner
that causes an undue burden upon interstate commerce, a violation of the equal protection or due
process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States or the State of California or a violation of any
other provision of the California Constitution or State law. If a person believes that the tax, as applied to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 252/710
him or her, is impermissible under applicable law, he or she may request that the Tax Administrator
release him or her from the obligation to pay the impermissible portion of the tax. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-
2018)
5-29-19: AUDIT AND EXAMINATION OF PREMISES AND RECORDS:
(A) For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of Cannabis Business Tax owed or verifying any
representations made by any taxpayer to the City in support of his or her tax calculation, the Tax
Administrator shall have the power to inspect any location where commercial cannabis cultivation
occurs and to audit and examine all books and records (including, but not limited to bookkeeping
records, State and Federal Income Tax returns, and other records relating to the gross receipts of
the business) of persons engaged in cannabis businesses. In conducting such investigation, the
Tax Administrator shall have the power to inspect any equipment, such as computers or point of
sale machines, that may contain such records.
(B) It shall be the duty of every person liable for the collection and payment to the City of any tax
imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three (3) years, all records as
may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the
collection of and payment to the City, which records the Tax Administrator or his/her designee shall
have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-20: OTHER LICENSES, PERMITS, TAXES, FEES OR CHARGES:
(A) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any
way affect any requirements for any City cannabis license, permit or license required by, under or
by virtue of any provision of any other chapter of this Code or any other ordinance or resolution of
the City, nor be deemed to repeal, amend, be in lieu of, replace or in any way affect any tax, fee or
other charge imposed, assessed or required by, under or by virtue of any other chapter of this Code
or any other ordinance or resolution of the City. Any references made or contained in any other
chapter of this Code to any licenses, License Taxes, fees, or charges, or to any schedule of license
fees, shall be deemed to refer to the licenses, License Taxes, fees or charges, or schedule of
license fees, provided for in other chapter of this Code.
(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a cannabis business shall not be required to pay the
license fee required by chapter 1 of this title so long as all of business's activities within the City that
would require payment of a License Tax or fee are activities subject to the Cannabis Business Tax.
(C) The Tax Administrator may revoke or refuse to renew the license required by chapter 1 of this title
for any business that is delinquent in the payment of any tax due pursuant to this chapter or that
fails to make a deposit required by the Tax Administrator pursuant to section 5-29-6 of this chapter.
(Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-21: PAYMENT OF TAX DOES NOT AUTHORIZE UNLAWFUL BUSINESS:
(A) The payment of a Cannabis Business Tax required by this chapter, and its acceptance by the City,
shall not entitle any person to carry on any cannabis business unless the person has complied with
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 253/710
all of the requirements of this Code and all other applicable State laws.
(B) No tax paid under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or
continuance of any illegal or unlawful business, or any business in violation of any local or State
law. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-22: DEFICIENCY DETERMINATIONS:
If the Tax Administrator is not satisfied that any statement filed as required under the provisions of this
chapter is correct, or that the amount of tax is correctly computed, he or she may compute and
determine the amount to be paid and make a deficiency determination upon the basis of the facts
contained in the statement or upon the basis of any information in his or her possession or that may
come into his or her possession within three (3) years of the date the tax was originally due and
payable. One or more deficiency determinations of the amount of tax due for a period or periods may
be made. When a person discontinues engaging in a business, a deficiency determination may be
made at any time within three (3) years thereafter as to any liability arising from engaging in such
business whether or not a deficiency determination is issued prior to the date the tax would otherwise
be due. Whenever a deficiency determination is made, a notice shall be given to the person concerned
in the same manner as notices of assessment are given under section 5-29-24 of this chapter. (Ord.
1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-23: FAILURE TO REPORT - NONPAYMENT, FRAUD:
(A) Under any of the following circumstances, the Tax Administrator may make and give notice of an
assessment of the amount of tax owed by a person under this chapter at any time:
1. If the person has not filed a complete statement required under the provisions of this chapter;
2. If the person has not paid the tax due under the provisions of this chapter;
3. If the person has not, after demand by the Tax Administrator, filed a corrected statement, or
furnished to the Tax Administrator adequate substantiation of the information contained in a
statement already filed, or paid any additional amount of tax due under the provisions of this
chapter; or
4. If the Tax Administrator determines that the nonpayment of any Business Tax due under this
chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty five percent (25%) of the amount of the tax shall be
added thereto in addition to penalties and interest otherwise stated in this chapter and any other
penalties allowed by law.
(B) The notice of assessment shall separately set forth the amount of any tax known by the Tax
Administrator to be due or estimated by the Tax Administrator, after consideration of all information
within the Tax Administrator's knowledge concerning the business and activities of the person
assessed, to be due under each applicable section of this chapter and shall include the amount of
any penalties or interest accrued on each amount to the date of the notice of assessment. (Ord.
1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-24: TAX ASSESSMENT - NOTICE REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 254/710
The notice of assessment shall be served upon the person either by personal delivery, by overnight
delivery by a nationally-recognized courier service, or by a deposit of the notice in the United States
mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the person at the address of the location of the business
or to such other address as he or she shall register with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of
receiving notices provided under this chapter; or, should the person have no address registered with
the Tax Administrator for such purpose, then to such person's last known address. For the purposes of
this section, a service by overnight delivery shall be deemed to have occurred one calendar day
following deposit with a courier and service by mail shall be deemed to have occurred three (3) days
following deposit in the United States mail. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-25: TAX ASSESSMENT - HEARING, APPLICATION AND DETERMINATION:
Within thirty (30) calendar days after the date of service the person may apply in writing to the Tax
Administrator for a hearing on the assessment. If application for a hearing before the City is not made
within the time herein prescribed, the tax assessed by the Tax Administrator shall become final and
conclusive. Within thirty (30) calendar days of the receipt of any such application for hearing, the Tax
Administrator shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before him or her no later than thirty (30)
calendar days after the receipt of the application, unless a later date is agreed to by the Tax
Administrator and the person requesting the hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be given by the Tax
Administrator to the person requesting such hearing not later than five (5) calendar days prior to such
hearing. At such hearing said applicant may appear and offer evidence why the assessment as made
by the Tax Administrator should not be confirmed and fixed as the tax due. After such hearing the Tax
Administrator shall determine and reassess the proper tax to be charged and shall give written notice
to the person in the manner prescribed in section 5-29-24 of this chapter for giving notice of
assessment. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-26: RELIEF FROM TAXES - DISASTER RELIEF:
(A) If a business is unable to comply with any tax requirement due to a disaster, the business may
notify the Tax Administrator of this inability to comply and request relief from the tax requirement;
1. A request for relief must clearly indicate why relief is requested, the time period for which the
relief is requested, and the reason relief is needed for the specific amount of time.
(B) The cannabis business agrees to grant the tax collector or his/her designee access to the location
where the cannabis business has been impacted due to a disaster;
(C) The Tax Administrator, in his/her sole discretion, may provide relief from the Cannabis Business Tax
requirement for businesses whose operations have been impacted by a disaster if such tax liability
does not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). If such tax liability is five thousand one dollars
($5,001.00) or more then such relief shall only be approved by the City Council;
(D) Temporary relief from the Cannabis Tax may be granted for a reasonable amount of time as
determined by the Tax Administrator or the City Council, as applicable in order to allow the cannabis
business time to recover from the disaster;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 255/710
(E) The Tax Administrator or City Council, as applicable may require that certain conditions be followed
in order for a cannabis business to receive temporary relief from the Cannabis Business Tax
requirement;
(F) For purposes of this section, "disaster" means fire, flood, storm, tidal wave, earthquake, or similar
public calamity, whether or not resulting from natural causes. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-27: CONVICTION FOR VIOLATION - TAXES NOT WAIVED:
The conviction and punishment of any person for failure to pay the required tax shall not excuse or
exempt such person from any civil action for the tax debt unpaid at the time of such conviction. No civil
action shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any
State law requiring the payment of all taxes. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-28: VIOLATION DEEMED MISDEMEANOR:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1696,
11-6-2018)
5-29-29: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter, or its application to any person or circumstance, is determined by a
court of competent jurisdiction to be unlawful, unenforceable or otherwise void, that determination shall
have no effect on any other provision of this chapter or the application of this chapter to any other
person or circumstance and, to that end, the provisions hereof are severable. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-30: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
All remedies and penalties prescribed by this chapter or which are available under any other provision
of this Code and any other provision of law or equity are cumulative. The use of one or more remedies
by the City shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
5-29-31: AMENDMENT OR REPEAL:
This chapter may be repealed or amended by the City Council without a vote of the people to the
extent allowed by law. However, as required by article XIIIC of the California Constitution, voter
approval is required for any amendment that would increase the rate of any tax levied pursuant to this
chapter. The people of the City of Placerville affirm that the following actions shall not constitute an
increase of the rate of a tax:
(A) The restoration or adjustment of the rate of the tax to a rate that is no higher than that set by this
chapter, if the City Council has acted to reduce the rate of the tax or incrementally implement an
increase authorized by this chapter;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 256/710
(B) An action that interprets or clarifies the methodology of the tax, or any definition applicable to the
tax, so long as interpretation or clarification (even if contrary to some prior interpretation or
clarification) is not inconsistent with the language of this chapter; or
(C) The collection of the tax imposed by this chapter even if the City had, for some period of time, failed
to collect the tax. (Ord. 1696, 11-6-2018)
Title 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, Res 8479 - PROHIBITING
NONMEDICAL MARIJUANA . Go to new ordinance.
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, Res 8479 - PROHIBITING
NONMEDICAL MARIJUANA . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
6-1-1: FRAUDULENTLY AVOIDING PAYMENT OF ADMISSION FEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person fraudulently to enter, without payment of the proper admission fee,
any theater, ballroom, lecture, concert or other place where admission fees are charged; provided,
however, that nothing herein contained shall be deemed to prohibit or restrict the free admission of
police officers engaged in the performance of police duties to any place of public entertainment or
amusement. (1962 Code)
6-1-2: BARBED WIRE AND ELECTRIC FENCES:
Barbed wire fences may be used in RE and R-1A zones where there is actual raising and grazing of
livestock. Barbed wire fences are also permitted in C and CG zones where the barbed wire is placed a
minimum of six feet (6') aboveground. It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or maintain any
electric fence as a guard to any parking lot or parcel of land. (Ord. 1158, 6-27-1978)
6-1-3: DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON THOROUGHFARES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or allow to remain in or upon any public
thoroughfare any material or substance injurious to person or property. (1962 Code)
6-1-4: KEEPING OF RESTRICTED JUNK:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 257/710
It shall be unlawful for any person to store or keep any old articles or materials which may be classified
as junk adjacent to or in close proximity to any school house, church, public parks, public grounds,
business buildings or residences without first providing proper and tight buildings for the storage of the
same. (1962 Code)
6-1-5: LUG WHEELS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for tractors with wheels injurious to pavement to be permitted upon the public
thoroughfares unless the operator of such vehicle shall first plank such streets. (1962 Code)
6-1-6: MUFFLERS; UNNECESSARY NOISE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle which shall not at all times be equipped
with a muffler upon the exhaust thereof in good working order and in constant operation to prevent
excessive or unusual noise and it shall be unlawful for any person operating any motor vehicle to use a
cutout, bypass or similar muffler elimination appliance. (1962 Code)
6-1-7: NUISANCES DEFINED:
Anything which is injurious to the health or morals, or indecent or offensive to the sense or an
obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property is declared a nuisance and as such shall be abated1. (1962 Code)
6-1-8: ASSISTANCE TO POLICE OFFICERS:
It shall be unlawful for any male citizen over the age of eighteen (18) years to refuse or neglect to
render assistance to any police officer when called upon for such assistance or aid in the suppression
of riot or other unlawful assemblage or in the arrest of any person who has committed an offense.
(1962 Code)
6-1-9: TRESPASSING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take down any fence or to let down any bars or to open any gate
in or on the property of another without the consent of the owner, occupant or person in charge thereof.
(1962 Code)
6-1-10: WATER FLOWING UPON STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow any water to flow into or upon any public thoroughfare in
such a manner to create a nuisance or hazard. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 258/710
6-1-11: WINDOW SILLS TO BE KEPT CLEAR:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any window sill, porch or other projection above
the first story of any building abutting on any sidewalk any article which might do injury by falling upon
any person on the sidewalk in front of such building, unless said article be securely fastened or
protected by screens. (1962 Code)
Chapter 2
POLICE DEPARTMENT
6-2-1: DEPARTMENT; CONTROL:
The police department shall be under the supervision and control of the chief of police. (1962 Code)
6-2-2: OFFICERS; APPOINTMENT:
The chief of police may:
(A) Appoint one or more police officers subject to the approval of the council.
(B) Appoint additional police officers with the concurrence of the mayor and/or police commission when
they deem it necessary for the preservation of the public order. (1962 Code)
6-2-3: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the enforcement of all of the laws
of the city and all statutes applicable therein; and to preserve order and prevent infractions of the law
and arrest violators thereof. (1962 Code)
6-2-4: ATTENDANCE AT PUBLIC MEETINGS:
The mayor or chief of police shall direct a sufficient number of policemen to attend and keep order at
any public meeting at which, in his opinion, a breach of the peace may occur. (1962 Code)
6-2-5: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The chief of police may make or prescribe such rules and regulations as he shall deem advisable; such
rules, when approved by the council, shall be binding on the members. The rules and regulations may
cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be worn or carried, hours of
service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or desirable for the better efficiency of the
department. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 259/710
6-2-6: REWARDS:
The chief of police, for meritorious service rendered by any member of the department in the due
discharge of his duty may permit such member to retain for his own benefit, so far as he may be
permitted by law, any reward or present tendered him therefor, and it shall be cause for dismissal for
any member to receive such reward or present without notice thereof to the chief of police and without
his permission. (1962 Code)
6-2-7: WITNESS FEES:
Every member of the department shall appear as witness whenever necessary in a prosecution for a
violation of any municipal, state or federal law. No member shall retain any witness fee for service as
witness in any action or suit to which the city is a party; any fees paid for such services shall be turned
over to the chief of police, who shall deposit the same with the treasurer. (1962 Code)
6-2-8: TRAINING OF OFFICERS:
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of chapter 1
of title 4, part 4 of the California Penal Code.
Pursuant to section 13522 of said chapter 1, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant thereto
will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California commission on
peace officer standards and training1. (Ord. 867, 10-2-1961)
6-2-9: TRAINING OF PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHERS:
The city declares it accepts the requirements of section 13510(C), chapter 1, title 4, part 4, of the
California Penal Code, and will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the
commission on peace officer standards and training (POST) for public safety dispatchers.
The city will adhere to the requirements of section 13512, chapter 1, that the commission and its
representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate by the commission to ascertain that
the city public dispatcher personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the
commission on peace officer standards and training. (Ord. 1565, 4-11-2000)
Chapter 3
ANIMAL CONTROL
6-3-1: COUNTY REGULATIONS ADOPTED:
The city hereby adopts, by reference, El Dorado County ordinance code, title 6, "Animals", chapters
6.04, 6.08, 6.12, 6.16, 6.20, 6.24, 6.25, 6.28 and 6.32.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 260/710
(A) As long as this ordinance is in effect, at least three (3) copies of the code being adopted by
reference, all certified to be true copies by the city clerk, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk,
and after adoption of the code one of these copies shall be kept in the office of the police chief.
(B) If, at a later time, the county amends its ordinance and the city wishes to conform to the county's
amended ordinance, it may do so through the same procedure as required for adoption of this
original ordinance. (Ord. 1449, 10-11-1988)
Chapter 4
RESERVED
(Ord. 1041, 9-11-1973)
Chapter 5
LOITERING AND TRESPASS PROHIBITED
6-5-1: LOITERING OF MINORS PROHIBITED:
(A) It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) to loiter about or upon the public streets,
avenues, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places
of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place between the hours of
eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and the time of sunrise of the following day; provided, however, that the
provisions of this section do not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parents,
guardian, adult spouse, or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor, or when the
minor is upon an errand directed by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the
care and custody of the minor or when the minor is returning directly home from a meeting,
entertainment, educational or recreational activity.
(B) For the purposes of this section, the word "loiter" is defined to mean to idle, linger, wander, stroll,
play, or to walk, drive or ride aimlessly.
(C) Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1445, 7-26-
1988)
6-5-2: TRESPASS UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY PROHIBITED1:
(A) Leave After Notification: No person shall remain upon any private property or business premises,
after being notified by the owner or lessee, or other person in charge thereof, to remove therefrom.
(B) Do Not Enter After Notification: No person, without permission, express or implied of the owner or
lessee or other person in charge of private property or business premises, shall enter upon the
private property or business premises after having been notified by the owner or lessee or other
person in charge thereof to keep off or keep away therefrom.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 261/710
(C) Exceptions: This section shall not apply in any of the following instances:
1. Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by the Unruh civil rights act or
any other provisions of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of
color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or national origin;
2. Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by section 365 of the
California Penal Code or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common
carriers;
3. Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing
or other lawful labor activities;
4. Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of any other exercise of a
constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech such as (but not limited to) peaceful
expressions of political or religious opinions, not involving offensive personal conduct; or
5. Where the person who is upon another's private property or business premises is there under
claim or color of legal right. This exception is applicable (but not limited) to the following types of
situations involving disputes wherein the participants have available to them practical and
effective civil remedies: marital and postmarital disputes, child custody or visitation disputes,
disputes regarding title to or rights in real property, landlord-tenant disputes, disputes between
members of the same family or between persons residing upon the property concerned up until
the time of the dispute, employer-employee disputes, business type disputes such as those
between partners, debtor-creditor disputes, and instances wherein the person claims rights to be
present pursuant to order, decree or process of a court. (Ord. 1445, 7-26-1988)
6-5-3: HARASSING PROHIBITED:
(A) Harassing Pedestrians: No person shall loiter in or upon any public highway, alley, sidewalk, or
crosswalk or other public ways open for pedestrian travel for the purpose of harassing pedestrians.
(B) Definition: "Harassing", for the purpose of this section, shall mean knowing and wilful conduct
directed at a specific person which seriously alarms, annoys, harasses or terrorizes that person and
which serves no legitimate purpose and is not constitutionally protected.
(C) Penalty/Punishment: A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. The punishment for a
violation of this section shall be a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation, a fine
not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation within one year, and a fine not
exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation of this section within one
year. (Ord. 1511, 8-9-1994)
6-5-4: SITTING OR LYING IN PUBLIC WAYS PROHIBITED:
(A) Prohibited Acts: No person shall sit, stand, or lie in any public highway, alley, sidewalk, or crosswalk
or other public way open for pedestrian travel in such a manner as to wilfully and maliciously
obstruct the free passage of pedestrians.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 262/710
(B) Definitions:
MALICIOUSLY: For the purpose of this section, shall mean to vex, annoy or injure another
person, or an intent to do a wrongful act, established either by proof or presumption of law2.
WILFULLY: For the purpose of this section shall mean a purpose or willingness to commit the act
or omission3.
(C) Penalty/Punishment: A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. The punishment for a
violation of this section shall be a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation, a fine
not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation of this section within one year,
and a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for an additional violation of this section
within one year. (Ord. 1512, 8-9-1994)
6-5-5: OBSTRUCTING ENTRANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall loiter, stand, or sit in or at the entrance of any church, hall, a public business, or place
of public assemblage within the city so as to obstruct such entrance. (Ord. 1445, 7-26-1988)
6-5-6: LOITERING IN MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS PROHIBITED:
(A) Findings: The city council finds and declares that there has been an increase in criminal activity,
particularly violent crime, in public parking lots as well as intimidation and harassment of citizens
who are using those parking lots to conduct business with local merchants. The council further finds
that the majority of these incidents are occurring in the evening hours after sunset.
The city council further finds that the primary purpose of municipal parking lots is to provide city
residents with safe and convenient temporary public parking and to facilitate the daily flow of traffic
in and around local businesses.
The city council further finds that there is a need to abate the congregation of individuals who
gather in the municipal parking lots for no apparent purpose. Such gatherings engender the
commission or threatened commission of public offenses and interfere with the primary use of the
public parking lots. Such activities constitute a continuing public nuisance which adversely affects
public health, safety and welfare of city residents and hinders commercial activity and traffic flow in
parking lots, commercial shopping centers and other public places.
(B) Remaining, Staying And Loitering In Municipal Parking Lots:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to remain, stay or loiter in any municipal parking lot between
sunset and sunrise of the next day, after first having been ordered to leave by a peace officer.
2. For purposes of this section only, "loiter" shall mean:
(a) To delay, linger or idle in any municipal parking lot without any intent to conduct lawful
business with the adjacent businesses.
(b) To remain in any municipal parking lot for a period of time longer than reasonably necessary
to conduct business with the adjacent businesses.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 263/710
(c) To remain in a motor vehicle parked in any municipal lot when no occupant of the vehicle is
conducting or intends to conduct business with the adjacent businesses.
(C) Obstructing And Intimidating Business Patrons: Any person, who while in a municipal parking lot,
intentionally obstructs, intimidates, threatens or harasses another person who is using a municipal
parking lot for the purpose of conducting business with the neighboring merchants and who then
refuses to leave said parking lot after being requested to do so by the owner of said business or his
agent or by a peace officer, is guilty of an infraction.
(D) Penalty/Punishment: A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. The punishment for a
violation of this section shall be a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a second violation of this section within one year,
and a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for an additional violation of this section within one
year.
(E) Severability: If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this section or the application
thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and
to this end the provisions of this section are declared to be severable.
(F) Effective Date: This section is, for the reasons stated in the council's findings, declared to be
necessary as an urgency measure to protect and preserve the public health, safety and welfare and
is, therefore, effective immediately upon adoption by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the city council. (Ord.
1529, 12-12-1995)
Chapter 6
RESERVED
(Ord. 1159, 7-11-1978)
Chapter 7
PLASTIC BAGS OR COVERINGS
6-7-1: DEFINITION:
The words "plastic coverings", "plastic bag", or "plastic package" when used in this chapter shall mean
any covering, package or bag made of plastic material sufficiently thin and pliable to respond to static
electricity created by contact with the human body to the extent that it clings to the human skin or body.
(1962 Code)
6-7-2: WARNING REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 264/710
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession, or to deliver as a cover or wrapper, any
plastic bag that is of sufficient size to fit over a child's head, or any bag which, when open, has an
opening larger than twenty five (25) square inches or a capacity of more than one hundred twenty five
(125) cubic inches, unless there is at all times clearly printed on such bag or covering, or on a paper
attached to such bag or covering, words in letters at least one-fourth inch (1/4") high as follows:
WARNING: To avoid danger of suffocation keep this bag (or covering) away from babies and
children. Do not use in cribs, beds, carriages or play pens. This is not a toy.
(1962 Code)
6-7-3: CERTAIN BAGS A NUISANCE:
Any plastic bag, covering or package not carrying or accompanied by the printed warning as provided
in section 6-7-2 of this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance. (1962 Code)
Chapter 8
RESERVED
(Ord. 1159, 7-11-1978)
Chapter 9
SALE OF UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
6-9-1: PERIOD HELD BEFORE SALE:
With the exception of firearms and other property specifically regulated by statute, any unclaimed
property held by the police department of the city shall be held by the police department for a period of
at least ninety (90) days, and after said property has been held for the period as above set forth, such
property shall be sold at the public auction to the highest bidder or disposed pursuant to the sections of
this chapter. (Ord. 1670, 4-28-2015)
6-9-2: NOTICE GIVEN:
Notice of any such sale shall be given by the chief of police at least five (5) days before the sale by
publication at least once of the notice of sale in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city.
(Ord. 1670, 4-28-2015)
6-9-3: RECEIPTS TO GENERAL FUND:
Any money received as a result of the sale shall be placed in the general fund of the city. (Ord. 1670, 4-
28-2015)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 265/710
6-9-4: DESTRUCTION:
Property deemed by the chief of police to have no monetary or salvage value may be destroyed after
being held as provided for in section 6-9-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1670, 4-28-2015)
6-9-5: PUBLIC USE:
If property described herein is deemed needed for public use, such property may be retained by the
city and need not be sold. (Ord. 1670, 4-28-2015)
Chapter 10
SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT
6-10-1: DEFINITION:
"Sound amplifying equipment" as used in this chapter means any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment" as used
herein shall not be construed as including such equipment when used in a normal and reasonable
manner in or about the home, standard automobile radios when used and intended to be heard only by
occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles, or
horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. (Ord. 993, 8-11-
1970)
6-10-2: PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate or permit the use or operation of any sound
amplifying equipment out of doors or indoors when used or operated to reach persons out of doors,
without first obtaining a written permit from the chief of police, with the exception of city parks, which
shall require the approval of both the chief of police and director of community services. Such permit
shall be issued, subject to the limitation hereinafter set forth in section 6-10-4 of this chapter, unless the
permit requested is for a location within a zone of quiet which has been established as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 1657, 9-10-2013)
6-10-3: HOURS FOR OPERATION:
Sound amplifying equipment shall not be used or operated out of doors or indoors when used or
operated to reach persons out of doors except between the hours of nine thirty o'clock (9:30) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) P.M., the volume of sound shall be controlled so that said volume is not unreasonably
loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility, shall not be used
or operated within five hundred feet (500') of the city hall when the city council is in session or within
five hundred feet (500') of any court while in session, and shall not be used or operated for the
amplification of music in those areas of the city which are designated as residential districts by the
zoning ordinance of the city. (Ord. 993, 8-11-1970)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 266/710
6-10-4: ZONE OF QUIET:
It shall be unlawful for any person to use or operate or permit the use of, or operation of any sound
amplifying equipment out of doors or indoors when used or operated to reach persons out of doors
within a zone of quiet established by resolution of the council of the city, provided that signs indicating
the existence of such zone of quiet have any record and are in place. (Ord. 993, 8-11-1970)
6-10-5: APPLICABILITY:
The only provisions of this chapter which shall apply to the use or operation of sound amplifying
equipment by a hospital, church, school or educational institution when used or operated upon property
owned or controlled by said hospital, church, school or educational institution by the provisions of
section 6-10-3 of this chapter which limit the time of use or operation through the hours of nine thirty
o'clock (9:30) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. which require that the volume of sound shall be
controlled so that said volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to
persons within the area of audibility, and which prohibit the use or operation within five hundred feet
(500') of the city hall when the city council is in session or within five hundred feet (500') of any court
while in session. (Ord. 993, 8-11-1970)
Chapter 11
OUTDOOR MUSIC FESTIVALS; LARGE OUTDOOR
PUBLIC GATHERINGS
6-11-1: MEASURES TO BE TAKEN:
The city council finds and declares that it is necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the
general public and the inhabitants of the city, that rules and regulations be established for the purpose
of regulating outdoor music festivals or other large outdoor public gatherings within the city and that to
ensure the public health and safety, proper sanitary, police, health and safety measures be provided to
regulate outdoor music festivals or other large outdoor public gatherings. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, persons, corporations, organizations, landowner, tenant or lessee to
allow, permit, encourage, organize, promote, conduct or advertise any entertainment, game, show,
exhibition, activity, amusement, gathering or assembly of persons within the city, where there will be
presented outdoor live or recorded musical entertainment, or any other outdoor gathering, assembly or
rally which said person, persons, corporation, organization, landowner, tenant or lessee believes or has
reason to believe will attract five hundred (500) or more persons, unless a valid city permit is first
obtained for the conducting and operating of such said activities. A separate permit will be required for
each said activity. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 267/710
Written application for a permit to conduct and operate such an outdoor activity shall be made to the
city council. Said application shall be submitted sixty (60) days or more prior to the date upon which
said activity is to be, or may be, held. Application for the permits herein provided shall be conditionally
approved or denied within forty five (45) days after the application has been filed. Failure by the city
council to act within said period shall constitute approval of the application. If the application for the
permit is not approved and the permit is denied, the denial shall be in writing setting forth the reasons
for the denial. The decision of the city council shall be final. With each application for a permit to
conduct an outdoor music festival or other large outdoor public gathering, the applicant shall pay a five
hundred dollar ($500.00) application fee which shall be refunded only in the event the application is
denied. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-4: APPROVAL OF PERMIT:
Whenever approval by a city government department, office or other agency is a condition for the
issuance of a permit pursuant to application made therefor as set forth herein, the request to such
department, office or other agency for such approval shall be made simultaneously with the filing of the
application for the permit with the city council. Conditional approval or denial by said government
department, office or agency shall be made within twenty five (25) days after request for permission
has been filed with said government department, office or agency. Failure to act within said period by
the government department, office or agency shall constitute its approval. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-5: CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
When a physical facility is required or subject to approval hereunder, conditional approval may be
granted upon the basis of specific plans and specifications proposed and submitted by the applicant for
permit. Any and all facilities required under the terms of any permit issued shall be in existence and in
place at the location for which the permit is granted, ten (10) days or more before the date when said
event is scheduled to take place and shall be subject to inspection and approval of the agencies,
departments or offices whose approval is required. Inspection of any and all facilities referred to herein
shall be approved or disapproved at least five (5) days preceding the event. Failure by the department
or agency to act as herein required shall constitute an approval. If the facilities fail to meet the
standards set forth in the plans and specifications therefor which have been conditionally approved,
such conditional approval shall be withdrawn and any and all permits granted subject to such approval
shall be cancelled and withdrawn. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-6: CONTENTS OF APPLICATION:
An application for a permit and the required accompanying documents shall be in six (6) copies and
shall show:
(A) The owner, exact location, legal description and area of the premises on which it is planned to
conduct the activities.
(B) The owner, exact location, legal description and area of all lands to be used for parking or other
uses incidental to the activity.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 268/710
(C) The date or dates and the hours during which the event is to be conducted.
(D) An estimate of the minimum and maximum numbers of customers, spectators, participants and
other persons expected to attend the event for each day it is conducted, together with detailed
information supporting such estimate.
(E) A detailed explanation of the applicant's program, plans and ability to supply potable water and
facilities, food supply and facilities, sanitation facilities (including, but not limited to, sewage,
garbage and rubbish), medical and first aid facilities and services, vehicle parking space, vehicle
access, on site traffic control, evacuation plans for sick or injured persons and to comply with all
conditions and regulations set forth in this chapter and in proposed permit conditions.
(F) A description of all loudspeakers and sound equipment to be used and the intensity of the sound, in
decibels, at the boundaries of the premises.
(G) If it is proposed or expected that customers, spectators or participants will remain overnight, the
arrangements for illuminating the premises and for camping or similar facilities.
(H) Provisions for cleanup of the premises and removal of rubbish after the event has concluded.
(I) Such other information pertinent to the event as the city council or any officer of the city finds is
reasonably necessary and required in order to determine whether or not the permit should be
granted.
(J) The name, age, residence, mailing address and telephone number of the applicant, and applicant's
legal nature, such as individual, partnership, corporation, etc. If the application is made by a
partnership, the names and addresses of all partners both general and special shall be included. If
the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be signed by the president and secretary thereof,
and shall contain the names and addresses of all corporate officers and a certified copy of the
articles of incorporation shall be attached to the application. If the application is by a joint venture,
the names and addresses of each member of the joint venture shall be included.
(K) Financial statement sufficient to give assurance of the ability of the applicants to meet the
conditions of the permit.
(L) A detailed explanation of the applicant's plan for policing the activity with particular emphasis on the
control and prevention of illegal alcoholic and illegal drug consumption.
(M) A detailed explanation of the applicant's plans in the event more persons attempt to attend the
event than is permitted by the particular permit involved.
(N) A consent to the entry at any time in the course of his duties of any peace officer, and any
employee of the police department of the city, sheriff, health officer, and any other El Dorado County
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 269/710
officer, and any city officer or employee, California highway patrol officer or state officer or
employee, in the performance of his duties, including, but not limited to, inspection.
(O) The address of applicant within the state of California to which all notices and correspondence
addressed to applicant shall be directed by the city. Any notice or correspondence addressed and
mailed postage prepaid to said address shall be deemed received by applicant. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-
1971)
6-11-7: COPIES TO BE FILED:
At the time of filing an application for a permit for such activity or event with the required fee and the
items required by section 6-11-6 of this chapter, the applicant, at the same time, also shall file:
(A) Six (6) copies of white background prints of a map drawn to scale showing:
1. The location of the property on which the event is planned to occur.
2. The location of all highways, streets, alleys, lots and parcels of land within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the exterior boundaries of the proposed use.
3. The location of the parking area and of all other areas to be used for other uses incidental to the
event.
4. All interior accessways.
5. Access to the property.
6. The location and detailed plans of all buildings and structures on the premises or to be erected,
including the bandstand, stage or other facility for performance.
7. The location of all loudspeakers.
8. The location of all toilet, medical, washing, drinking and other facilities required by this chapter.
(B) A certified list as shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county of the names and
addresses of all persons to whom all property is assessed within five hundred feet (500') of the
exterior boundaries of the proposed use.
(C) An agreement in writing signed by all property owners permitting such use of the premises to be
used for both the activity and for parking, or a document showing that the applicant is the owner
thereof.
(D) The agreements or contracts which show what doctors, first aid attendants and ambulances will be
available at the premises.
(E) An agreement approved as to form by the city attorney and signed by the applicant or applicants
that, within seventy two (72) hours after the conclusion of the event, he or they will clean up the
premises and remove all trash, debris, garbage and other waste from in and around the premises.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 270/710
Such agreement shall be secured by an undertaking in a total amount of not less than five thousand
dollars ($5,000.00). Said undertaking shall be in the form of a surety bond written by a corporate
bonding company authorized to do business in the state of California. Said undertaking shall be
filed with the city clerk within seven (7) days after the city council grants the permit. The city clerk
shall not issue the permit until said undertaking is filed with him in a form approved by the city
attorney.
(F) An agreement in writing, approved as to form by the city attorney and signed by the applicant or
applicants and by the owner or owners of the subject premises (including both the premises where
the event will be held and where the parking therefor will be located) that they will reimburse all
owners and occupants of property adjoining the subject premises for all damages of any kind to
such owners or occupants or to their property caused by the applicant or applicants, owner or
owners of the subject premises, or by any person attending the event, which damage would not
have occurred had the event not been held; and said agreement shall also state that said applicant
or applicants and said owner or owners of the subject premises (including both the premises where
the event will be held and where the parking therefor will be located) agree to indemnify the city and
its officers, agents and employees, against any and all loss, injury, damage, claim, liability and
cause of action, of any and every nature whatsoever arising out of, or in any way connected with
said event and shall indemnify against loss, injury, damage, claim, liability and cause of action, to
both person and property. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-8: INSURANCE POLICY REQUIRED:
The undertaking or insurance policy required herein shall be for the benefit of the city and its officers,
agents, and employees and for the benefit of all persons to whom the permittee or owner may become
liable. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-9: AMOUNT OF INSURANCE POLICY:
The undertaking or policy of insurance shall be in such an amount that the total shall not be less than
one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). Said security shall be filed with the city clerk within seven
(7) days after the city council grants the permit. The city clerk shall not issue the permit for said activity
until said security is filed with him in a form approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-10: PUBLIC HEARING:
Upon receipt of a complete application, including accompanying documents and the application fee,
the city clerk shall with due diligence transmit the same to the city council and the city clerk at that time
shall request the city council to set a time and date for a public hearing. The city council shall set the
application for a public hearing at a regular meeting of the city council, not more than thirty (30) days
thereafter. The city clerk shall thereupon give not less than ten (10) days' written notice thereof to the
applicant by mail, postage prepaid, to the address set forth in the application. The city clerk shall also
give written notice of the hearing and copies of the application to the police chief, the county health
officer, the director of public works, the city attorney and the planning director who shall investigate the
matter and report in writing to the city council not later than the time set for the hearing, with
appropriate recommendations concerning the activity. At said hearing the applicant shall have the right
to testify and to present other evidence. The city clerk shall also serve notice of the time and place of
such hearing by publishing once in a newspaper of general circulation published in the city of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 271/710
Placerville, county of El Dorado, state of California, at least ten (10) days before said hearing, and shall
also, not less than ten (10) days before such hearing, send written notice by mail of the time and place
of hearing to all persons whose names and addresses appear upon the latest available assessment roll
of the county as owning property within five hundred feet (500') of the exterior boundaries of the
proposed use. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-11: GRANTING OF PERMIT:
If the city council finds that the applicant has complied with or will comply with the requirements of this
chapter, it shall grant the permit, providing however, that said permit shall be revoked at any time the
applicant fails to meet the conditions of this chapter. The permit shall state the maximum number of
persons allowed to attend the event. If the city council finds that the applicant has not complied with
this chapter and ordinances of this city applicable thereto, then the permit shall be denied. (Ord. 1001,
4-27-1971)
6-11-12: REGULATIONS WHICH MUST BE COMPLIED WITH BY EACH PERMITTEE:
(A) Drinking Water: The permittee shall provide a potable domestic water supply from a source
approved by the health officer. Water shall not be dipped from a receptacle for drinking or cooking
uses. All food concessions that handle other than packaged or bottled goods must be supplied with
hot and cold running water under pressure and a means of disposing of wastewater.
If trucks are used to haul water into the site, they shall, prior to use, be cleaned and sterilized under
the supervision of the county health department.
Water shall be provided for employees and spectators at the following rate per person per day:
employees - thirty five (35) gallons; spectators - ten (10) gallons.
The approval of the county health officer of permittee's drinking water plans shall be a prerequisite
to an issuance of a permit.
(B) Sanitary Facilities: Adequate toilet facilities for both sexes must be distributed throughout the
grounds as follows: One water closet, chemical or sanitary privy unit, must be supplied for each two
hundred fifty (250) persons.
Toilet facilities and accessories shall be maintained in a sanitary condition at all times and shall be
cleaned at least twice each day.
Wastewater and sewage originating on the grounds must be disposed of by a system approved by
the health officer.
The approval by the health officer of permittee's sanitary facilities plans shall be a prerequisite for
the issuance of a permit. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-13: PARKING:
The permittee shall have on the premises, or contiguous thereto, automobile storage spaces equal to
one-fourth (1/4) of the number of persons which the permit allows to attend the event unless the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 272/710
planning director finds that a smaller number is sufficient in which case the permittee may provide such
lesser number. At all times between one hour before the beginning of the event and one hour after its
termination, the permittee shall provide a sufficient number of parking attendants at all entrances, exits
and within the parking lots. The approval by the planning director of the permittee's parking plans shall
be a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-14: GARBAGE, TRASH AND REFUSE:
The permittee shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the health officer that the permittee has an
adequate plan for the proper storage, collection and disposal of garbage, trash and refuse. All solid
waste material shall be disposed of by the sanitary landfill method, and the event area and parking
shall be returned to a litter free condition within seventy two (72) hours after the event is concluded, all
to the satisfaction of the health officer. Every licensee shall be required to furnish at least one trash can
with at least thirty two (32) gallons capacity for every twenty five (25) persons expected to be in
attendance. Proof that the requisite quantity of trash and refuse receptacles will be available must be
made to the health officer. The approval by the health officer of permittee's solid waste disposal plans is
a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-15: OPERATION OF EVENT:
The permittee shall operate the event only on those days and during the hours specified on the permit.
(Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-16: ADMISSION:
Admission shall be by ticket only. The permittee shall not admit and shall prevent the entrance of any
person who does not possess a ticket to the event, except a peace officer or other city or county public
officer or employee or agent thereof. The permittee shall not sell, give, or distribute a greater number of
tickets than the number which the permit allows to attend. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-17: ADVERTISING:
A person shall not advertise or announce by any means or medium, including, but not confined to,
pamphlets, handbills, newspapers, radio and television, the holding of such an event prior to the
granting of a permit. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-18: FOOD AND DRINK:
The permittee shall be required to provide food and drink service facilities to adequately feed the
number of persons allowed by permit. In selling, preparing, delivering or serving food or beverage, or
both, all persons shall comply with the California restaurant act, chapter 11, beginning with section
28590 of division 21 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California, and also with the city of
Placerville ordinance code, all to the satisfaction of the health officer. The approval of the health officer
of permittee's food and beverage plans is a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit for an outdoor
music festival or other large outdoor public gathering. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 273/710
6-11-19: MEDICAL COVERAGE OF PERFORMERS:
The permittee shall be responsible for making adequate plans for medical coverage of performers,
employees, participants, customers and spectators.
There shall be at least one physician per one thousand (1,000) persons available on site all the time
during preparation and performance of the outdoor festival or other large outdoor public gathering.
Adequate medical supply, including personnel and material for first aid and minor emergency surgery,
shall be available on site. An adequately protected area shall be set aside for the purpose of medical
care. An area suitable for recovery from reaction to drug abuse shall be available. The permittee shall
furnish one ambulance per each one thousand (1,000) persons at said event.
The permittee's plans for the above medical preparedness shall be subject to the approval by the
county health officer and such approval is a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-
1971)
6-11-20: ELECTRICAL ILLUMINATION:
Every permittee planning an event after dark, or planning to allow persons who attend the public
amusement to remain on the premises after dark, shall provide electrical illumination to ensure that
those areas which are occupied are lighted at all times. The planning director must approve an
applicant's lighting plans as a prerequisite to issuance of a permit.
A permittee shall be required to illuminate specific areas on the premises in accordance with the
following scale of lighting intensity:
Open areas reserved for spectators 10 foot-candles
Stage areas 100 foot-candles
Parking and overnight areas 5 foot-candles
Restroom and concession areas 50 foot-candles
(Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-21: COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REGULATIONS:
Permittee shall comply with all applicable zoning regulations of the city. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-22: PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE:
No permit granted under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable to another location, another
person or entity, or another set of dates. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-23: PERMITS TO BE OBTAINED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 274/710
Prior to doing any construction, excavation, grading or encroachment required for said event, the
permittee or applicant shall obtain from the city all necessary permits therefor. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-24: CAMPING AND OVERNIGHT FACILITIES:
Every permittee of an event which will last more than one day or at which persons will remain overnight
on the premises, shall provide camping facilities and overnight areas. Plans for such must be approved
by the health officer and comply with division 5, title 25, of the California Administrative Code,
"incidental camp areas". (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-25: UNLAWFUL TO PERMIT GATHERING:
A person who allows, permits, encourages, organizes, promotes, conducts or advertises any
entertainment, game show, exhibition, activity, amusement, gathering or assembly of persons within the
corporate limits of the city where there is presented outdoor live or recorded musical entertainment in
violation of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
Provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any events conducted and supervised or cosponsored by
any public school or other governmental body. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
6-11-26: URGENCY ORDINANCE:
It has come to the attention of the city council that there is a proposed music festival to be held within
the next thirty (30) days in the city. There is at present no ordinance regulating this type of activity.
Without an ordinance regulating music festivals and large outdoor public gatherings, there is no
adequate safeguard that proper sanitary facilities will be available or that proper precautionary
measures can be taken to care for crowd control, police and fire protection, and that sufficient money or
surety bond be available to compensate any property owner for possible property damage. For the
above reasons, this chapter is necessary for the public health, safety and welfare, and is therefore
declared to be an urgency ordinance. (Ord. 1001, 4-27-1971)
Chapter 12
PARADES
6-12-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the PARADE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
PLACERVILLE. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the city of Placerville.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 275/710
CITY: The city of Placerville.
PARADE: Any parade, march, or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street,
park or other public place in the city.
PARADE COMMITTEE: The chief of police, the fire chief, the director of public works, the city
administrator, one downtown merchant, and one city council member.
PARADE PERMIT: A permit as required by this chapter.
PERSON: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
(Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971; amd. Ord. 1412, 4-28-1987)
6-12-3: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall
have been obtained from the parade committee.
(A) Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to:
1. Funeral processions conducted by a state of California licensed mortuary;
2. Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing
such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;
3. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-4: APPLICATION:
A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms
provided by such officer.
(A) Filing Period: An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than
thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the
parade.
(B) Contents: The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information:
1. The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade;
2. If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name,
address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized
and responsible heads of such organization;
3. The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and
who will be responsible for its conduct;
4. The date when the parade is to be conducted;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 276/710
5. The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point;
6. The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such
parade; the type of animals and description of vehicles;
7. The hours when such parade will start and terminate;
8. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets
proposed to be traversed;
9. The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parades;
10. The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such area or areas;
11. The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade;
12. If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the
applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the parade committee a communication in
writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the
permit on his behalf.
13. The purpose of the parade.
(C) Late Applications: The parade committee, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the
authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than thirty (30) days before the
date such parade is proposed to be conducted. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
(D) Fee: There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade permit a fee as set by
resolution of the city council. There shall be no fee if the parade is for the purposes of promoting the
city or youth organizations of the city. (Ord. 1300, 5-25-1982)
6-12-5: STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The parade committee shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the
application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, they find that:
(A) The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other
traffic contiguous to its route;
(B) The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of
the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent
normal police protection to the city;
(C) The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to
prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the
proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 277/710
(D) The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous
to such assembly areas;
(E) The conduct of such parade will not interfere with movement of firefighting equipment en route to a
fire;
(F) The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and
without unreasonable delays en route;
(G) The parade is not to be held for the purpose of advertising any produce or goods and is not
designated to be held for private profit. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-6: NOTICE OF REJECTION:
The parade committee shall act upon the application for a parade permit within five (5) days after the
filing thereof. If the parade committee disapproves the application, they shall mail to the applicant
within five (5) days after the date upon which the application was filed, a notice of its action, stating the
reasons for its denial of the permit. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-7: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council.
The appeal shall be taken within ten (10) days after notice. The city council shall act upon the appeal
within twenty one (21) days after its receipt. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-8: ALTERNATIVE PERMIT:
The parade committee, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize
the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that named by the
applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five (5) days after notice of
the action of the parade committee, file a written notice of acceptance with the parade committee. An
alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade
permit under this chapter. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-9: NOTICE TO CITY AND OTHER OFFICIALS:
Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the parade committee shall transmit a copy thereof
to the mayor and the city council. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-10: CONTENTS OF PERMIT:
Each parade permit shall state the following information:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 278/710
(A) Starting time;
(B) Minimum speed;
(C) Maximum speed;
(D) Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade;
(E) The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
(F) The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
(G) Such other information as the parade committee shall find necessary to the enforcement of this
chapter. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-11: DUTIES OF PERMITTEE:
A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable
laws and ordinances.
(A) Possession Of Permit: The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall
carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-12: PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES:
(A) Interference: No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, or impede, or interfere with any
parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade.
(B) Driving Through Parades: No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons
comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
(C) Parking On Parade Route: The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary,
to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street, sidewalk, alley, parking lot or part thereof
constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No
person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation thereof.
(D) Loud Noise: The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other
vehicle along the route of the parade except as a danger warning, the racing of motors of any
automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle parked along the route of the parade in such manner as to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 279/710
create a loud and unnecessary noise which annoys or disturbs the animals in the parade or is
annoying or disturbing to the general public watching the parade shall be unlawful. (Ord. 1002, 6-
22-1971)
6-12-13: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The parade committee shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder if the
standards for issuance as herein set forth are not complied with by the permit holder. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-
1971)
6-12-14: SEPARABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions thereof. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
6-12-15: URGENCY:
Each summer the city of Placerville has a parade in connection with "Wagon Train" which is an event
for the promotion of the greater Placerville area. Animals participate in this parade. Each year this
event draws more attention and brings more people. Recent occurrences in another Mother Lode
community make it apparent that there should be regulations for the purpose of controlling the
vehicular traffic during a parade and to further control unnecessary, loud noises from vehicles which
possibly could disturb the animals participating in the parade and would make it impossible for the
general public to enjoy the parade activities. For the above reasons this chapter should be declared as
an urgency ordinance so as to be in effect at the time of the Wagon Train Parade and this will be for the
best interest of the general public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 1002, 6-22-1971)
Chapter 13
RESERVE POLICE OFFICERS
6-13-1: DUTIES AND SERVICES:
The purpose of the reserve police shall be to cooperate with and assist the police department of the
city under the orders and direction of the chief of police, in the enforcement of law and order during any
and all emergencies declared to exist within the city by the chief of police.
Reserve officers shall render police services upon occasions when, in the opinion of the chief of police,
such augmentation to the regular department is essential to the public welfare and safety. They shall
exercise police powers when circumstances make it expedient to preserve order and/or to protect life
and property pending the arrival of regular police officers. (Ord. 1663, 8-26-2014)
6-13-2: SALARIES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 280/710
Reserve officers shall receive financial remuneration for services rendered during specific events or
assignments as directed by the chief of police.
The maximum rate of pay shall be equal to the hourly rate of a step A police officer without fringe
benefits. (Ord. 1663, 8-26-2014)
6-13-3: EXECUTIVE OFFICER:
The chief of police shall be the executive officer of the Placerville police department reserve. (Ord.
1663, 8-26-2014)
6-13-4: COORDINATOR:
The coordinator of the reserve police shall be appointed from within the regular department to serve at
the will and pleasure of the chief of police. (Ord. 1663, 8-26-2014)
6-13-5: RESPONSIBILITY:
The coordinator shall be responsible for the execution of all orders and rules governing the reserve
police. The coordinator shall have the power to enforce all orders, written or verbal, issued by the chief
of police. Members shall be governed by, and comply with, the provisions contained within the
Placerville police department operations manual. (Ord. 1663, 8-26-2014)
Chapter 14
BURGLARY AND ROBBERY EMERGENCY ALARM
SYSTEMS
6-14-1: PURPOSE:
The immediate preservation of the public safety, health, and welfare required the adoption of this
chapter. The public has purchased alarm systems which have malfunctioned, causing an increase in
the false alarm reports which require an immediate response of emergency service units subjecting the
general public to a dangerous situation. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning respectively
ascribed to them by this section:
ALARM AGENT: Any person who is employed by an alarm business operator, either directly or
indirectly, who does not respond to activated alarms but whose duties include any of the following:
selling, maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, installing, replacing, or moving on or in any
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 281/710
building, structure or facility, any alarm system.
ALARM BUSINESS: The business of any person consisting of: selling and installing, maintaining,
servicing, altering, replacing or moving any alarm system or component parts thereof in or on any
building, structure or facility, or responding to alarm systems.
ALARM BUSINESS OPERATOR: Any person who operates any business engaged in the sale and
installation, maintenance, alteration, or servicing of the alarm systems, or which responds to such
alarm systems. Alarm business operator shall not include a business which merely sells from a fixed
location or manufactures alarms systems, unless such business services, installs, monitors, or
responds to alarm systems at protected premises.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any mechanical or electrical device designed to detect, or enable a person to notify
others of, an unauthorized intrusion onto certain premises or the existence of an emergency on such
premises, and which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. The following
devices shall not constitute alarm systems within the meaning of this subsection:
(A) Devices which do not register alarms that are audible, visible, or perceptible outside the
protected premises;
(B) Devices which are not installed, operated or used for the purpose of reporting an emergency to
the police;
(C) Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles; and
(D) Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police department.
ANSWERING SERVICE: A telephone answering service providing among its services the receiving on
a continuous basis through trained employees of emergency signals from alarm systems, and the
subsequent immediate relaying of said messages by live voice to the communication center.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE: An alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone
lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
CENTRAL STATION: An office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators supervise the
circuits, and where guards and/or servicemen are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
DIRECT LINE: A telephone line leading directly from a central station to the communication center,
where said line is used only to report emergency signals on a person to person basis.
EMERGENCY: The commission or attempted commission of a robbery or burglary.
FALSE ALARM: The activation of an alarm system which results in a response by the police where an
emergency does not exist. False alarms which fall into the following two (2) categories shall not be
counted against a permittee under subsection 6-14-11(B)2 of this chapter for the purposes of
suspension or revocation of an alarm system permit:
(A) False alarms which the permittee can demonstrate in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 6-14-11(B)2 of this chapter, were proximately caused by hurricanes, tornadoes,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 282/710
earthquakes, or other violent acts of nature;
(B) False alarms which the permittee can demonstrate, in accordance with the provisions of
subsection 6-14-11(B)2(a) of this chapter, were actually caused by the act of some person other
than:
1. The permittee for the purpose of this subsection, the term "permittee" shall include officers,
agents, employees, independent contractors, and any other persons subject to the direct or
indirect control of the permittee;
2. The person who installed, connected, operated, maintained or serviced the alarm system;
3. The manufacturer of the alarm system, including the manufacturer's officers, agents,
employees, independent contractors and any other persons subject to the direct or indirect
control of the manufacturer.
INTERCONNECT: To connect an alarm system to a telephone line, either directly or through a
mechanical device that utilizes a standard telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to
transmit an emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system.
MODIFIED CENTRAL SYSTEM: An office to which alarm systems are connected, where operators
supervise the circuits but where guards are not maintained to investigate alarm signals.
PERMITTEE: The person to whom an alarm system permit is issued.
PERSON: Shall include natural persons, without regard to number or gender, any partnership,
corporation, and any other type of legal entity.
PRIMARY TRUNKLINE: A telephone line leading directly into the communication center for the
purpose of handling emergency calls on a person to person basis, and which is identified as such by a
specific number included among the emergency numbers listed in the telephone directory issued by
the telephone company, covering the service area within the police department's jurisdiction.
SIREN: Any audible noise similar to that which must be sounded by an authorized emergency vehicle
under the conditions set forth in section 21055 of the California Vehicle Code.
SPECIAL TRUNKLINE: A telephone line leading into the communication center and having the primary
purpose of handling emergency signals or messages originating through a central station, modified
central station or answering service. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-3: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
(A) Alarm Business: No person shall engage in, carry on, conduct or operate an alarm business without
having been issued a business license therefor and having paid the annual business license fee in
the amount provided for by resolution. No business license, which is required hereunder, shall be
renewed for any operator of an alarm business who does not possess a valid, unexpired and
unrevoked alarm company operator's license issued by the department of consumer affairs, state of
California. Nor shall any business license required hereunder be issued in the first instance, if at the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 283/710
time of applying therefor, the department of consumer affairs, state of California, requires such
applicant to possess an alarm company operator's license issued by the department of consumer
affairs, state of California, and the applicant for business license does not possess such alarm
company operator's license. Any business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this section
shall be automatically suspended, and it shall be unlawful for any alarm business operator to
perform any work covered by such business license during any period in which said license issued
by the department of consumer affairs, state of California, is suspended or revoked or is not
renewed after the expiration thereof.
(B) Alarm Agent And Responding Alarm Agent: No person shall act as alarm agent or responding
alarm agent without having previously registered as an alarm agent or responding alarm agent with
the department of consumer affairs, state of California. Any person acting as an alarm agent or
responding alarm agent must, prior to performing any duties of an alarm agent or responding alarm
agent, show his registration cards, issued by the department of consumer affairs, state of California,
to the chief of police or his representative. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall install, connect, operate or maintain, or cause to be installed, connected, operated or
maintained, an alarm system upon any property of which such person is in possession without first
obtaining an alarm system permit therefor in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any such
person who installs, connects, operates or maintains, or who causes to be installed, connected,
operated or maintained an alarm system without first obtaining a permit as required by this section or
who, after having a permit revoked or suspended, fails to disconnect an audible alarm or, in the case of
silent alarm, continues to relay emergency signals to the communications center, shall be in violation of
this chapter. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-5: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
(A) All applications for alarm system permits shall be filed with the chief of police on such forms as may
be prescribed. Such applications shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the
person who will respond to an alarm, or render service or repairs to the alarm system during any
hour of the day or night and such additional information as the chief of police shall reasonably deem
necessary for the evaluation and proper processing of the permit application.
(B) Any person who operates or maintains more than one alarm system under any particular property
may, at his option, apply for a single permit for that particular property or for separate permits for
each alarm system operated or maintained; provided, however, that if such a person chooses to
secure a separate permit for each alarm system a separate application shall be submitted for each
such system and a separate permit fee shall accompany each such application. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-
1980)
6-14-6: FEES:
(A) Every application for an alarm system permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit fee
which shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fee is established to cover the cost
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 284/710
of processing the applications and permits and shall be in addition to any other permit fee imposed
by this code.
(B) Every applicant shall be given a receipt for the aforesaid permit fee at the time such fee is paid. The
receipt shall serve as a temporary alarm system permit for a period not to exceed forty five (45)
days from the date on which said permit fee was paid, and shall be of no force or effect after the
forty five (45) days period expires, or after the alarm system permit is issued by the chief of police,
whichever occurs sooner. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
Alarm system permits shall be issued to the person who is in possession of the property which the
alarm system is designed to protect. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-8: EXPIRATION OF PERMIT:
Each alarm system permit that is issued shall expire one year after the date of issuance. The date of
issuance shall be the date shown on the alarm system permit issued by the issuing authority. Upon
expiration of an alarm system permit, a new permit shall be secured in the manner specified by section
6-14-5, subsection 6-14-6(B), sections 6-14-7 and 6-14-9 of this chapter. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-9: RENEWAL FEES:
The fee for the renewal of an alarm system permit shall be established by resolution of the city council.
(Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
(A) Alarm permits shall be renewed on the anniversary date of said permit.
(B) Thirty (30) days prior to said renewal date the permittee shall be notified in writing by the city that
the permit is due for renewal.
(C) If said permit is renewed within said thirty (30) day period, no fee shall be charged for said renewal.
(D) In the event said permit is not renewed during said thirty (30) day period, the permittee shall be
required to submit an application for reinstatement of said permit and shall be required to pay the
permit fee as set by resolution establishing alarm permit fees. (Res. 4372, 10-23-1984)
6-14-10: TRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT:
Any alarm system permit issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be valid only for
the permittee named on the permit, and only for the particular alarm system or systems specified on
the permit. No alarm system permit shall in any manner be transferred or assigned without the written
consent of the chief of police. Any request to transfer an alarm system permit shall be made only upon
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 285/710
such form as the chief of police may prescribe and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of
five dollars ($5.00). Transfer of an alarm system permit shall in no way affect the date of expiration of
said permit. False alarm previously charged to the transferor shall not be charged to the transferee;
provided, however, that the chief of police may deny any request to transfer an alarm system permit
where, after reasonable investigation, it appears that the transfer is requested for the purpose of
allowing the transferor to evade responsibility for prior false alarms. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-11: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
(A) Hearings: No alarm system permit shall be suspended or revoked under this section until a hearing
shall have been held by the chief of police, or a designated representative. Written notice of the
time and place of such hearing shall be served upon the permittee, and upon the person who
renders service or repairs to the permittee's alarm system as designated on the permittee's
application, at least ten (10) days prior to the date set for such hearing. Such notice shall contain a
brief statement of the grounds to be relied upon for suspending or revoking such permit. Notice may
be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by depositing the same in
the U.S. mail in a sealed envelope postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at the
address shown on the permit application.
(B) Grounds: The following shall constitute the exclusive grounds for suspension or revocation of an
alarm system permit:
1. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.
2. Where an alarm system actuates excessive false alarms. An alarm system shall be deemed to
actuate excessive false alarms where there are three (3) false alarms within thirty (30)
consecutive days, five (5) false alarms within ninety (90) consecutive days or six (6) false alarms
within one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. If a permittee presents sufficient proof that a
particular false alarm was caused by an event or act specified in subsections (A) and (B) of the
definition of "false alarm" in section 6-14-2 of this chapter, said false alarm shall not be counted
against the permittee in determining whether the permittee's alarm system actuated excessive
false alarms.
(a) If the chief of police or designated representative, determines that an alarm system has
generated excessive false alarms, the permittee responsible for such alarm system shall have
his permit suspended for fifteen (15) days. On the sixteenth day following such a suspension,
the suspended permit shall be restored by operation of law.
(b) If the chief of police, or designated representative, determines that an alarm system has
generated excessive false alarms, and if he further finds that the permittee responsible for such
alarm system has had his permit suspended during the twelve (12) months prior to the date on
which the hearing is held, the permittee shall have his permit revoked.
3. The violation of any condition imposed by the chief of police upon an alarm system permit issued
in accordance with section 6-14-12 of this chapter.
(C) Appeals: Any permit holder aggrieved by the decision of the issuing authority in suspending or
revoking an alarm system permit may appeal such decision to the city council.
Notice of appeal shall be filed in writing with the city clerk not later than ten (10) days after said
suspension or revocation. During the pendency of said appeal to the council the permit shall remain
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 286/710
in effect.
The city shall either conduct a hearing on said appeal or refer said appeal to a hearing officer who
shall conduct the hearing within thirty (30) days of the filing of said appeal. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
(D) Notices:
1. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions, after the police department has recorded two (2) false
alarms in any quarter of any calendar year, generated by any alarm user permit holder, the permit
holder and the alarm company maintaining the alarm annunciator panel at the communication
center shall be notified either by personal delivery or first class mail that police response to any
further false alarms will result in a charge for each such response.
2. The response to a second or subsequent false alarm by any alarm user not possessing a valid
permit as required by this chapter and, after said user has been once warned/advised by letter or
citation of the permit requirements and no permit having still been issued shall result in a charge
for each such response.
3. The fee for police response as provided herein shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
1300, 5-25-1982)
6-14-12: REAPPLICATION AFTER REVOCATION:
Any person whose alarm system permit is revoked may reapply for a new alarm system permit, but
only in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
(A) Reapplication: All reapplications shall be submitted directly to the chief of police, or to that person
whom the chief of police designates as the alarm officer, on such forms as may be prescribed.
(B) Fees: Every reapplication for an alarm system permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
permit fee which shall be established by resolution of the city council. The fee is established to
cover the cost of processing the reapplications and permits and shall be in addition to any other
permit fee imposed by this code.
(C) Investigation: The chief of police, or designated representative, shall investigate each reapplication
to determine whether the grounds for the prior revocation have been eliminated, or are not likely to
occur again in the future. Such investigation may include, but shall not be limited to, an on site
investigation of the alarm system; an examination of the alarm system and any specifications,
diagrams, or descriptions pertaining thereto; and a prescribed test period of reasonable duration.
(D) Issuance Of Permit: If, after investigation, and in his sole discretion, the chief of police determines
that the grounds for the prior revocation have been eliminated, or that such grounds are not likely to
occur again in the future, an alarm system permit shall be issued to the person who is in possession
of the property which the alarm system is designed to protect. The chief of police may attach such
conditions to an alarm system permit as he deems reasonably necessary to ensure that the
permittee will comply with the provisions of this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 287/710
(E) Appeals: Any person whose reapplication for an alarm system permit is denied by the chief of
police may appeal such denial to the city council, in accordance with the procedure set forth in
subsection 6-14-11(C) of this chapter. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-13: REGULATIONS, REQUIREMENTS AND DUTIES:
(A) Alarm System Requirements: No alarm system shall be installed or connected on or after the date
this chapter becomes effective which emits the sound of a siren. Any alarm system which emits the
sound of a siren, and which is installed and in operation prior to the date this chapter becomes
effective, shall have that part of the alarm system which emits the sound of a siren disconnected
within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date this chapter becomes effective.
(B) Audible Alarm System Requirements: Any alarm system which is installed or connected on or after
the date this chapter becomes effective and which, when activated, generates an audible sound on
the premises, shall have as part of the system an automatic shutoff that will deactivate the audible
portion of the system within fifteen (15) minutes after it is first activated. Any alarm system which is
installed and in operation prior to the date this chapter becomes effective and which, when
activated, generates an audible sound on the premises, shall have such an automatic shutoff device
installed and in operation within one year after the date this chapter becomes effective.
(C) Display Of Alarm System Permit: Every alarm system permit shall be kept on the premises where
the alarm system is located.
(D) Automatic Dialing Device Regulations:
1. No automatic dialing device shall be interconnected to a primary trunkline of the communications
center or police department after the effective date of this chapter.
2. Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this chapter, all automatic dialing devices
interconnected to a primary trunkline shall be disconnected therefrom. The owner or lessee of
such device shall be responsible for having the device disconnected within the sixty (60) day time
period.
3. Persons owning or leasing an automatic dialing device may have the device interconnected to a
telephone line transmitting directly to:
(a) A central station; or
(b) A modified central station; or
(c) An answering service.
4. The relaying of messages to the communications center by a modified central station or an
answering service shall be over a special trunkline unless the special trunkline is unavailable; the
relaying of messages by a central station may be over a direct line.
5. No automatic dialing device may be interconnected to the telephone company operator.
(E) Response Required: When an alarm system has been activated, the alarm business and/or the
permittee shall have an alarm agent and/or other person in responsible control present at the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 288/710
location within thirty (30) minutes after being requested to do so by a representative of the
communications center and/or Placerville police department.
(F) Power Supply: All alarm systems shall be equipped with an uninterruptible power supply in such a
manner that the failure or interruption of normal electrical utility power shall not activate the alarm
system. This power supply must be capable of at least four (4) hours of operation.
(G) Notification Card Required: All premises having an alarm permit system permit shall file and keep
current an emergency notification card with the Placerville police department.
(H) Notice Of Name Of Servicer Or Occupant: Every audible alarm system shall have a sign or notice
posted on or near the audible device with the name and telephone number of the person or
company responsible for the maintenance of the system. The notice shall be posted in such a
position as to be readable from the ground level outside and adjacent to the building. All silent
alarm systems shall have a notice on the premises which provides the same information. (Ord.
1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-14: VIOLATION OF CHAPTER:
(A) Penalties: Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in California Penal Code
section 19. (Ord. 1578, 8-28-2001)
(B) Enforcement: The conviction or punishment of any person for violation of the provisions of this
chapter or for failing to secure a permit as required by this chapter shall not relieve such person
from paying the permit fee due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall payment of any
permit fee prevent criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. All
remedies shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use
of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The amount of any
permit fee shall be deemed delinquent thirty (30) days after it is due and payable. (Ord. 1243, 11-
25-1980)
6-14-15: CONFIDENTIALITY:
The information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character, shall
not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known
except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter; it is hereby declared that the public
interest served by not making the information public clearly outweighs the public interest served by
disclosure of the information. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-16: APPLICABILITY TO EXISTING ALARM SYSTEMS:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all alarm systems which were installed, connected,
operated or maintained on or prior to the date on which this chapter becomes effective; provided,
however, that the permits required for such alarm systems under section 6-14-4 of this chapter shall be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 289/710
obtained within ninety (90) days from and after the date on which this chapter becomes effective. (Ord.
1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-17: SEVERABILITY:
If any section or part of any section of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder hereof not hereby
invalidated shall remain in full force and effect. The council of the city hereby declares that it is the
intent of such council that it would have passed all other portions of this chapter independent of the
elimination therefrom of any such portion as may be declared invalid. (Ord. 1243, 11-25-1980)
6-14-18: APPLICABILITY OF CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE:
No provisions of this chapter shall be construed as preempting the requirements and/or regulations of
the California building code or title 4, chapter 1 of this code. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
Chapter 15
PRIVATE PATROL SERVICE REGULATIONS
6-15-1: APPLICATION FOR PATROL SERVICE PERMIT:
Before any person shall engage in the business of maintaining any patrol service or patrol system, or
patrolling any district, he shall make an application in writing to the chief of police for permission to
engage in such business, and describe therein the district in which he shall desire to operate. (Ord.
1075, 7-8-1975)
6-15-2: INVESTIGATION:
Said application shall be made to the chief of police, who shall cause an investigation to be made
concerning the conditions prevailing within the district designated in any such application, whether
already supplied with sufficient patrol service, patrol system, guard or watchman, and shall see that the
applicant has complied with all of the following requirements.
(A) Contents: Said application shall be signed and verified by the applicant, and shall specify his name,
business address, residence address, and the numbers of any telephones maintained by him, the
length of his residence in Placerville, the location of his last place of business, and the name and
character of said business, and the length of time he was engaged therein, and the names and
addresses of three (3) persons residing within said city as references.
(B) Surety Bond: Said application must be accompanied by a surety bond, the form of which shall be
approved by the city attorney, and the penal sum of which must be one thousand dollars
($1,000.00).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 290/710
(C) Condition Of Bond: The condition of each bond must be substantially such that the principal therein
named will faithfully conform to the code of the city, and to each and all laws of the state, whether
then in force, or which may thereafter be adopted, relating to the business of the applicant.
(D) Liability On Bond: The principal and sureties named in said bond, and their successors and
assigns, shall be jointly and severally bound unto the city, and unto any and every person aggrieved
or damaged by the breach of the conditions of said bond; and said bond shall not be void upon the
said recovery, but may be sued and recovered upon, from time to time, by any person, aggrieved or
damaged, until the whole penalty is exhausted.
(E) Additional Bond: In the event that the total liability of the sureties upon such bond falls below one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00), applicant shall furnish an additional bond to keep the liability at a
minimum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
(F) Motor Vehicle Insurance: If the applicant intends to, or does operate any motor vehicle in the
conduct of his business, he shall file with the city clerk an insurance policy covering such motor
vehicle, which said insurance shall include public liability to the extent of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for the death or injury of one person, twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) for the
death or injury of two (2) or more persons, and property damage in the sum of two thousand dollars
($2,000.00).
(G) Issuance Of Permit: If satisfied that the statements and references contained in said application are
true and that application has been approved as hereinafter provided, and upon applicant's
compliance with all the requirements of this chapter, the chief of police shall cause to be issued to
applicant a permit hereunder, subject to the terms and conditions outlined in section 6-15-3 of this
chapter.
(H) Information Required: Said permit holder shall file with the chief of police, prior to the employment
of any person, the applicant's description, photograph, and fingerprints, accompanied by at least
two (2) letters of recommendation.
Any person employed by a permit holder shall be approved by the chief of police before being
regularly employed; said employee to be removed for any reasonable cause offered by the chief of
police.
(I) Length Of Permit: All permits shall be issued for one year, and only after being approved and
countersigned by the chief of police. (Ord. 1075, 7-8-1975)
(J) Investigation Fee: The applicant shall pay an investigation fee as set by resolution of the council.
(Ord. 1300, 5-25-1982)
6-15-3: TERMS AND CONDITIONS:
(A) Said patrol service or patrol system or public guards shall be operated and conducted under the
general supervision of the chief of police.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 291/710
(B) Said chief of police shall regulate the style and color of uniform to be used by said patrol system or
patrol service or public guard. This will include, but not be limited to:
1. Patches: The patch will be oval in shape with one-half inch (1/2") lettering giving the name of the
company and the words "Private Patrol".
2. Badges And Cap Pieces: The patrol service, system, or public guard may not wear badges
resembling a star nor including a seal or emblem. This must be a plain badge with the name of
the company and the words "Private Patrol" placed on both.
3. Rank And Title: The members of the patrol service or system or public guard shall not hold rank
nor title nor wear insignia (stripes, bars, etc.) similar to the police services.
4. Vehicles: The color of the vehicles is not to be black, black and white, gold, gold and white,
brown, brown and white, or white. No vehicle is to have white door panels. No seals or decals are
to be placed on the vehicle, but the name of the company and the words "Private Patrol" must be
placed on the side of the doors and the rear of the vehicle. Lettering will be not less than two and
one-half inches (21/2") in height and the lettering shall be in contrast to the color of the
background upon which it is placed.
(C) Any such permit and any license issued pursuant thereto may at any time be revoked by the chief
of police for cause shown, after notice to the holder thereof and an opportunity to be heard shall
have been given.
(D) That the persons operating any patrol service or system in the city of Placerville shall have
complied with an act to license and regulate the business of private detectives and detective
agencies, being a law of the state of California. (Ord. 1075, 7-8-1975)
6-15-4: LICENSE FEE:
Every person, firm or corporation as herein provided conducting or operating any patrol system or
patrol service shall pay, in lieu of any other business license of the city, a license fee to the city of
Placerville of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per annum, payable yearly.
Every person, firm, or corporation as herein provided performing the function of a public guard shall
pay, in lieu of any other business license of the city, a license fee to the city of Placerville of ten dollars
($10.00) per annum, payable yearly. (Ord. 1075, 7-8-1975)
6-15-5: VIOLATION:
Any person violating or causing to be violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in addition to having all permits and
licenses canceled, the fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00), or shall be punishable by
imprisonment in the county jail of the county of El Dorado for not more than six (6) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1075, 7-8-1975)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 292/710
Chapter 16
WEAPONS
6-16-1: APPLICABILITY OF CHAPTER:
No portion of this chapter shall prohibit the possession of any firearm, or any ordinary air rifle or pellet
gun, or any ammunition for such weapons if carried pursuant to a valid permit issued by a duly
authorized government agency or lawfully carried for purposes of gun safety training, hunting, fishing or
other lawful sport. (Ord. 1490, 4-14-1992)
6-16-2: CHAPTER SUPPLEMENTAL TO STATE LAW:
The purpose in passing this chapter is to supplement state law regulating and controlling deadly
weapons, Penal Code, section 12000, et seq. (Ord. 1490, 4-14-1992)
6-16-3: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS:
It shall be unlawful in the city to fire, discharge, shoot or operate, or to assist or participate in the firing,
discharging, shooting or operating of any gun, revolver, pistol, firearm, spring gun, air gun, sling,
slingshot, or device designed or intended to discharge or capable of discharging any dangerous missile
or any cartridge shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance devised or intended to
be used or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm, except when it may be necessary to do so to
protect life or property, or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal, or in the hunting of
game with a shotgun within the boundaries of a hunting or game club or game farm and the pellets
discharged from such shotgun do not exceed the size of no. 2 shot; or in the enforcement of any law by
any peace officer, and except when used at any pistol or rifle range in accordance with rules and
regulations approved by the police department and the city council in connection with the operation of
such pistol or rifle range. (Ord. 1490, 4-14-1992)
6-16-4: CONFISCATION AND DESTRUCTION:
Any dangerous or deadly weapon possessed or controlled in violation of the California Penal Code by
any person shall be confiscated by the chief of police and upon a plea of guilty or upon the conviction
thereof in the case of an adult or upon the findings of the allegation to be true in the case of a juvenile,
shall be destroyed by the chief of police after such plea, after judgment of conviction becomes final, or
after the allegations are found to be true. (Ord. 1490, 4-14-1992)
6-16-5: EXEMPTION:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the discharge of a firearm using blank ammunition in
the course of a skit or theatrical presentation, whether indoors or outdoors, provided that said firearm
and blank ammunition which is to be used in the skit or theatrical presentation is inspected and
approved prior to its use by the chief of police of the city or his appointed designee and, in the event of
a case of a continuing performance, the firearm and ammunition must be inspected prior to the initial
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 293/710
performance only. In the case of a continuing performance, only the firearm and blank ammunition
inspected by the chief of police of the city or his appointed designee shall be used in such
performance. (Ord. 1498, 11-24-1992)
Chapter 17
PROHIBITION OF REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS FROM
ENTERING CITY PARKS, SCHOOLS, AND OTHER AREAS
WHERE CHILDREN CONGREGATE
(Rep. by Ord. 1662, 6-10-2014)
Chapter 18
SKATEPARKS
6-18-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public peace and the health, safety, and welfare of
residents of the city of Placerville by establishing regulations for the use of skateparks operated within
the city of Placerville. This chapter does not preclude other civil or criminal actions in regard to conduct
proscribed herein. The city council hereby declares that skateboarding is a hazardous recreational
activity. Individuals using a skatepark operated in the city of Placerville shall assume all risk of injury or
loss. (Ord. 1638, 11-23-2010)
6-18-2: SAFETY EQUIPMENT:
Any person entering, using, or remaining in a skatepark operated in the city of Placerville shall wear
proper safety equipment, including, but not limited to, a secure helmet, kneepads, and elbow pads. All
safety equipment shall be functional, properly sized, and in good repair. Helmets shall conform to state
standards relating to bicycle safety helmets. (Ord. 1638, 11-23-2010)
6-18-3: REGULATIONS:
All persons entering, using, or remaining in any skatepark operated in the city of Placerville shall
comply with the following rules and regulations:
(A) The skatepark shall have fixed hours of use, which shall be posted at the skatepark. No person
shall use the skatepark at times other than those posted at the skatepark. In addition to other
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 294/710
penalties specified herein, use of the skatepark after posted hours or during a time of closure may
result in a trespassing citation.
(B) The skatepark may be used by skateboarders on the days designated for that particular use and
only in accordance with the schedule of use, which shall be posted at the skatepark.
(C) All persons entering, using, or remaining in any skatepark must wear a shirt while on skatepark
property.
(D) No person may bring structures, obstacles, or other materials, such as ramps or jumps, into the
skatepark.
(E) Smoking, tobacco, drugs, and alcoholic beverages are prohibited anywhere at or within two
hundred feet (200') of the skatepark.
(F) It shall be unlawful to engage in graffiti, tagging, or other defacing (such as the placing of stickers or
decals) of skatepark property or the property of others.
(G) Except for authorized guide dogs and service animals, animals are prohibited in the skatepark.
(H) Glass containers are prohibited anywhere at or near the skatepark.
(I) Recklessness, horseplay, foul language, vandalism, and disrespect to staff and/or other skatepark
users is prohibited.
(J) No person shall skate on curbs, fences, railings, walls, benches, tables, and/or driveways in the
area surrounding the skatepark. Skatepark users shall be considerate of nearby businesses and
residents in the surrounding neighborhood.
(K) No skating is allowed at the skatepark when the skatepark surfaces are wet.
(L) Amplified music and sound systems are prohibited at the skatepark.
(M) Climbing on or over the skatepark fence is prohibited. (Ord. 1638, 11-23-2010)
6-18-4: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) Any violation of these rules and regulations will result in immediate expulsion from the skatepark
property. Three (3) violations shall result in a one year expulsion from the skatepark.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 295/710
(B) Any person who violates any of these rules and regulations shall, in the discretion of the enforcing
authority, be guilty of an infraction or a misdemeanor, and may be subject to a fine of not more than
five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 1638, 11-
23-2010)
6-18-5: NOTICE:
A sign or signs shall be posted at all skatepark facilities providing notice that the violation of the
skatepark's rules and regulations shall subject the violator to the penalties described in section 6-18-4
of this chapter. (Ord. 1638, 11-23-2010)
6-18-6: NEGLIGENCE PER SE:
Any person who fails or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter and who is injured while
using the skatepark shall be deemed negligent per se. (Ord. 1638, 11-23-2010)
Chapter 19
CAMPING ON PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY
6-19-1: PURPOSE:
The streets and public areas within the city should be readily accessible and available to residents and
the public at large. The use of these areas for camping purposes or storage of personal property
interferes with the rights of others to use the areas for which they were intended. Such activity can
constitute a public health and safety hazard which adversely impacts neighborhoods and commercial
areas. Camping on private property without the consent of the owner, proper sanitary measures and for
other than a minimal duration adversely affects private property rights as well as public health, safety,
and welfare of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain streets, parks and other public and
private areas within the city in a clean, sanitary and accessible condition and to adequately protect the
health, safety and public welfare of the community, while recognizing that, subject to reasonable
conditions, camping and camp facilities associated with special events can be beneficial to the cultural
and educational climate in the city. Nothing in this chapter is intended to interfere with otherwise lawful
and ordinary uses of public or private property. (Ord. 1659, 1-14-2014)
6-19-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the particular provisions or the context otherwise requires, the definitions contained in this
section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this
chapter.
CAMP: To place, pitch or occupy camp facilities; to live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; to use
camp paraphernalia.
CAMP FACILITIES: Include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, vehicles, vehicle camping outfits or
temporary shelter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 296/710
CAMP PARAPHERNALIA: Includes, but is not limited to, bedrolls, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping
bags, hammocks or cooking facilities and similar equipment.
CITY MANAGER: The city manager or designee.
ESTABLISH: Setting up or moving equipment, supplies or materials onto public or private property to
"camp" or operate camp facilities.
MAINTAIN: Keeping or permitting equipment, supplies or materials to remain on public or private
property in order to camp or operate camp facilities.
OPERATE: Participating or assisting in establishing or maintaining a camp or camp facility.
PARK: Any areas set aside for recreational uses, areas conserved for their scenic interest,
playgrounds, beaches, recreation centers, golf courses, model plane fields, and any other areas owned
or operated by the city of Placerville and which are intended for active or passive recreational
purposes. The word "park" shall also include any parking lot adjacent to any park, any buildings,
equipment, plants or other facilities located in any park and any landscaped public area and/or right of
way.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: All private property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys, and
improved or unimproved land.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: All public property including, but not limited to, streets, sidewalks, alleys,
improved or unimproved land and parks.
STORE: To put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a
location. (Ord. 1659, 1-14-2014)
6-19-3: UNLAWFUL CAMPING:
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities, or use camp
paraphernalia in the following areas:
(A) Any public property; or
(B) Any private property.
1. It is not intended by this section to prohibit overnight camping on private residential property by
friends or family of the property owner, so long as the owner consents and the overnight camping
is limited to not more than five (5) consecutive nights.
2. Nothing in this chapter is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities of an owner of private
property or other lawful user of private property that are normally associated with and incidental to
the lawful and authorized use of private property for residential or other purposes; and provided
further, nothing is intended to prohibit or make unlawful, activities of a property owner or other
lawful user if such activities are expressly authorized by the city's comprehensive zoning
ordinance or other laws, ordinances and regulations.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 297/710
3. The city manager may, as provided in section 6-19-5 of this chapter, issue a temporary permit to
allow camping on public or private property in connection with a special event.
A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. In addition to the remedies set forth in Penal Code
section 370, the city attorney may institute civil or administrative actions to abate a public
nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-14-2014)
6-19-4: STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY ON PUBLIC AND PRIVATE
PROPERTY:
It is unlawful and a public nuisance for any person to store personal property, including camp
paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council:
(A) Any public property; or
(B) Any private property without the written consent of the owner.
A violation of this section is a misdemeanor. In addition to the remedies set forth in Penal Code
section 370 the city attorney may institute civil or administrative actions to abate a public nuisance
under this chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-14-2014)
6-19-5: PERMIT FOR SPECIAL EVENTS REQUIRED:
The city manager may, in his or her discretion, issue a permit to establish, maintain and operate a
camp or a camp facility in connection with a special event. A special event is intended to include, but
not be limited to, programs operated by the city departments, youth or school events, marathons or
other sporting events and scouting activities. The city manager may consult with various city
departments, the health officer and the public prior to issuing any temporary permit. Each department
or person consulted may provide comments regarding any health, safety or public welfare concerns
and provide recommendations pertaining to the issuance, denial or conditioning of the permit. A
reasonable fee, to be set by the city council shall be paid, in advance, by the applicant. The fee shall
be returned if the application is denied. In exercising his or her discretion to issue a temporary permit,
the city manager may consider any facts or evidence bearing on the sanitary, health, safety and welfare
conditions on or surrounding the area or tract of land upon which the proposed temporary camp or
camp facility is to be located.
Any person who establishes, maintains or operates a camp or camp facility without a permit is guilty of
a misdemeanor and constitutes a public nuisance. In addition to remedies provided in Penal Code
section 370 the city attorney may institute civil or administrative actions to abate a public nuisance
under this chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-14-2014)
6-19-6: POSTING COPY OF PERMIT:
It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or carry on any camp or camp facility unless
there shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place upon the area or tract of land upon which the
camp or camp facility is located a permit obtained from the city manager in accordance with the
provisions of section 6-19-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1659, 1-14-2014)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 298/710
6-19-7: POWER OF THE CITY MANAGER TO MAKE RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city manager is further empowered to ascertain that the operation or maintenance of any camp or
camp facilities to which a temporary permit shall apply will in no way jeopardize the public health,
safety or welfare and for this purpose may make additional rules and regulations pertaining to their
establishment, operation or conduct. The city manager may also impose conditions on the
establishment, maintenance and operation of the camp or camp facility, including, but not limited to,
security, sanitation facilities, the number of occupants, posting of bonds or deposits, insurance, quiet
hours, duration of the permit, and permitted activities on the premises. When the city manager shall
issue any permit under the terms of section 6-19-5 of this chapter, the same may be revoked at any
time thereafter by the city manager if the city manager becomes satisfied that the maintenance or
continuing operation of the camp or camp facilities is adverse to the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 1659, 1-14-2014)
6-19-8: CURRENT ORDINANCE PROVISIONS:
Neither the adoption of this chapter nor the repeal hereby of any ordinance shall in any manner affect
the prosecution for violation of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date
hereof, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinance relating to the collection
of any such license or penalty or the penal provision applicable to any violation thereof, nor to affect the
validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof, required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to
any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and
effect. (Ord. 1659, 1-14-2014)
Chapter 20
AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION1
6-20-1: PURPOSE:
The citizens of Placerville have a right to be free of aggressive solicitations within the city of Placerville.
This chapter shall address and define aggressive solicitations and solicitors within the city limits. The
actions of the aggressive solicitors can lead a person to feel intimidated, fearful of bodily harm, or
damage to property. No soliciting shall occur within fifteen feet (15') in front of a bank, ATM, or check
cashing business, near a motor vehicle traveling on the road, any public transportation vehicles, and
within fifteen feet (15') of a gas station. (Ord. 1660, 1-14-2014)
6-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
PUBLIC PLACE: A place to which a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not
limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of
amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby and other portion of any
business establishment, apartment house or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for
residence.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 299/710
SOLICIT, ASK OR BEG: Includes using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs
or other means to request an immediate donation of money or other thing of value or to offer the sale of
goods or services. (Ord. 1660, 1-14-2014)
6-20-3: AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION PROHIBITED:
(A) No person shall solicit, ask or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place.
(B) "Aggressive manner" shall mean any of the following:
1. Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during or after soliciting,
asking or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to:
(a) Fear bodily harm to himself or herself or to another, or damage to or loss of property; or
(b) Otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value;
2. Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle
without the consent of that person or an occupant or owner of that vehicle;
3. Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any
means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to
avoid physical contact;
4. Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited;
5. Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person has informed the solicitor
by words or conduct that he or she does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money
or any other thing of value to the solicitor; or
6. Using profane, offensive, or abusive language that is likely to provoke a violent reaction. (Ord.
1660, 1-14-2014)
6-20-4: ALL SOLICITATION PROHIBITED AT SPECIFIED LOCATIONS:
(A) Banks, Check Cashing Businesses And ATMs:
1. Prohibition: No person shall solicit, ask or beg on public property within fifteen feet (15') of any
entrance or exit of any bank or check cashing business during its business hours or within fifteen
feet (15') of any automated teller machine when it is available for customer use. When an
automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance
shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. No person
shall solicit, ask or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person
would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or
other person lawfully in possession of such facility.
2. Definitions: For the purposes of this subsection (A), the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE FACILITY: An area inside a structure in which one or more
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 300/710
automated teller machines are located but excluding an area within any structure the primary
purpose or function of which is unrelated to banking activities, including, but not limited to,
supermarkets, airports and school buildings.
AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINE OR ATM: Any electronic information processing device which
accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit, deposit, or convenience account.
BANK: Any member bank of the federal reserve system, and any bank, savings and loan
association, credit union, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking
institution organized or operated under the laws of California or the United States whether or not
the deposits of such institutions are insured by the federal deposit insurance corporation.
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS: Any person licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorater
pursuant to division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with section 12000.
(B) Motor Vehicles: No person shall approach an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle traveling
within a public right of way for the purpose of soliciting, asking or begging. A vehicle is "traveling" for
this purpose even though stopped at an intersection or otherwise in compliance with traffic control
laws and regulations but not if parked legally. This prohibition does not apply to solicitations related
to emergency repairs requested by an operator or occupant of a vehicle.
(C) Public Transportation Vehicles: No person may solicit, ask or beg in any publicly owned or operated
vehicle, including a bus, designed, used or maintained for carrying ten (10) or more persons,
including the driver.
(D) Gas Stations: No person shall solicit, ask or beg within fifteen feet (15') of a fueling pump, air, or
water hose at a gas station. For purposes of this subsection, "gas station" means a business that
sells at retail gasoline or other vehicle fuel dispensed by a pump. (Ord. 1660, 1-14-2014)
6-20-5: NONEXCLUSIVITY:
Nothing in this chapter shall limit or preclude the enforcement of other applicable laws to conduct within
the scope of this chapter. (Ord. 1660, 1-14-2014)
6-20-6: PENALTY:
An intentional violation of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor, pursuant to section 1-4-5 of
this code. (Ord. 1660, 1-14-2014)
Title 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Chapter 1
GARBAGE1
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 301/710
7-1-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
CERTIFICATE: A certificate of public convenience and necessity by the council authorizing the holder
thereof to conduct a garbage collection business in the city.
HOLDER: A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued. (Ord.
866, 9-5-1961)
7-1-2: CERTIFICATE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate a garbage collection business owned or controlled by him in the city without
having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the council. (Ord. 866, 9-5-
1961)
7-1-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE:
An application for certificate shall be filed with the clerk and shall be verified under oath and shall
furnish the following information:
(A) The name and address of the applicant.
(B) The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of any unpaid judgments against the
applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to the judgments.
(C) The experience of the applicant in the garbage collection business.
(D) Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require
the granting of a certificate.
(E) The equipment proposed to be used by the applicant in the operation of the garbage collection
business in the city. (Ord. 866, 9-5-1961)
7-1-4: PUBLIC HEARING:
Upon the filing of an application the council shall fix a time and place for a public hearing thereon which
public hearing shall be set at a date at least ten (10) days after the application has been filed with the
clerk and not later than thirty (30) days after the application has been filed with the clerk. Notice of
hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience
and necessity have been theretofore issued. Due notice shall also be given to the general public by
posting a notice in the city hall. Any interested person may file with the clerk a memorandum in support
or in opposition to the issuance of a certificate. (Ord. 866, 9-5-1961)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 302/710
7-1-5: ISSUANCE OF A CERTIFICATE:
If the council finds that further garbage collection service in the city is required by the public
convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such garbage
collection service and to conform to the provisions of this chapter then the council shall issue a
certificate stating the name and address of the applicant and the date of the issuance of the certificate,
otherwise the application shall be denied. In making the foregoing findings the council shall take into
consideration whether any existing garbage collection service is adequate to meet the public need, the
probable need of additional garbage service in the future and the character, ability and responsibility of
the applicant. (Ord. 866, 9-5-1961)
7-1-6: TRANSFER OF CERTIFICATES:
No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned, mortgaged, or otherwise
transferred without the consent of the council. (Ord. 866, 9-5-1961)
7-1-7: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATES:
A certificate issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the council
after the holder has:
(A) Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Discontinued operations for more than seven (7) days.
(C) Violated any provision of this code, or the laws of the United States or the state of California, the
violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to render satisfactory garbage
collection service in the city.
(D) Not properly or adequately collected garbage in the city.
Prior to suspension or revocation the holder shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken
and shall have an opportunity to be heard. (Ord. 866, 9-5-1961)
7-1-8: SCHEDULE OF RATES AND SERVICE:
The holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity shall before operating a garbage
collection business in the city file with the council a schedule of rates intended to be charged by him
and the hours during which garbage is to be collected in the residential areas of the city and in the
commercial areas of the city. The rates and hours of collection may not be changed by any licensee
without first having obtained the approval of the council. (Ord. 866, 9-5-1961)
7-1-9: LICENSE REQUIRED; FEE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 303/710
It shall be unlawful for any person to collect and haul for hire any garbage, refuse or waste material
within the city without first obtaining from the license and tax collector a permit or license therefor,
which license shall be issued only upon an application of a person holding a certificate of public
convenience and necessity. The application shall require the applicant to agree to observe all rules and
regulations of the police department and of the council regarding the disposal of garbage, refuse and
waste material and the applicant shall also agree to abide by the rules and regulations of the council
regarding the city dump, when garbage, refuse and waste material are hauled or disposed of at the city
dump.
Upon the signing of the application and the payment of the fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each quarter
year, a license shall be issued to the person applying therefor; provided the applicant's license has not
theretofore been revoked for failure to comply with the rules and regulations of the city or for a violation
of this chapter. (Ord. 866, 9-5-1961)
7-1-10: PERSONS HAULING OWN GARBAGE:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed as requiring any resident of the city to obtain a
license or permit to haul or dispose of his own garbage, refuse or waste material, this license being
intended to apply only to the cases of the collection hauled or disposal of garbage, refuse and waste
material for hire. This section shall not be interpreted as exempting compliance with chapter 1A of this
title. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
Chapter 1A
SOLID WASTE REGULATIONS
7-1A-1: PURPOSE:
(A) Pursuant to the California integrated waste management act of 19891, the legislature as mandated
that local agencies make adequate provisions for solid waste handling within their jurisdictions.
(B) To protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city of Placerville (city), it is in the
public's best interest to establish exclusive franchises for the mandatory collection, disposal and
processing of solid waste and recyclable materials.
(C) Pursuant to state law, the city is authorized to execute its powers for the purpose of the collection
or disposal of garbage or refuse matter and may contract for the collection and disposal of garbage
or refuse matter. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-2: USE OF CITY FRANCHISE COLLECTION/HAULER SERVICE REQUIRED:
The periodic collection of garbage, recyclable materials and other solid waste materials from improved
properties in the city of Placerville benefits occupants of places and premises in the city of Placerville,
and promotes and protects the health, safety and welfare of all residents of the city of Placerville.
Therefore, collection services provided by the city of Placerville's franchise collector/hauler are
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 304/710
mandatory for all owners of improved property within the city of Placerville in or from which solid waste
is created, accumulated or produced.
Solid waste must be regulated to the extent necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
public, to conserve disposal capacity, to meet state laws and to ensure cost effective public service. To
this end, the city council finds that to give practical effect to this policy, a mandatory collection
ordinance to regulate the collection of waste, and a comprehensive system for the storage, collection,
removal, transport, recovery of marketable and recyclable materials, and disposal of solid waste in the
city of Placerville is essential.
No person shall establish, operate or carry on the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of
solid waste or recyclable materials within the city of Placerville unless a franchise agreement has been
entered into between such person and the city of Placerville. The city council shall determine at its sole
option and discretion whether to enter into any new or renewed franchise agreement with any person.
The maximum number of franchises to be awarded by the city council shall be one franchise for the
collection, transportation, recycling, composting and disposal and waste diversion of solid waste and
recyclable materials within the city of Placerville. A franchise shall be granted only to persons who
possess all permits and licenses necessary to provide solid waste collection services in El Dorado
County and the city of Placerville. A franchise may be revoked according to the terms of the relevant
franchise agreement. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-3: APPLICABILITY:
Mandatory collection service is required for garbage, recyclable materials and other solid waste
materials generated on all occupied properties within the city of Placerville, as identified in this chapter.
As mandatory collection service is implemented and becomes available pursuant to the subscription
guidelines of this chapter, the owner, tenant or occupant of every parcel with one or more businesses
and/or residential buildings approved for occupancy and located within the city of Placerville shall
subscribe to and thereafter use regularly the collection service franchised by the city of Placerville.
No provision herein contained shall be construed to conflict with any provision of the integrated waste
management act, the medical waste management act, or any other state or federal law. In the event
such a conflict exists, or shall exist in the future, state or federal law shall be controlling. This chapter is
not intended, nor shall it apply to transfer stations or other solid waste disposal facilities. (Ord. 1629, 6-
23-2009)
7-1A-4: SUBSCRIPTION TO COLLECTION SERVICE:
Subscription to mandatory collection service shall not be required until the service becomes available
to each affected property. The property owner of each occupied premises shall assume responsibility
for subscribing to collection service within seven (7) days of either written notification from the city or
occupancy of the premises, whichever is sooner. At the city's discretion, providing collection service to
all properties may be implemented in phases with residential single-family and small residential multifamily
properties to be implemented initially. Larger residential multi-family, commercial and other uses
shall be implemented as programs become available and economically viable. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-5: PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE FOR SECURING COLLECTION
SERVICE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 305/710
The owner of any improved property in or from which solid waste and recyclable materials are created,
accumulated or produced is responsible for subscribing to the collection service to be rendered to such
property by the city's franchised collection service. It is the property owner's responsibility, not the
tenant, to secure and maintain collection services. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-6: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF FEES; MANDATORY COLLECTION:
Each owner, occupant or person in possession, charge or control of any collection premises located in
the city is hereby made liable jointly and severally for the payment of the solid waste collection,
procession and disposal fees levied against such premises for required solid waste collection,
processing and disposal services, irrespective of the actual use of the service provided by the city or
the franchise collector/hauler. Services made available to those premises required to receive such
service shall be considered as services utilized. It shall be the primary duty of the owner of such
premises to provide for the payment of the services. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-7: PAYMENTS ON BEHALF OF OWNER PERMITTED:
Nothing in this chapter is intended to prevent an arrangement, or the continuance of an existing
arrangement, under which payments for collection service are made by a tenant or tenants, or any
agent on behalf of the owner, however any such arrangement will not affect the owner's obligation to
the city or to the franchise collector/hauler for payment for such service. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-8: BILLING CYCLE AND PENALTY FOR DELINQUENT PAYMENTS:
Solid waste collection fees may be billed and paid in advance on a quarterly or bimonthly basis.
Payment shall be due upon receipt, and shall become delinquent fifteen (15) days after the date of any
billing. A finance charge and late payment penalty as permitted by law shall be added at the end of
each month following the delinquency date. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-9: DISCONTINUATION OF SERVICE:
The city or the franchise collector/hauler may discontinue service for any customer whose account
remains unpaid for forty five (45) days after the date of billing as long as the customer has received a
notice on a form approved by the city manager stating that service will be discontinued fifteen (15) days
from the date of the notice if payment is not made by that time. Upon payment of the delinquent fees,
collection shall resume on the next regularly scheduled collection day. Fees shall be continued to be
assessed and billed notwithstanding that service has been discontinued and notice of same shall be
included in the form sent to the customer. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-10: INITIAL NOTIFICATION OF MANDATORY COLLECTION SERVICE:
Within ninety (90) days of adoption of an ordinance by the city of Placerville requiring mandatory
collection service, the city shall notify by mail all affected property owners of the ordinance and the
requirement for such property owners to subscribe to the collection service. This mailing list will then be
provided to the city of Placerville's franchise collector/hauler to monitor service subscriptions. Upon
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 306/710
completion of the notification process, the city of Placerville's franchise collector/hauler will deliver the
appropriate service bins/carts to each property. The city will also attempt to notify landlords and
property managers. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-11: WRITTEN NOTICE REQUIRED FOR NONUSE:
The city of Placerville's franchise collector/hauler shall give written notice to the city manager or
designated representative of the address of any occupied premise within the city which is not
subscribing to the collection and disposal service provided by the collection service franchised by the
city. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-12: FAILURE TO SUBSCRIBE:
If the city manager has reason to believe that any person required to subscribe for service has failed to
subscribe or failed to maintain a subscription for service, the city manager may cause written notice to
be mailed to the owner of the real property so affected directing the owner to subscribe for such service
within ten (10) days after the date of the notice.
Any such notice shall state that if the person to whom it is directed fails within the ten (10) day period to
subscribe for such collection service, or fails to appear and show sufficient cause why such person
should not be required to subscribe, the city manager may authorize such service and the charges
therefor will be assessed against the real property upon which the premises served are located.
After notice and a public hearing, unpaid delinquent accounts may be confirmed by the city council,
and the amount confirmed shall constitute a lien on the property. The lien shall continue until the
amount of the charges and interest thereon at the legal rate, computed from the date of confirmation of
the charge, is paid in full or until it is discharged of record.
Alternatively or in addition, the confirmed amount may be made a personal obligation of the property
owner of record. Alternatively, or in addition, the confirmed amount may be specially assessed against
the real property involved, and collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real
property taxes.
The delinquent fees as confirmed by the city council shall constitute special assessments against the
respective parcels of land and are a lien on the property for the amount of such delinquent fees. A
certified copy of the confirmed report shall be filed with the county auditor, on or before August 10 of
each year, for the amounts of the respective assessments against the respective parcels of land as
they appear on the current assessment roll. The lien created attaches upon recordation, in the office of
the county recorder of the county in which the property is situated, of a certified copy of the resolution
of confirmation. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as
ordinary county ad valorem property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and
the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All laws applicable to
the levy, collection and enforcement of the city ad valorem property taxes shall be applicable to such
assessment, except that if any real property to which such lien would attach has been transferred or
conveyed to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrance for value has been
created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of such taxes would
become delinquent, then the lien which would otherwise be imposed by this section shall not attach to
such real property and the delinquency fees, as confirmed, relating to such property shall be
transferred to the unsecured roll for collection. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 307/710
7-1A-13: EXCLUSIONS:
(A) Appear And Show Cause For Exclusion: Any written notice sent to a property owner shall include
an option to appear before the city manager, or a designated representative, at a time specified
within the notice, to show cause why such person should not be required to subscribe for the
collection of garbage and recyclables. In addition, any property owner not receiving a notice may
arrange to appear before the city manager, or a designated representative, at a time specified, to
show cause why such person should not be required to subscribe for the collection service. At the
appearance, the city manager may find excluded from the requirements of this chapter only those
persons who show:
1. They are not owners of the property mentioned; or
2. The property is not within the Placerville city limits; or
3. The property is vacant; or
4. The residential unit or structure on the property is vacant or temporarily unoccupied for a period
in excess of one month; or
5. Unique parcel specific conditions which compel the property owner, tenant or occupant to selfhaul
their garbage, recyclables and green waste to the transfer station. Such conditions may
include properties with long, narrow or steep driveways where the franchise collector/hauler, in
the opinion of the city manager, is unable to properly and safely use the franchise
collector/hauler's equipment, and granting such exclusion would not create a nuisance; or
6. The owner or occupant legally recycles and/or composts virtually all their solid waste so that no
unsanitary condition, hazard to health, or public nuisance will arise upon the premises owned,
managed or controlled by them if they are not provided with collection and disposal services by a
collector.
(a) Declaration Required: All persons claiming this exclusion shall be asked to sign a declaration
or affidavit, under penalty of perjury, once per year, stating that they legally recycle and/or
compost virtually all their solid waste so that no unsanitary condition, hazard to health, or public
nuisance will arise upon the premises owned, managed or controlled by them.
Any exclusion granted by the city manager is revocable for cause, as determined by the city
manager. Any exclusion granted by the city manager can be made conditional, as needed to ensure
continuing eligibility. Violations of any such conditions can result in the revocation of the exemption,
and/or result in the assessment of penalties under title 1, chapter 4A of this code. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-
2009)
7-1A-14: GENERAL EXEMPTIONS; MANDATORY COLLECTION:
(A) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any of the residential units or commercial
enterprises hereafter described:
1. Property owned by federal, state or local governments shall be exempt from the requirements of
this chapter.
2. A person or entity who contracts for landscaping or gardening work performed for the customer
and incidental to such services removes and recycles or disposes of green or yard waste,
provided that such removal and recycling or disposal are performed by the person removing and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 308/710
recycling or disposing of such green or yard waste, and not by a subcontractor or other third
party.
3. A person or entity that has been given an exemption by the city from any mandatory collection
ordinance that the city may adopt in the future.
4. A licensed contractor that generates construction and demolition debris in the course of
his/her/its business activities and such contractor, or his/her/its full time employees, and not a
subcontractor or other third party, and self-hauls such construction and demolition debris (but
excluding all other solid waste or recyclable materials) to an authorized and permitted (as may be
required by federal, state or local regulatory agencies with jurisdiction over such activities)
processing facility for purposes of material recovery. A licensed contractor shall not use any
subcontractor or other third party other than the franchise collection/hauler to haul construction
and demolition debris to an authorized and permitted materials recovery facility.
(B) Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a statement under oath or
under penalty of perjury with the franchise collector/hauler stating the facts upon which exemption is
claimed, and, in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable
for the payment of the solid waste collection fees required by this chapter.
(C) The franchise collector/hauler, after giving notice of not less than ten (10) days and a reasonable
opportunity for hearing to any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section, may revoke
any exemption granted upon information that the person is not entitled to the exemption as provided
herein. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-15: RECEPTACLES:
(A) All residential solid waste and recyclables must be placed in authorized receptacles or containers
as provided in this chapter. Receptacles or containers for residential solid waste and recyclables
shall be of a size and type approved by the city manager. Receptacles for residential solid waste
shall be placed at ground level, obscured from public view, and shall be placed on collection days in
a manner suitable for collection, typically at curbside, but in no case shall they be placed in such a
manner as to constitute a public hazard or nuisance. Receptacles shall be removed from curbside
within forty eight (48) hours after collection. Unless special arrangements are made to
accommodate those customers unable to place their receptacles at curbside, no collection shall
take place unless the waste is placed in front of the residence prior to collection time. Each
customer receiving residential solid waste service shall be supplied with as many authorized
receptacles as needed by the customer to handle the waste stream of the residence. Receptacles
may consist of waste carts of varying sizes and capacities. Receptacles must be returned when no
longer used or upon cancellation of service.
(B) No person shall deface, damage, paint or in any way mark any authorized receptacles. Customers
may be charged for replacement of waste carts which have been damaged or lost due to the fault or
neglect of the customer under appropriate circumstances. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-16: RESPONSIBILITIES OF SOLID WASTE GENERATORS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 309/710
(A) Responsibility Of Property Owner: The owner of any property, including any residence, commercial
establishment, institution or industry, vacant or occupied, shall be responsible for the satisfactory
storage and removal of all solid waste accumulated on that property. In those instances where a
person rents or leases to another, the property owner or his agent shall be ultimately responsible for
solid waste generated or stored on those premises should said waste remain on the premises
during or beyond the tenant term. Excepting disruptions in normal solid waste collection schedules,
nonrecyclable wastes shall not be allowed to remain on the premises for more than seven (7) days,
to prevent propagation, harborage, or attraction of flies, rodents or other vectors, and the creation of
nuisances.
For the purposes of this section, disruptions in normal solid waste collection schedules shall be
limited to when:
1. Disruptions are due to strikes; or
2. Severe weather conditions or acts of God make collection impossible using normal collection
equipment; or
3. Official holidays interrupt a normal seven (7) day collection cycle in which case collection may be
postponed until the next working day.
Recyclable materials separated from nonrecyclable wastes may be stored on the premises for
longer than seven (7) days provided that the recyclable materials are cleaned and/or stored in a
manner that prevents propagation, harborage, or attraction of flies, rodents or other vectors, or the
creation of nuisances or fire hazards.
(B) Solid Waste And Recyclable Materials Ownership:
1. Except as provided hereinabove, all solid waste and recyclable materials are the property of the
person gathering them until:
(a) The solid waste and/or recyclable materials are legally disposed of in an authorized disposal
site; or
(b) The solid waste and/or recyclable materials are legally deposited at an authorized transfer
station, processing facility, buy back center or drop off recycling center; or
(c) The solid waste and/or recyclable materials are picked up by the franchise collector/hauler
authorized by the city.
2. Solid waste and recyclable materials legally placed for disposal and/or processing becomes the
property and responsibility of the franchise collector/hauler upon receipt of the solid waste or
material.
3. No person shall remove solid waste and/or recyclable materials placed for collection other than
the person generating or responsible for the waste or by the franchise collector/hauler or
permittee.
(C) Construction/Demolition Projects:
1. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent or contractor in charge of any construction or demolition
site to cause, maintain, permit, or allow to be caused, maintained or permitted, the accumulation
of any solid waste or litter on the site before, during or after completion of the construction or
demolition project.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 310/710
2. It shall be the duty of the owner or contractor in charge of any construction or demolition site to
have adequate containers on site for the disposal of solid waste and litter and to make
appropriate arrangements for the collection thereof by the franchise collector/hauler or the
personal transportation site to an authorized facility for final disposal. While the container is on
site, substantial provisions shall be employed by the owner or contractor to prevent the blowing or
falling of solid waste from the container so as to prevent a littering condition.
3. The owner or contractor in charge of such construction or demolition site may be required at any
time to show proof of appropriate collection, or if personally transported, of final disposal at an
authorized facility. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-17: PROHIBITED ACTS:
(A) No person shall deposit or permit to be deposited on, over, or along any public road, highway right
of way or public or private property within the boundaries of the city any solid waste or litter except
in containers or in areas lawfully provided for or permitted for that use.
(B) The existence or accumulation, without the authority of the city, of litter, trash, scrap materials, junk
parts, garbage or refuse of any kind upon private property shall be prohibited, provided that said
refuse is visible to the occupants of an adjacent or nearby parcel of real property, or to the users of
any right of way. It shall be unlawful to allow accumulations of wastepaper, litter or combustible or
flammable waste materials or rubbish of any kind to remain in any court, yard, vacant lot or open
space.
(C) It shall be unlawful for any owner, manager or employee of a commercial establishment or
institution to deposit solid waste from the establishment or institution in any receptacle maintained
on a sidewalk or at any other location for disposal of litter by pedestrians.
(D) No person shall dump, deposit, or otherwise dispose of any hazardous or biomedical waste onto
land, into soil, rock, air or water, or at unauthorized disposal sites, transfer stations, resource
recovery facilities, transformation facilities, buy back centers, drop off recycling centers, or any
container to be collected and ultimately deposited, unless otherwise approved in advance and in
writing by the city manager, with the consent of the franchise collector/hauler.
(E) No person shall burn or incinerate solid waste except as permitted by the El Dorado County fire
protection district.
(F) No person shall tamper with, modify, remove from or deposit solid waste or recyclable materials in
any container which has not been provided for his/her use, without the permission of the container
owner.
(G) No person shall place solid waste upon the land of another, or in a residential or commercial solid
waste receptacle of another, or upon premises other than those from which the solid waste
originated, for the purpose of making waste available for collection and disposal.
(H) No person shall, other than the owner or franchised recyclable materials hauler, tamper with,
modify or deposit waste into recyclable materials that have been segregated from nonrecyclable
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 311/710
waste and placed at a designated collection location for the purpose of collection and recycling.
Unless otherwise provided by contract, all recyclable materials which are segregated from
nonrecyclable waste for the purpose of recycling, and placed at a designated collection location,
may not be removed by anyone other than the franchised recyclable materials collector or owner.
(Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
7-1A-18: COMPLAINT PROCEDURE:
The city manager, or designee, shall adopt an administrative complaint procedure whereby customers
may file complaints regarding service or any other matter arising out of the services provided under this
chapter. Appeals from any determinations made pursuant to this administrative procedure may be
made to the city council. (Ord. 1629, 6-23-2009)
Chapter 2
LITTER REGULATIONS1
7-2-1: DEPOSITS OF INJURIOUS MATERIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit upon any highway, freeway, alley, street, off
street parking lot, park, playground, or any public place in the city, any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks,
hoops, wire, cans or any other substance likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle. (Ord. 846, 11-
17-1960)
7-2-2: DEPOSITS OF OFFENSIVE MATERIAL:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, papers,
ashes, refuse, the carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash or rubbish or any noisome, nauseous or
offensive matter in or upon any highway, freeway, alley, street, off street parking lot, park, playground,
or any public place in the city. (Ord. 846, 11-17-1960)
7-2-3: DUMPING OF ROCKS OR DIRT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or dump any rocks or dirt in or upon any highway,
freeway, alley, street, off street parking lot, park playground, or any public place in the city without the
express consent of the superintendent of public works. (Ord. 846, 11-17-1960)
7-2-4: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped, deposited or thrown upon any of the public
thoroughfares mentioned in this chapter, any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove
the same or cause the same to be removed. (Ord. 846, 11-17-1960)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 312/710
7-2-5: VEHICLES SPILLING LOAD ON THOROUGHFARE:
No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any public thoroughfare, unless the vehicle is so constructed or
loaded as to prevent any of its contents or load, other than clear water, from dropping, spilling, sifting,
leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom.
No vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste, papers, ashes, refuse, trash or rubbish, or
any other noisome, nauseous or offensive matter, shall be driven or moved unless the load is covered
with a cover sufficient to prevent the load, or any part of the load from spilling upon the public
thoroughfare. This section does not prohibit a rubbish vehicle from being without cover while in the
process of acquiring its load, nor does this section prohibit a rubbish truck from being without cover;
provided, that said rubbish truck is so constructed as to prevent its load or any portion of its load from
spilling. (Ord. 846, 11-17-1960)
7-2-6: DUMPING IN WATERWAYS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, place, throw or deposit any waste, refuse, trash or debris
into Lumsden Park Pond, Hangtown Creek or Cedar Ravine Creek or any tributaries thereof. (Ord.
1657, 9-10-2013)
7-2-7: DEPOSIT OF MATERIALS IN TRASH CAN OR CONTAINER:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any material in a trash can or container which is owned,
rented or controlled by a person or firm other than the person making the deposit unless the person
depositing the material has been authorized to do so by the person or firm owning, renting or
controlling the trash can or container.
Refuse must be in the container and lids must be kept closed at all times.
It shall be unlawful for a person or firm owning or renting the trash container to allow refuse to overflow
onto the ground.
It will be unlawful for household garbage to be disposed of in the sidewalk trash containers. (Ord. 1042,
9-11-1973)
7-2-8: CLEANLINESS OF SIDEWALKS:
Each holder of a business license shall be responsible for the cleanliness of their sidewalks. (Ord.
1042, 9-11-1973)
Chapter 3
WATERWORKS SYSTEM
7-3-1: SUPERVISION OF WATERWORKS SYSTEM:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 313/710
The municipal waterworks is hereby declared to be under the direct superintendence of the
superintendent of public works, subject to control and rules and regulations as may, by resolution of the
council from time to time, be prescribed. (Ord. 605, 3-10-1924)
7-3-2: UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSITS:
For newly established utility service accounts, or as a condition to reconnecting utility service to an
account for which service was terminated for nonpayment of utility service invoice, the applicant may
be required, at the discretion of the finance director, to deposit a sum of money prior to establishing the
account or reconnecting service, which sum shall be based solely on the credit worthiness of the
applicant as determined by the finance director. Any such deposit shall be subject to the provisions of
section 10009.6 of the California Public Utilities Code and shall not exceed twice the estimated
average periodic bill. (Ord. 1603, 10-25-2005)
7-3-2A: ESTABLISHMENT OF RATES:
The council shall establish the rates to be charged for the sale and use of water from the municipal
waterworks, and said rates may be changed from time to time, by resolution of the council, when they
deem such change necessary or for the best interest of the city. (Ord. 605, 3-10-1924)
Effective April 15, 1988, the water rates in the city shall, on a bimonthly basis, be as follows:
Water Use
(Cubic Feet)
Rate
(Cubic Feet)
Single-family residential:
0 to 500 $12.00 flat rate
501 to 1,000 1.40 per 100
1,001 to 2,000 1.15 per 100
2,001 to 3,000 0.75 per 100
3,001 to 10,000 1.50 per 100
10,001 and over 2.00 per 100
Multiple-unit residential:
0 to 1,000 average/unit 12.00 flat rate/unit
1,001 to 2,000 average/unit 1.20 per 100 cubic feet/unit
2,001 to 3,000 average/unit 1.25 per 100 cubic feet/unit
3,001 to 10,000 average/unit 1.50 per 100 cubic feet/unit
10,001 and over average/unit 2.00 per 100 cubic feet/unit
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 314/710
Commercial:
0 to 500 12.00 flat rate
501 to 1,000 1.40 per 100
1,001 to 20,000 0.75 per 100
20,001 to 50,000 0.85 per 100
50,001 and over 1.00 per 100
Surcharge for multiple-units above 1
12.00 per unit
(Res. 4920, 5-10-1988)
7-3-2B: WATER BOOSTER PUMP STATION CHARGES:
(A) In the event it is necessary to install or maintain a water booster pump in order to provide water
service, then the owners of the property receiving such service shall pay an additional prorated
charge, to be determined by the city engineer, to reimburse the city for the installation, energy
costs, repair, maintenance and replacement of said water booster pump. (Ord. 1420, 7-28-1987)
(B) If the water booster pump station is already in service, then the area served by the water booster
pump station shall carry an additional charge to the city in order to reimburse the city for energy
costs only. (Ord. 1306, 7-27-1982)
7-3-3: COUNCIL TO ADOPT REGULATIONS:
The sale of water to consumers within the city shall always be governed by such rules and regulations
as the council shall adopt, and the council may change the rules and regulations from time to time by
resolution. (Ord. 1331, 8-23-1983)
7-3-4: INSTALLATION OF METER:
Any consumer of water may, upon notice to the superintendent of public works, have installed a water
meter of suitable size for the service desired, and pay the fee prescribed in section 7-3-17 of this
chapter, and thereafter the rates to be charged and collected shall be as set forth by resolution of the
council. (Ord. 605, 3-10-1924)
7-3-5: UTILITY SERVICE CHARGES; WHEN DUE:
Utility service charges include charges for water service, wastewater service, or both, for residential or
commercial users.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 315/710
(A) Utility service account payment shall be due upon receipt of invoice. Utility service charges are
payable bimonthly and shall become delinquent twenty (20) days from the date of mailing of the
utility account invoice. Delinquent accounts will be subject to a late charge of twenty dollars
($20.00). Water and sewer service charges are inseparable and the failure to pay either charge on
a utility service invoice will result in the termination of water and sewer services. Termination of
services shall be pursuant to division 5, chapter 1, article 1, commencing with sections 10009
through 10011 of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California. In the event that a utility service
account remains delinquent and a turnoff order is issued, a disconnection/reconnection charge as
determined by resolution of the city council shall be paid for each occasion that the city has to
disconnect and/or reconnect service discontinued for nonpayment of utility service invoice. No
service which has been discontinued for nonpayment of utility service charges shall be reconnected
until all current and delinquent utility charges are paid. In cases when delinquent utility charges
remain unpaid, the city shall have the right to lien against the real property and/or cause legal action
to be brought against the utility account holder. When a previous tenant leaves without paying a
delinquent utility invoice, the city may require that subsequent service be furnished under the name
of the owner on record of real property or his/her agent. (Ord. 1634, 12-14-2009)
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a utility service customer may avoid
late charges and termination of service by paying one-half (1/2) of the invoice amount of utility
service charges before the delinquency date as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, and the
remaining one-half (1/2) of said utility service invoice amount within thirty (30) days after the
delinquency date set forth in subsection (A) of this section. In this event, it is the responsibility of the
customer to notify the finance department of the city of Placerville of their intent to pay utility service
charges pursuant to this section. The utility service customer will not receive an additional bill for the
remaining fifty percent (50%) of the utility service invoice amount and it will be the customer's
responsibility to pay said amount within the thirty (30) day period set forth herein. (Ord. 1603, 10-
25-2005)
7-3-6: WATER; UNNECESSARY WASTE PROHIBITED:
Consumers shall prevent all unnecessary waste of water. During periods of drought or water shortage,
the council may, from time to time, adopt emergency water conservation policies. Any person wilfully or
negligently wasting water or violating any emergency water conservation policy, while such policies are
in effect, shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to having his/her water supply turned off,
and shall not be allowed to purchase water from the city until he/she gives satisfactory proof that the
wastage has ceased and has paid the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) to have the supply reconnected.
(Ord. 1441, 5-24-1988)
7-3-7: LEAKAGE; DAMAGE TO PIPES:
All consumers of water shall keep their service pipes, plumbing, and stopcocks free from leakage at
their own expense and will be held liable for any damage which may result from failure to comply
herewith. (Ord. 1331, 8-23-1983)
7-3-8: INSPECTION OF PIPES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 316/710
The water collector or any officer of the city shall have the power at all times during reasonable hours
to make examination of the premises of any consumer of water to designate the rates as herein
established and to inspect the water pipes and their appurtenances. (Ord. 605, 3-10-1924; amd. Ord.
1331, 8-23-1983)
7-3-9: APPLICATIONS FOR SERVICE:
Application for the use of water from the water system must be made on printed forms provided for that
purpose, which can be secured from the finance department. Should any consumer of water desire
water for an additional purpose not stated in the original application, a new application must be made.
(Ord. 1634, 12-14-2009)
7-3-10: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
All utility service accounts and bills shall be recorded in the name of the person(s)/entity requesting
utility service. However, when service is provided to a multi-unit residential structure or other similar
structures, as set forth in sections 10009 and 10009.1 of the California Public Utilities Code, residential
occupants of such structures shall have the right to become customers pursuant to the provisions of
sections 10009 and 10009.1 of the California Public Utilities Code. (Ord. 1603, 10-25-2005)
7-3-11: CONNECTIONS TO BE MADE BY AUTHORIZED PERSON ONLY:
No one, except the superintendent of public works or his/her representative shall make any
connections or turn the water on or off from any building or premises. (Ord. 1331, 8-23-1983)
7-3-12: USE OF WATER AND EQUIPMENT; RESTRICTIONS:
(A) The council reserves the right to shut off the water in mains for the purpose of repairs and will not
be responsible for any damage arising therefrom, and the city will not be responsible for the
breaking of any pipe or service cock, or any other interruption of the supply of water by reason of
the breaking of pumps or machinery or stopping for necessary repairs.
(B) All disconnections must be made by screwing on a metallic cap or plug.
(C) The council reserves the right at any time to require the use of self-closing faucets in cases where
they may deem it necessary. (Ord. 605, 3-10-1924; amd. Ord. 1331, 8-23-1983)
7-3-13: FINANCE DIRECTOR TO BE EX OFFICIO WATER COLLECTOR:
The finance director shall be ex officio water collector and shall use due diligence in the collection of
the water service charges and fees; and deposit the same with the treasurer each day. Water service
charges shall be charged for all premises where turned on, whether occupied or not until such time as
the water is ordered turned off. (Ord. 1634, 12-14-2009)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 317/710
7-3-14: CITY MAY INSTALL METERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1331, 8-23-1983)
7-3-15: WATER FUND:
The treasurer shall place all monies collected from water consumers to the credit of a special fund
which is hereby created and shall be called the "water fund". (Ord. 605, 3-10-1924)
7-3-16: SPECIAL CONTRACTS; VACATED PREMISES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1331, 8-23-1983)
7-3-17: METER INSTALLATION FEE:
Water meter installation fees shall be as the city council may from time to time establish by resolution1.
(Ord. 1014, 9-12-1972)
7-3-18: LOCATION OF METERS:
It shall be the policy of the city to require water meters to be installed on city property adjacent to the
property line of the property where the water is to be used. If in the opinion of the superintendent of
public works there are circumstances in individual cases which indicate that it would be less
burdensome and more advantageous to the city and the property owner to have the water meter at a
place within the property line, this may be done provided that there is either an easement or written
agreement which has been accepted by the city council. (Ord. 1331, 8-23-1983)
7-3-19: WATER CONNECTION POLICY FOR RESIDENTS OUTSIDE CITY:
If there be a request from any one or more persons outside the city to use the water system of the city,
the city council shall then consider each such request upon its own merit. Any determination made by
the city council with respect to any one or more requests shall in no way be binding upon the city with
respect to any other requests.
(A) If the city should allow any land outside the city to hook onto the water system of the city, then the
following regulations shall apply:
1. The water lines to the city water line shall be constructed by and at the expense of the person or
persons requesting the water service.
2. Any water line constructed shall be constructed according to sound engineering practices and to
the standards of the city. The city engineer shall be the sole judge of whether the construction is
according to sound engineering practices and according to city standards.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 318/710
3. Any water line constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be of sufficient size to provide for future
construction and shall be properly engineered to permit minimal maintenance. The adequacy of
the size shall be determined solely by the city engineer.
4. The city shall inspect and supervise the installation of any water line constructed pursuant to this
chapter. The person or persons requesting the water line shall pay all charges including overhead
to the city for such inspection and supervision. This charge shall be paid within ten (10) days after
the request is made by the city.
5. Anybody receiving water services pursuant to this chapter shall pay two (2) times the normal
connection charge and two (2) times the monthly service charge.
6. Additionally, anybody receiving water services as established by this chapter shall pay the city an
in lieu tax equal to that which a person who is a resident of the city would pay for services
received which are not available outside the city. The amount of such in lieu tax shall be
computed each year by the city for each person receiving water services under the provisions of
this chapter. At the option of the city this charge could be paid either monthly with the water
service charge or semiannually on the tax bill. Anybody paying an in lieu tax for a sewer
connection will not be required to pay any additional in lieu tax as a result of the water
connection.
(B) Anybody requesting a water service to the city as set forth in this chapter shall file a written
statement with the city that he shall agree to any future proposed annexation to the city of the land
receiving water services if requested to do so by the city. If any future property owner of the land
refuses to sign a petition to annex to the city, the water service may be terminated by the city by
giving the property owner thirty (30) days' prior written notice that if he does not sign the petition his
water service will be terminated.
(C) If any owner of real property receiving water services pursuant to this chapter should fail to comply
with anything contained in this chapter, the city may then terminate water services after thirty (30)
days' written notice to the property owner with respect to the real property outside the city owned by
such defaulting owner. (Ord. 1061, 7-9-1974)
7-3-20: WATER LINE EXTENSIONS:
Extensions of water lines from the city main to the customer's property line shall be at the customer's
cost. The customer shall make a deposit based upon a cost estimate by the city. At the completion of
the installation, the public works superintendent shall submit an invoice based on actual materials,
including the meter, labor and equipment used, and charge this against the deposit. If the deposit was
too large, the customer will be refunded the difference, if it is too small, the customer shall pay the
difference. (Ord. 1143, 2-14-1978)
7-3-21: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE:
In addition to the normal water connection charge, there shall be a capital improvement charge which
shall be paid at the same time as the connection charge is paid. In the event more than one dwelling
unit or business is receiving water service through the same connection to the city water system, there
shall be an additional capital improvement charge for each dwelling unit or business commencing with
the second dwelling unit or business. Exception: apartments shall pay seventy five percent (75%) of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 319/710
the capital improvement charge(s) noted above. Said capital improvement charge(s) are based upon
requirements of the El Dorado irrigation district (EID) as detailed in the "agreement between city and
EID for a water supply" and to the city for local water system capital improvements. Distribution of the
funds generated by the capital improvements shall be directed to the EID for regional water system
capital improvements, and to the city for water system capital improvements. The amount of capital
improvement charges and distribution of said funds shall be set by council resolution and may be
changed from time to time by the city council, when they deem such change necessary or for the best
interest of the city. (Ord. 1560, 5-11-1999)
7-3-22: WATER SYSTEM EXTENSIONS, REIMBURSEMENT:
(A) Persons other than the city may desire to alter and/or extend the city's water facilities to make water
and/or fire protection, as required by title 3, chapter 10 of this code, available to properties lying
beyond existing facilities. The person desiring to alter and/or extend such water facilities must make
an application with the city engineer requesting that such facilities be altered and/or extended and
must file plans and specifications showing how the facilities are to be altered and/or extended. Such
alterations and/or extensions may be constructed by the applicant if the city engineer approves the
application, plans and specifications.
(B) In the event the city engineer determines that properties, other than the property being developed
by the person constructing the water facilities, benefit from the construction, the city may enter into
an appropriate reimbursement agreement with the person constructing the water line and/or fire
protection. Said agreement shall provide that the city shall, but without liability therefor, endeavor to
collect by way of connection charges and/or development fees and reimburse to such developer so
much of the construction costs of said water facilities as may be practicably collected from the
property owners on the basis of the extent to which said water facilities shall benefit their respective
properties. (Ord. 1343, 12-13-1983)
(C) Each reimbursement agreement with the developer shall be authorized by the council in the same
manner as other contracts. Such reimbursement agreement and the rights therein granted shall be
assignable by the person constructing such water line in the first instance.
(D) All rights for reimbursement under any reimbursement agreement shall terminate on the tenth
anniversary of the date of the agreement, and the city shall thereafter retain any fees charged for
connection to the system.
(E) The area to be benefited shall be determined by the city engineer, and a map designating the area
to be benefited shall be attached to all reimbursement contracts.
(F) The determination of benefits may be based either on area or front foot charges, whichever is
determined to be most equitable by the city engineer, and the appropriate allocations of
construction costs shall be based upon the benefits to be derived from each parcel of property. The
determinations of benefits and allocations of cost by the city engineer shall be final and conclusive.
(Ord. 1144, 2-14-1978)
(G) Fees shall be paid as required by section 4-8-1 of this code to defray the costs incidental to the
processing of plans and for the inspection of such work. (Ord. 1263, 5-26-1981)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 320/710
(H) All charges to be made pursuant to this section shall be in addition to the meter installation fee
required by section 7-3-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 1144, 2-14-1978)
(I) The developer or applicant shall pay all of the initial costs of constructing an extension to the water
and/or installing any fire protection devices as set forth pursuant to this section. The parties within
the area that will benefit from the extension to the water and/or the installation of fire protection
devices shall pay their proportionate share of the cost at such time as they connect to the extension
of the water line or as part of the payment of any required development fees. (Ord. 1343, 12-13-
1983)
(J) It shall be unlawful for any person to break, damage, destroy or tamper with any water line,
structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the waterworks system of the city. Any
violation shall be subject to penalty section 1-4-5 of this code. (Ord. 1355, 5-8-1984)
Chapter 4
SEWER REGULATIONS
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
APARTMENTS: Multiple-family structures, including mobile home parks, containing two (2) or more
dwelling units intended for residential use located on any parcel of real property or lot.
BASE CHARGE: The minimum bimonthly charge for consumption from one to seven hundred fifty
(750) cubic feet.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): An estimate of the amount of organic material in a sample
of water that can be oxidized by microorganisms under standard conditions. It is used to determine the
strength of a wastewater, the efficiency of the wastewater treatment plant processes and to determine
the oxygen load that the effluent from the plant has on the receiving water. A sample is incubated for
five (5) days at twenty degrees Celsius (20°C). The reduction in dissolved oxygen concentration during
the incubation period yields a measure of biochemical oxygen demand.
CCF: A unit of one hundred (100) cubic feet of water delivered to the user as a measure of the
estimated volume of wastewater discharged by the user into the wastewater system.
CESSPOOL: An excavation into the earth which is used for the reception of sewage or drainage from
plumbing fixtures, effluent from septic tanks, together with the water used in carriage of the sewage or
drainage but which does not have watertight walls and bottom.
CITY: The city of Placerville, a municipal corporation of the state of California.
CITY SEWER: Any sewer pipeline or other system appurtenance which is under the jurisdiction of the
city, also termed "public sewer".
COSTS OF SERVICES: All costs incurred to construct, operate, maintain, and finance the wastewater
system, including fixed and variable operations and maintenance costs, debt service, capital costs, and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 321/710
inflow and infiltration costs.
DIRECTOR: The city of Placerville, director of public works or authorized representatives.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: An establishment that prepares and serves food for consumption but one
that does not have a commercial type dishwasher or a commercial type garbage disposal that
processes solid waste.
HEALTH OFFICER: The health officer of El Dorado County.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing processes, trade, or business
as distinct from sanitary sewage.
LIFELINE: A rate discounted for low income users who qualify for AT&T's Lifeline program and/or
Pacific Gas And Electric's CARE program.
LOWER LATERAL: The portion of a sewer lateral located within the public right of way connecting an
upper lateral to the city's sewer system.
pH: The logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration in grams per liter of solution. A
pH test determines the strength of the acid or alkali in the sewage.
PRIVY: A structure used as a toilet under a part or all of which is a vault or pit intended for the
reception of human waste material.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2")
(1.27 cm) in any dimension.
RATE: The total or component amount of an individual wastewater service charge.
REST HOMES/HOUSING FACILITIES: Any facility, place or building which is maintained and operated
to provide nonmedical residential care, daycare or house finding agency services for children, adults,
or children and adults, including, but not limited to, the developmentally disabled, physically
handicapped, mentally disordered, or incompetent persons. A community care facility may provide
incidental medical services.
REVENUE PROGRAM GUIDELINES: The state water resources control board published guidelines for
establishing wastewater rates.
SEPTIC TANK: A watertight receptacle which receives the discharge of a drainage system or part
thereof, designed and constructed so as to retain solids, digest organic matter through a period of
detention, and allow the liquids to discharge into the soil outside the tank through a subsurface
drainage system.
SEWAGE: Domestic or industrial waste substances, liquid or solid, associated with human habitation,
or which contains or may be contaminated with human or animal excrement, offal or any feculent
matter, or combination thereof, collected by the city's sewer system and treated at the city's wastewater
treatment plant.
SEWER LATERAL: The sewer line beginning at the foundation wall of any building and terminating at
the sewer main and shall include the upper and lower lateral.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 322/710
SEWER MAIN: A public sewer pipeline designed to receive the flow from more than one sewer lateral.
SINGLE-FAMILY: A structure containing a single dwelling unit intended for occupancy by one family
and located on a parcel or real property or lot.
STRENGTH: Refers to state water resources control board published characteristics for commercial
and industrial users, and is a measure of BOD (ppm) and SS (ppm) concentration of discharge to the
system.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) OR SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS): Those solids that either float on
the surface of or are in suspension in sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by filtration
under standard laboratory procedures and expressed in milligrams per liter. A well mixed sample is
filtered through a weighed standard glass fiber filter and the residue retained on the filter is dried to a
constant weight at one hundred three (103) to one hundred five degrees Celsius (105°C). The increase
in weight of the filter represents the total suspended solids.
UPPER LATERAL: That portion of a sewer lateral beginning at the foundation wall of any building or
industrial facility and running to the property line.
USER CATEGORY: The various categories used for determining the various rates for wastewater
service charges.
UTILITY SERVICE ACCOUNT: An account established for either water service, wastewater service, or
both, for a residential or nonresidential user. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-2: SEWER RATES:
The rates to be charged all persons using or required by law to use the wastewater system of the city
or any part thereof shall be set from time to time by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-3: BASIS FOR DETERMINING RATES:
The rates shall meet state and federal requirements that user rates reflect the costs of services. Costs
of services are allocated on the basis of effluent flow and strength.
(A) User Categories: Each user will be assigned to a category based upon state water resources
control board published industrial characteristics for effluent strength. The user categories are as
follows:
Residential users:
Apartment buildings
Single-family
Nonresidential users:
Bars
Car washes
Churches
Fairgrounds
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 323/710
Fast food service
Fire stations
Halls
Hospitals
Hotels/motels
Laundromats
Markets
Mortuaries
Movie theaters
Rest homes/housing facilities
Restaurants
Retail stores and offices
Schools
Service stations
(B) Consumption Based Rates: Each user will be charged based upon actual use or consumption.
Consumption is determined by the cubic feet of water used as follows:
1. For residential users, the consumption will be determined by each user's wet weather flows
during the billing period of December 16 of the preceding year through February 15 of the current
year. The first seven hundred fifty (750) cubic feet will be included in the bimonthly base charge.
For each cubic foot thereafter, the charge will be based on a per one hundred (100) cubic feet
water consumption basis.
2. For nonresidential users, the consumption will be determined by each user's contemporaneous
water consumption.
3. For newly established residential accounts, the citywide average residential wet weather water
consumption shall be the basis for the first year rates.
4. For those residential users who are not city water customers and use well water, the consumption
basis for calculating the rate will be the average residential wet weather flow for a single-family
dwelling, or in the event the user is a multi-family dwelling, the average wet weather flows of a
comparable dwelling. For those residential users who are not city water customers and purchase
water from the El Dorado irrigation district, the consumption basis for calculating rate will be the
wet weather flow of the preceding year as reported by the El Dorado irrigation district.
(C) Customer Dispute Of Bill: In the event any person is dissatisfied with the amount of their bill and
believes that they discharge less than one hundred percent (100%) of their metered water through
the sewer they may:
1. Install at their own expense and maintain a sewer and/or an irrigation meter in good working
order. An irrigation meter will separately measure nonsewer related water consumption thereby
reducing the customer's sewer bill. The person desiring to install an irrigation meter must submit
an application with the public works department and comply with the provisions of the
department's irrigation meter policy. The meters herein referred to shall be subject to inspection
by the director.
2. Protest to the city clerk, and the director shall investigate the percentage of metered water
actually discharged through the sewers owned by the person and report the percentage to the
city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 324/710
(D) Council To Adjust Rate: If the council is satisfied, under either of the provisions of subsection (C) of
this section, that the percentage of metered water that goes through the user's sewer is less than
one hundred percent (100%), it shall fix the percentage and shall adjust the rate of the user
according to their actual use, subject to the minimum monthly rate in effect. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-4: UTILITY SERVICE CHARGES; WHEN DUE:
(A) Utility service account payment shall be due upon receipt of invoice. Utility service charges are
payable bimonthly and shall become delinquent twenty (20) days from the date of the mailing of the
utility account invoice. Delinquent accounts will be subject to a late charge of twenty dollars
($20.00). Water and sewer service charges are inseparable and the failure to pay either charge on
a utility service invoice will result in the termination of water and sewer services. Termination of
services shall be pursuant to division 5, chapter 1, article 1, commencing with sections 10009
through 10011 of the Public Utilities Code of the state of California. In the event that a utility service
account remains delinquent and a turnoff order is issued, a disconnection/reconnection charge as
determined by resolution of the city council shall be paid for each occasion that the city has to
disconnect and/or reconnect service discontinued for nonpayment of utility service invoice. No
service which has been discontinued for nonpayment of utility service charges shall be reconnected
until all current and delinquent utility charges are paid. In cases when delinquent utility charges
remain unpaid, the city shall have the right to lien against the real property and/or cause legal action
to be brought against the utility account holder.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a utility service customer may avoid
late charges and termination of service by paying one-half (1/2) of the invoice amount of utility
service charges before the delinquency date as set forth in subsection (A) of this section, and the
remaining one-half (1/2) of said utility service invoice amount within thirty (30) days after the
delinquency date set forth in subsection (A) of this section. In this event, it is the responsibility of the
customer to notify the finance department of the city of Placerville of their intent to pay utility service
charges pursuant to this subsection. The utility service customer will not receive an additional bill for
the remaining fifty percent (50%) of the utility service invoice amount and it will be the customer's
responsibility to pay said amount within the thirty (30) day period set forth herein. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-
2012)
7-4-5: UNMETERED WATER:
(Rep. by Ord. 1604, 10-25-2005)
7-4-6: NONPAYMENT OF CHARGES; DISCONNECTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 1604, 10-25-2005)
7-4-7: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF CHARGES:
All utility service accounts and bills shall be recorded in the name of the person(s)/entity requesting
utility service. However, when service is provided to a multi-unit residential structure or other similar
structures, as set forth in sections 10009 and 10009.1 of the California Public Utilities Code, residential
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 325/710
occupants of such structures shall have the right to become customers pursuant to the provisions of
sections 10009 and 10009.1 of the California Public Utilities Code. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-8: UTILITY SERVICE DEPOSITS:
For newly established utility service accounts, or as a condition to reconnecting utility service to an
account for which service was terminated for nonpayment of utility service invoice, the applicant may
be required, at the discretion of the finance director, to deposit a sum of money prior to establishing the
account or reconnecting service, which sum shall be based solely on the credit worthiness of the
applicant as determined by the finance director. Any such deposit shall be subject to the provisions of
section 10009.6 of the California Public Utilities Code and shall not exceed twice the estimated
average periodic bill. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-9: USERS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS:
(A) If there be a request from any one or more persons or government agencies outside of the city to
use the sewer system of the city, the city council shall then consider each such request upon its
own merit. Any determination made by the city council with respect to any requests shall in no way
be binding upon the city with respect to any other requests. The city shall in no event consider a
request to use the sewer system of the city for the land outside the city which lies outside of the
Placerville watershed. The city council shall consider all requests if the land is being used for
residential or governmental purposes.
(B) If the city should allow any land outside of the city to hook onto the sewer system of the city, then
the following regulations shall apply:
1. Any extensions or upsizing of the city sewer line shall be designed and constructed by and at the
expense of the person or persons requesting the sewer service.
2. Any sewer line constructed shall be properly designed and constructed as detailed in section 7-4-
14 of this chapter.
3. Any sewer line constructed pursuant to this chapter shall be of sufficient size to provide for future
connections and shall be properly engineered to permit minimal maintenance. The adequacy of
the size shall be determined by the director.
4. The city shall inspect and supervise the installation of any sewer line constructed pursuant to this
chapter. The person or persons requesting the sewer line shall pay all charges including
overhead to the city for such inspection and supervision. This charge shall be paid within ten (10)
days after the request is made by the city.
(C) If any owner of real property receiving sewer services pursuant to this chapter should fail to comply
with anything contained in this chapter, the city may then terminate sewer services after thirty (30)
day written notice to the property owner with respect to the real property outside the city owned by
such defaulting owner. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-10: SEWER FUND:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 326/710
All monies received under this chapter shall be used for the repair, replacement and maintenance of
the sewer system and all equipment thereof and the extension of the lines thereof within the city, it
being the intent and purpose of this chapter to provide funds for the operation of the sewer system
without resorting to other funds of the city. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-11: ENFORCEMENT:
The director shall be charged with the administration of the sewerage system and the enforcement of
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-12: CONNECTIONS TO SEWER LINE:
Any person desiring to make a connection to the city sewer system or to a private sewer line which
connects with the city sewer system must first make an application with the public works department
and receive a permit from the city.
Each apartment in an apartment house, each separate housing unit in a townhouse or condominium,
and each mobilehome within a mobilehome park shall be considered as a separate dwelling unit. (Ord.
1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-13: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE:
A capital improvement charge shall be paid at time of permit issuance, in an amount which shall be set
from time to time by resolution of the city council.
In the event more than one dwelling unit or business is discharging wastewater through the same
connection to the city sewer system, there shall be an additional capital improvement charge in an
equal amount for each additional dwelling unit or business. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-14: DESIGN AND INSTALLATION OF SEWER PIPES; MINIMUM
REQUIREMENTS:
(A) The design criteria, preparation of plans and specifications, and the construction of all public
sewers shall comply with the El Dorado irrigation district (EID) sewer design standards, standard
detail drawings and technical specifications, except as specified within the city of Placerville
standard plans and specifications.
(B) The preparation of the plans and specifications shall be by a person or persons, firm, partnership or
corporation legally authorized to practice civil engineering in the state of California.
(C) Where the improvement plans submitted cover only a portion of the ultimate development of the
property, a sewer master plan shall be submitted to and approved by the director that shows how
sewage service will be provided to the remainder of the property within the development. If further
extension of the sewer system to additional parcels is probable, then the sewer master plan shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 327/710
take into account the entire sewer drainage watershed area and shall be submitted to and approved
by the director prior to the submittal of the first set of sewer plans for the development.
(D) Complete plans and specifications for the proposed improvement must receive approval by the
director before any work is started on construction of the project.
(E) No alterations shall be made to an approved set of plans or specifications unless such changes,
corrections, or additions are resubmitted to the director for approval, and no modification or
deviation from the plans or specifications shall be made during construction without written
authorization from the director.
(F) All public sewers and all necessary easements or other land rights shall be deeded to the city upon
completion of construction and acceptance by the director. No new connections shall be made to
the public sewer prior to the city's acceptance of the improvements as public sewers. (Ord. 1646, 5-
8-2012)
7-4-15: STORM OR DRAINAGE WATER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the discharge of any water, except sewage
water only, including storm drainage or groundwater into any sewer or pipeline or sewer mains of the
city. "Drainage" and "stormwater" within the meaning of this chapter expressly includes water flowing
from the roofs of buildings, creeks, springs and from the surface of lands and also includes irrigation
water. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-16: SEWER SYSTEM EXTENSIONS; REIMBURSEMENT:
(A) Persons other than the city may from time to time desire to have the sewer main facilities of the city
extended for the purpose of making sewer facilities available to properties lying beyond the existing
sewer main facilities. The person desiring to extend the sewer main facilities must make application
with the director requesting that the sewer main facilities be extended and must file with the director
plans and specifications setting forth the manner in which the sewer main facilities are to be
extended. The sewer main facilities may be extended by the applicant in the event that the director
approves the application, together with the plans and specifications.
(B) In the event the director determines that properties other than the property being developed by the
person constructing the sewer facilities benefits from the construction, the city may enter into an
appropriate reimbursement agreement with the person constructing the sewer facilities. Said
agreement shall provide that the city shall, but without liability therefor, endeavor to collect by way
of connection charges and reimburse to such initial developer so much of the construction costs of
said sewer line facilities as may be practicably collected from the property owners on the basis of
the extent to which said sewer line shall benefit their respective properties.
(C) Each reimbursement agreement with the developer shall be authorized by the city council in the
same manner as other contracts. Such reimbursement agreement and the rights therein granted
shall be assignable by the person constructing such sewer line in the first instance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 328/710
(D) All rights for reimbursement under any reimbursement agreement shall terminate on the tenth
anniversary of the date of the agreement, and the city shall thereafter retain any fees charged for
connection to the system.
(E) The area to be benefited shall be determined by the director, and a map designating the area to be
benefited shall be attached to all reimbursement contracts.
(F) The determination of benefits may be based either on area or front foot charges, whichever is
determined to be most equitable by the director, and the appropriate allocations of construction
costs shall be based upon the benefits to be derived from each parcel of property. The
determinations of benefit and allocation of cost by the director shall be final and conclusive.
(G) Fees shall be paid as required by section 4-8-1 of this code to defray the costs incidental to the
processing of plans and inspection of such work.
(H) The developer or applicant shall pay all of the initial costs of constructing an addition to the sewer
line as set forth pursuant to this section. The parties within the area that will benefit from the
addition to the sewer line shall pay their proportionate share of the cost at such time as they
connect to the extension to the sewer line. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-17: SEWER SYSTEM EXTENSIONS BY CITY; REIMBURSEMENT:
(A) The city may from time to time extend the sewer line facilities of the city for the purpose of making
sewer service available to properties lying beyond existing sewer line facilities.
(B) Where such extensions of sewer line facilities are constructed by the city, the director shall
determine the area and the specific parcels of property which will benefit from each such extension
of sewer line facilities, and shall prepare a map designating the area to be benefited.
(C) The owner of any property determined by the director to benefit from the extension of sewer line
facilities under this section shall, at the time application is made to connect to the sewer line, pay a
fee to the city to reimburse the city for that property's proportionate share of the construction costs
of the sewer line, including interest at the rate of three percent (3%) per year from the date the
sewer line extension is completed and accepted by the city to the date the fee is paid.
(D) The determination of benefits may be based either on area or front foot charges, whichever is
determined to be most equitable by the director, and the appropriate allocations of construction
costs shall be based upon the benefits to be derived from each parcel of property. The
determinations of benefit and allocation of cost by the director shall be final and conclusive.
(E) All charges levied pursuant to this section shall be in addition to the capital improvement charge
required by section 7-4-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-18: REGULATION AND CONTROL OF WASTEWATER DISCHARGES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 329/710
(A) Wastewater may be discharged into public sewers for collection, treatment, and disposal by the city,
provided that such wastewater discharge is in compliance with this chapter and the user pays all
applicable city sewer use charges.
(B) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into a public sewer wastewater which will
result in nuisance, or contamination, or pollution in receiving waters.
(C) No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, wastewater into a public sewer if it contains
substances or has characteristics which, either alone or by interaction with other wastewaters,
cause or threaten to cause:
1. Damage to city facilities.
2. Interference with, or impairment of, operation or maintenance of city facilities, including flow
overloading.
3. Obstruction of flow in city facilities.
4. Danger to life or safety of any person.
5. Interference with treatment or disposal processes.
6. Flammable or explosive conditions.
7. Wastewater, or any other byproducts of the treatment process, to be unsuitable for reclamation
and reuse, or to interfere with any processes for reclamation.
8. Noxious or malodorous gases or odors.
9. Discoloration or any other condition in the quality of the city's treatment plant effluent such that
water quality requirements cannot be met by the city.
10. Conditions which violate any statute or any rule, regulation, or ordinance of any public agency.
(D) It is unlawful for any person to transport domestic sewage, septic tank or cesspool cleanings,
sludge, or any other polluted wastewaters into the city, except as authorized by the director and
health officer.
(E) It is unlawful for any person to make a connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any
sanitary sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the director.
(F) It is unlawful for any person to wilfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any
sewer, structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the city's sewer system including
the city's pumping stations or the city's wastewater treatment plant.
(G) It is unlawful for any person to wilfully obstruct, or cause to be obstructed, any sewer in such a
manner as to impede the natural flow of sewage through or from such sewer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 330/710
(H) No person shall discharge cooling water, any unpolluted water from a production, manufacturing, or
processing operation, or treated groundwater (from a groundwater remediation site) without
obtaining permission from the director.
(I) The connection of the drain from any swimming or wading pool to a sanitary sewer shall be
prohibited unless required by the health officer and approved by the director.
(J) No person shall connect, or cause to be connected, the outlet of a cesspool, septic tank, or a drain
therefrom to any sanitary sewer.
(K) It shall be unlawful to dispose of material pumped from septic tanks and grease trap/interceptors in
the sewerage system except at the times and places and in the manner directed by the director.
(L) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a public sewer the following:
1. Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.0, greater than 9.0 or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, or personnel of the city;
2. Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit
(150°F);
3. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether emulsified or not, or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty two (32) and
one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F);
4. Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage
grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the director;
5. Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes, or concentrated plating
solutions, whether neutralized or not;
6. Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and similar objectionable or toxic
substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment plant exceeds the limits
established by the director for such materials;
7. Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other waste or odor producing substances, in such
concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the director as necessary, after
treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters;
8. Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits
established by the director in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations;
9. Materials which exert or cause:
(a) Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but not limited to, fuller's earth,
lime slurries and lime residues) or of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium
chloride and sodium sulfate),
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 331/710
(b) Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning
solutions),
(c) Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in such quantities as to
constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment works,
(d) Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting slugs as defined herein;
10. Those pesticides and other toxic pollutants in toxic amounts, as determined by the administrator
of the environmental protection agency in accordance with the federal act, such other federal or
state act as may be applicable and as further designated from time to time by the director,
including the following substances or materials containing these substances:
(a) Aldrin, dieldrin,
(b) Benzidine,
(c) Cadmium,
(d) Cyanide,
(e) DDD, DDE, DDT,
(f) Endrin,
(g) Mercury,
(h) Polychlorinate biphenyls (PCBs), and
(i) Toxaphene;
11. Any ashes, cinders, sand, silt, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics,
wood, paunch manure, or obstruction to flow in sewers or other interference with proper operation
or maintenance of the sewerage system;
12. Any discharges of such quantities or such qualities that they are not amendable to adequate
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment process employed;
13. Discharges prohibited by the environmental protection agency regulations promulgated under
the federal act.
(M) If the waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in subsection (C)
of this section, and which, in the judgment of the director, may have a deleterious effect upon the
sewage works, processes, equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life
or constitute a public nuisance, the director may:
1. Reject the wastes;
2. Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
3. Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
4. Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered by
sewer charges under the provisions of subsection (J) of this section. If the director permits the
pretreatment or equalization of waste flows, the design and installation of the plants and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 332/710
equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the director, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(N) All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this chapter, shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of
"Standard Methods For The Examination Of Water And Wastewater", published by the American
Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided or upon
suitable samples taken at said control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the
public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out in
the customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewer works and to
determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property.
(O) It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper
with any sewer, structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewerage system of
the city. Any violation shall be subject to penalty section 1-4-5 of this code. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-19: RESPONSIBILITY OF THE PROPERTY OWNER:
(A) Every parcel controlled by one owner shall have a sewer lateral from the parcel to the city sewer
system. The city shall not be responsible for any construction, repair or maintenance for any sewer
line other than the city's sewer mains.
(B) When a public sewer is constructed by a property owner and offered to the city for maintenance
and operation, and said public sewer is not within a public right of way, a public sewer easement
shall be granted to the city. Said easement shall be for pipeline purposes and incidentals thereto,
including the construction and maintenance of gravity or pressure sewer lines, together with the
right of ingress and egress, upon, over, under and across the property it is constructed upon.
Current and future property owners shall keep the easement free of permanent structures, debris,
parked vehicles or trailers, trees, tall landscaping, or any other objects that could obstruct ingress
and egress on, over and across the property.
(C) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner requesting a sewer connection to bring his sewer
lateral to the city's sewer main where the connection is to be made.
(D) The connection of the sewer lateral into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the
building and plumbing codes as adopted in title 4 of this code, and other applicable rules and
regulations of the city. All connections shall be made gastight and watertight. A cleanout shall be
installed at the property line. The cleanout shall be in an approved box and shall be easily
accessible. The sewer lateral and cleanout shall be maintained by the property owner.
(E) Upon payment of the applicable building, water and sewer fees, the director shall approve the
location of all water and sewer connection sites before the necessary permits are issued, and all
new connections or changes in existing connections must be inspected by an authorized
representative of the city before the sewer and water lines are backfilled.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 333/710
(F) When a sewer lateral is not available, the installation of the sewer lateral and the connection to the
public sewer shall be done only by a contractor licensed by the state of California to do this type of
work. Such contractor also shall possess a current business license issued by the city and have on
deposit with the city a surety bond in a form approved by the city in the sum of twenty thousand
dollars ($20,000.00) to guarantee the faithful performance of all terms and conditions of the city.
Construction shall be as follows:
1. The director shall be notified forty eight (48) hours, not including weekends and holidays, in
advance before a connection is made to a public sewer, and in no case shall the sewer lateral
and connection be covered until the work has been inspected.
2. Construction operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to cause as little inconvenience
as possible to abutting property owners and the traveling public. The contractor shall furnish,
erect, and maintain such lights, signs, barricades, and other devices as are necessary to prevent
accidents. The contractor shall obtain all necessary permits to complete the work.
(G) The sewer lateral, whether installed at the time the public sewer is constructed or not, shall be
installed and maintained at the sole expense of the property owner. The city is responsible for
maintenance only of the public sewer.
(H) No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, stormwater
drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a sewer lateral which, in turn, is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sewer.
(I) For all industrial zoned and commercial properties that could produce high strength/flow sewage, the
owner shall construct a metering/sampling manhole near the property line where the building sewer
connects with the service sewer when required by the director. Said metering/sampling manhole
shall be constructed in accordance with a standard plan approved by the director and shall be
constructed at the sole expense of the owner. For properties currently connected to the public
sewer that do not have metering/sampling manholes, the owner shall construct a metering/sampling
manhole at his/her expense when directed by the director.
(J) Where there is no city sewer main adjacent to the property line, then it shall be the responsibility of
the property owner to extend the public sewer line to the city sewer main in accordance with city
standards. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-20: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
(A) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, shall be
served with a written notice by the director (except as provided in subsection (B) of this section),
stating the nature of the violation and fixing a time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof.
(B) If the director determines that a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any
amendments thereto, results in the immediate threat of a public hazard or an immediate menace to
the public health or safety, the director may enter the premises without notice and do everything
necessary to abate such hazard or menace to the public health or safety. The actual cost incurred
by the director in taking such abatement action shall be a legal charge against the violator.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 334/710
(C) Any person wilfully violating any of the foregoing provisions of this chapter, or any amendments
thereto, or who shall continue the violation beyond the time specified in the notice to correct such
violation, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(D) The violator of any of the provisions of this chapter, or any amendments thereto, shall become
liable to the city for expense, loss, or damage to the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 1646, 5-
8-2012)
7-4-21: CESSPOOLS AND PRIVIES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, use or allow to remain a cesspool or privy, on any
property, place of business, residence or building in the city. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-4-22: SEPTIC TANKS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a septic tank in the city unless because of the terrain it is
not feasible to connect with the city sewer system, and in that event, a permit must be first obtained
from the development services director. When connection to the city sewer system is not feasible, a
building permit shall not be issued until the proposed building site is inspected and approved by the
county or city health officer and all county regulations regarding septic tanks have been complied with.
Upon presentation of an approved, numbered septic tank permit issued by an authorized city or county
health officer, a building permit may be issued by the duly authorized representative of the city showing
thereon the approved septic tank permit number. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
Chapter 5
FATS, OILS AND GREASE (FOG)
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to facilitate the maximum beneficial use of the city's sewer services
and facilities while preventing blockages of the sewer lines resulting from discharges of fats, oils
and grease (FOG) into the public sewer system, and to specify appropriate FOG discharge
requirements for food service establishments as defined herein.
(B) The provisions set forth in this chapter are designed to ensure compliance with federal, state and
local laws and regulations, and to allow the city to meet applicable standards.
(C) This chapter also establishes quantity and quality standards on all discharges containing FOG,
which may alone or collectively cause or contribute to FOG accumulation in the sewer facilities
causing or potentially causing or contributing to the occurrence of sanitary sewer overflows. (Ord.
1646, 5-8-2012)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 335/710
7-5-2: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to discharges of wastewater containing FOG conveyed to the public sewer
system from any commercial or institutional food service establishment. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-3: DEFINITIONS:
Subject to the foregoing, the meaning of the terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES OR BMPs: Activities, prohibitions, maintenance procedures and
other management practices to prevent or reduce the introduction of FOG into the public sewer
system.
BLOCKAGE: A partial or complete obstruction of wastewater flowing through a sewer pipeline.
CHANGE IN LAW: A change to any state or federal law, permit or regulation; changes to this code;
changes to any city national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit or waste discharge
requirement (WDR); or the subsequent existence of any court order, consent decree, injunction or
other regulatory or legal imposition that affects the use and/or operation of the city's sanitary sewer
system and any other public or private sanitary sewer systems, lines or other public or private
infrastructure that connects to the city's sanitary sewer system.
CHANGE IN OPERATIONS: Any change in the ownership, food types, or operational procedures that
have the potential to change the amount of fats, oils and grease (FOG) discharged by a food service
establishment (FSE) to the city's wastewater collection and treatment system.
CITY: The city of Placerville, a municipal corporation of the state of California.
COLLECTION SYSTEM: The public sewer system consisting of all pipes and conveyance system
components conveying wastewater to the city's wastewater treatment plant (Hangtown Creek Water
Reclamation Facility (HCWRF)).
COMMISSARY: An establishment which is used as a base of operations for one or more motorized
food wagons or pushcarts, where such unit or units and/or equipment are serviced, cleaned, supplied
and/or maintained.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: A collection of individual samples obtained at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time. The resulting mixture (composite sample) is intended to form a
representative sample of the waste stream discharged during the sample period.
DESIGN HYDRAULIC DEPTH: Total operating depth of interceptor contents at which interceptor is
designed to operate.
DIRECTOR: The city of Placerville director of public works or authorized representative.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Any city employee or agent of the city with authority to enforce the
provisions of this chapter and the authority to make any decision, on behalf of the director, required or
called for by this chapter.
FATS, OILS AND GREASE OR FOG: Any substance such as vegetable or animal product that is used
in, or is a byproduct of, the cooking or food preparation process, and that becomes or may become
viscous, or solidifies or may solidify, with a change in temperature or other conditions.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 336/710
FOOD GRINDER: Any device installed in the plumbing or wastewater system for the purpose of
grinding food or food waste.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT OR FSE: A facility, including, but not limited to, any commercial or
institutional entity within the sanitary sewer service area of the regional wastewater control facility,
operating in a permanent structure such as a room, building or place, or portion thereof, maintained,
used or operated for the purpose of storing, preparing, serving, manufacturing, packing or otherwise
handling food for sale to other entities, or for consumption by the public, its members or employees,
and which has any process or device that uses or produces FOG, or grease vapors, steam, fumes,
smoke or odors that are required to be removed by an exhaust hood pursuant to California Health And
Safety Code section 114149.1 or in accordance with the California uniform retail food facilities law
(CURFFL)1. The term "food service establishment" or "FSE" also means any commissary where food is
prepared using fats, oils or grease and/or which receives water from motorized food wagons or
pushcarts containing fats, oils or grease. A limited food preparation establishment is not considered an
FSE when engaged only in reheating, hot holding, or assembly of ready to eat food products, provided
that the establishment has no wastewater discharge containing a significant amount of FOG.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis without regard to the flow in
the waste stream and without consideration of time.
GREASE CONTROL DEVICE: Any grease interceptor, grease trap or other mechanism, device or
process which attaches to, or is applied to, wastewater plumbing fixtures and lines, the purpose of
which is to trap, collect or treat FOG prior to it being discharged into the public sewer.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR: A multicompartment device that primarily uses gravity to separate FOG
from the wastewater as it moves from one compartment to the next. The design, construction, sizing
and installation of grease interceptors shall conform to this chapter and the most current edition of the
California plumbing code. In the event of conflict, this chapter will control.
GREASE TRAP: A grease control device that is used to serve individual plumbing fixtures. A grease
trap is typically installed indoors, under or near a dishwashing sink.
HOT SPOTS: Sewer lines that have experienced grease related blockages or sanitary sewer overflows
(SSOs) and that must be cleaned or maintained frequently to avoid blockages of the public sewer.
INSPECTOR: A person authorized by the director to inspect any existing or proposed wastewater
generation, conveyance, processing and/or disposal facilities.
INSTITUTION: A school, church, hospital, convalescent home or other similar entity.
INTERCEPTOR: See definition of Grease Interceptor.
LATERAL: The private sewer line connecting a home or other structure to the city's sewer main,
including the portion of the line lying within the public right of way, often referred to as the "lower"
lateral.
MANIFEST: That receipt which is retained by an FSE for the disposal of FOG, recyclable wastes and/or
liquid wastes.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: Any structure planned or under construction for which a sewer connection
permit has not been issued.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, association, society, corporation,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 337/710
joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular
shall include the plural where indicated by context.
PUBLIC SEWER: A sewer system which is controlled by a public authority.
REMODEL OR REMODELING: Any physical and/or operational change to an FSE that involves any
one or a combination of the following:
(A) Under slab plumbing in the food processing area;
(B) A thirty percent (30%) or greater increase in the net public seating area;
(C) A thirty percent (30%) or greater increase in the size of the kitchen area;
(D) Any change in the size or type of food preparation equipment;
(E) Any remodel, addition, alteration or repair valued greater than seventy five thousand dollars
($75,000.00).
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: A person who the director determines is responsible for causing, permitting,
or maintaining a public nuisance or a violation of this code, any applicable uniform code, applicable
state codes, any national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit or any wastewater
discharge permit. The term "responsible person" includes, but is not limited to, a property owner,
tenant, person with a legal interest in the property, person in possession of the property or person that
exercises custody and control over the property.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer which conveys wastewater.
SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW OR SSO: Any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of
untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system.
SEWER FACILITIES OR SEWER SYSTEM: Any and all facilities used for collecting, conveying,
pumping, treating and disposing of sewage, wastewater and/or sludge.
SEWER LATERAL: A building sewer as defined in the latest edition of the California plumbing code. It
is the wastewater pipeline connecting a building's wastewater plumbing to the public sewer.
SLUDGE: Any solid, semisolid and/or liquid decant, sediment or supernatant from a manufacturing
process, utility service, tank, vault or FOG control facility.
STORM DRAIN: A pipe or conduit for carrying storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes
wastewater and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT RULE: Requirement for grease interceptors to be maintained such that the
combined FOG and solids accumulation does not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the design
hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor. This is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time
and required available hydraulic volume are maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG
discharged to the sewer system.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 338/710
WASTE: Wastewater and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive,
associated with human habitation or of human or animal nature, including such wastes placed within
containers of whatever nature prior to and for the purpose of disposal.
WASTEWATER: The liquid and water carrying industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities, FSEs, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is
discharged into the city's wastewater collection system. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-4: FOG DISCHARGE LIMITATION:
No FSE shall discharge FOG, or cause FOG to be discharged, into the public or private sewer or lateral
that causes an SSO or that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to blockages in the public or
private sewer or lateral which connects the FSE to the public sewer. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-5: PUBLIC SEWER OVERFLOWS; PUBLIC NUISANCE; ABATEMENT ORDERS
AND CLEANUP COSTS:
(A) The discharge of FOG into the public or private sewer that causes an SSO or that accumulates or
has the potential to accumulate such that it may or does cause or contribute to a blockage of the
public or private sewer or lateral that may result in an SSO, presents a risk to the public health,
safety and welfare and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter, or by any means otherwise provided by law.
(B) When the director determines that an FSE has discharged FOG and that FOG discharge has
caused a blockage of the public or private sewer or lateral or an SSO, the director may order the
FSE owner or the property owner to install and maintain a grease interceptor and to devise and
implement a plan to abate the nuisance created by the FOG discharge through the cleaning, repair
or replacement of any sewer facilities obstructed or damaged thereby.
(C) At the reasonable discretion of the director or at the request of the property owner or operator of
the FSE, the city may act immediately to clear or repair any public or private sewer or lateral and
contain and clean any SSO caused by the blockage of a private or public sewer or lateral or system
serving an FSE. Any cost, expense, liability, fine, penalty or other payment made or incurred by the
city to clear or repair any public or private sewer or lateral, or to contain, clean, report and otherwise
remediate any SSO, caused by the blockage of any public or private sewer or lateral caused by the
discharge of FOG by an FSE shall be borne jointly and severally by the property owner and owner
of the FSE and shall constitute a debt to the city, due and payable upon demand and collectible in
any manner provided by law. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-6: KITCHEN BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) REQUIREMENTS:
(A) All FSEs shall implement kitchen best management practices in accordance with the requirements
and guidelines established by the director under the FOG control program in an effort to minimize
the discharge of FOG to the sewer system.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 339/710
(B) All FSEs shall be required, at a minimum, to implement and comply with the following kitchen best
management practices:
1. Drain screens shall be installed on all drainage pipes in food preparation areas.
2. All waste cooking oil shall be collected and stored properly in recycling receptacles such as
barrels or drums. Such recycling receptacles shall be maintained properly to ensure that they do
not leak. Waste cooking oil shall be transported by a licensed waste hauler to an approved
recycling or disposal site in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local laws.
3. All garbage and food waste shall be disposed of properly in trash bins or containers, and not in
sinks.
4. Kitchen exhaust filters shall be cleaned as frequently as necessary to be maintained in good
operating condition. The wastewater generated from cleaning kitchen exhaust filters, floor mats
and kitchen equipment shall be disposed of properly in compliance with these regulations.
5. Employees of FSEs shall be trained by ownership/management periodically on the following
subjects:
(a) How to "dry wipe/scrape" pots, pans, dishware, utensils, equipment and work areas before
washing to remove FOG;
(b) How to properly dispose of garbage, food waste and solids in enclosed plastic bags prior to
disposal in trash bins or containers to prevent leaking and odors;
(c) The location and use of absorption products to clean under fryer baskets and other locations
where FOG may be spilled or dripped;
(d) How to properly dispose of FOG from cooking equipment into a FOG receptacle such as a
barrel, drum or bin without spilling.
Training shall be documented for each employee. Training records shall be available for review
at any reasonable time by the director. Training records shall be retained for a minimum of
three (3) years. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-7: PROHIBITIONS; REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Discharge into the sewer system of FOG that may accumulate and/or cause or contribute to
blockages in the sewer system including the lateral is prohibited.
(B) Installation of food grinders in the plumbing system are prohibited when new FSEs are constructed
and when existing FSEs are required to install grease control devices and/or install grease
interceptors. FSEs shall remove all existing food grinders within one hundred eighty (180) days from
the effective date of this chapter except upon the issuance of a conditional waiver by the director
pursuant to section 7-5-13 of this chapter.
(C) Introduction of any additives into the plumbing system of an FSE, grease interceptor or grease
control device for the purpose of emulsifying or biologically/chemically treating FOG for grease
remediation or as a supplement to interceptor maintenance is prohibited.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 340/710
(D) Disposal of waste cooking oil into the public sewer or storm drain is prohibited.
(E) Discharge of wastewater from dishwashers to any grease interceptor or grease control device is
prohibited.
(F) Discharge of wastewater with temperatures in excess of one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit
(140°F) into any grease interceptor or grease control device is prohibited.
(G) Discharge of wastes from toilets, urinals, wash basins and other fixtures containing fecal materials
to sewer lines directed to any grease interceptor or grease control device is prohibited.
(H) Discharge of any waste including FOG and solid materials removed from a grease control device to
the public sewer system is prohibited. Grease removed from grease interceptors shall be
transported to an approved disposal or recycling facility.
(I) Operation of grease interceptors with FOG and solids accumulation exceeding twenty five percent
(25%) of the design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor is prohibited. The grease and solids
layers combined shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the total interceptor liquid depth.
(J) Increasing the use of water or in any other manner attempting to dilute a discharge as a way of
achieving compliance with these regulations is prohibited. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-8: FOG CONTROL REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Every FSE is required at the time of construction, remodel, and/or change in operations to install,
operate and maintain a grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of
this chapter, subject to the waiver provisions of section 7-5-13 of this chapter. The grease
interceptor installed shall be adequate to separate and remove FOG contained in wastewater from
the FSE prior to discharge to the public sewer system as determined by the most current edition of
the California plumbing code. Fixtures, equipment and drain lines located in the food preparation
and cleanup areas of an FSE shall be connected to the grease interceptor. Dishwashers shall not
be connected to the grease interceptor.
(B) Compliance shall be established as follows:
1. New Construction Of FSEs: New construction of any FSE shall include complete installation of a
grease interceptor prior to commencing discharges of wastewater to the public sewer, unless a
waiver is obtained in accordance with section 7-5-13 of this chapter.
2. Existing FSEs:
(a) Any existing FSE, which has caused or contributed to grease related blockage in the public
sewer, has one or more sewer laterals connected to pipelines on the city's "hot spot" list and/or
has contributed significant FOG to the public sewer, shall be deemed to have reasonable
potential to adversely impact the public sewer and shall be required to install a grease
interceptor within one hundred eighty (180) days following issuance of written notification by
the director.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 341/710
(b) Any existing FSE or FSE that changes ownership or that undergoes remodeling and/or a
"change in operations", as defined in this chapter, shall be required to install a grease
interceptor or to obtain a waiver in accordance with section 7-5-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 1646,
5-8-2012)
7-5-9: COMMERCIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTIES:
Any owner, or official designee, of a commercial and/or institutional property where one or more FSEs
are located shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of the grease interceptor(s)
serving the FSEs that are located on that property, as required by this chapter. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-10: GREASE INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Any FSE required by this chapter to provide FOG control shall install, operate, and maintain an
approved type and adequately sized grease interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the
objectives of this chapter.
(B) Grease interceptor design, construction, sizing and installation shall conform to the most current
edition of the California plumbing code. Grease interceptors shall have a minimum of two (2)
compartments.
(C) The grease interceptor shall be installed at a location where it shall be at all times easily accessible
for inspection, cleaning, and removal of accumulated grease.
(D) An access manhole, with a minimum diameter of twenty four inches (24"), shall be provided over
each grease interceptor chamber and each sanitary tee within the interceptor. The access
manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and be designed and maintained to prevent the
entry of groundwater or stormwater runoff. The manholes shall also have readily removable covers
to facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling activities.
(E) All grease interceptors are required to have grease retention fittings as designed for proper
function. Any interceptor that does not have grease retention fittings shall be repaired and/or
retrofitted with appropriate grease retention fittings.
(F) No FOG that has accumulated in a grease interceptor shall be discharged into any sewer lateral or
public sewer. In addition, FOG shall not be transferred to or disposed of in a storm drain, public right
of way, or onto the surface of any street, sidewalk, landscaping area or parking area.
(G) The required maintenance frequency for every FSE with a grease interceptor shall be determined
by the director pursuant to the following criteria and procedures:
1. All grease interceptors shall be maintained in efficient operating condition by periodic removal of
the full contents of the interceptor, which includes wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating
materials, sludge and solids.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 342/710
2. Grease interceptors shall be fully pumped out and cleaned once every three (3) months or when
the combined FOG and solids accumulation in the grease interceptor equals twenty five percent
(25%) of the design hydraulic depth of the grease interceptor, whichever occurs first. The purpose
of the twenty five percent (25%) rule is to ensure that the minimum hydraulic retention time and
required available hydraulic volume are maintained to effectively intercept and retain FOG from
being discharged to the public sewer system.
3. If the grease interceptor, at any time, contains FOG and solids accumulation exceeding the
requirements described in subsection (G)2 of this section, the FSE shall be required by the
director to have the grease interceptor pumped and cleaned as soon as possible, but in no case
more than seventy two (72) hours following issuance of an order to clean by the director, unless
otherwise specified by the director.
4. The director may require any FSE with a grease interceptor to submit data and information
necessary to establish the required maintenance frequency of the grease interceptor.
5. The director may change the required maintenance frequency at any time to reflect changes in
actual operating conditions when sufficient data has been obtained and validated to warrant a
different frequency based on the requirements described in subsection (G)2 of this section or
other guidelines adopted by the city pursuant to the FOG control program. The required
maintenance frequency may increase or decrease based on the actual generation of FOG from
the FSE but shall not be less frequent than once every three (3) months unless specific written
authorization from the director is obtained.
(H) Wastewater, accumulated FOG, floating materials, sludge/solids, and other materials removed from
the grease interceptor shall be transported by a licensed waste hauler to an approved recycling or
disposal site in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and/or local laws. FSEs shall obtain
and maintain a copy of the waste hauler's documentation which shall include:
1. Name of the hauling company;
2. Name and signature of the operator performing the pump out;
3. Documentation of a full pump out indicating the total volume of water and FOG removed in
gallons;
4. Documentation of the level by percentage of the combined FOG and solids accumulation in the
interceptor in order to determine compliance with the twenty five percent rule;
5. Documentation regarding whether repairs to the grease interceptor are required;
6. Identification of the facility where the waste hauler has transported the waste.
(I) The director may direct city staff or a city contractor to pump and clean an FSE's grease interceptor
if the FSE has failed to comply with the terms of this chapter. The FSE jointly and severally with the
property owner shall be responsible for any and all expenses of the city in undertaking such work
and such expenses are deemed a debt of the owner of the pertinent FSE and the property owner to
the city, enforceable and collectible as provided by law.
(J) Abandoned grease interceptors shall be immediately emptied and filled by the property owner with
a suitable material as required for abandoned septic tanks as specified in the most current edition of
the California plumbing code. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 343/710
7-5-11: FACILITIES AND DRAWING SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
Upon request by the director:
(A) Any FSE and/or property owner may be required to submit to the city two (2) copies of facility site
plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, detail drawings showing all sewer locations and
connections, and schematic drawings of grease interceptors, FOG control devices or other FOG
control equipment and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. The submittal shall be in a
form and content acceptable to the director for review of the existing or proposed grease control
device, monitoring facilities, metering facilities, and operating procedures. The review of the plans
and procedures shall in no way relieve the FSE of the responsibility of modifying the facilities or
procedures in the future as necessary to produce an acceptable discharge, and to meet the
requirements of this chapter or the requirements of any other regulatory agency.
(B) The director may require the drawings be prepared by a California registered civil, chemical,
mechanical, or electrical engineer. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-12: RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS:
The FSE and the property owner shall be required to maintain on the FSE premises copies of all
documentation required in this chapter for no less than three (3) years. The FSE and the property
owner shall, upon request, make the documentation readily available for inspection at any time to the
director, any inspector and/or enforcement officer and the public. Required documentation shall
include:
(A) A record or logbook of grease interceptor and/or grease control device cleaning and maintenance
practices and activities;
(B) A record or logbook of kitchen BMPs being implemented, including employee training;
(C) Copies of waste hauling records and manifests for grease interceptor contents and waste oil
disposal and recycling;
(D) Records of solids accumulation in the grease interceptor to determine compliance with the twenty
five percent (25%) rule;
(E) Records of all sampling data;
(F) Records of any spills and/or cleaning of the sewer lateral or public sewer;
(G) Any other information necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-13: WAIVER OF GREASE INTERCEPTOR REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 344/710
(A) Waiver: Subject to the limitations contained in subsections (B) and (C) of this section, the director
may grant a conditional waiver of the requirement to install a grease interceptor and remove
existing food grinders.
(B) Negligible FOG: The director may grant for new construction, including remodels, a conditional
waiver to any FSE and/or property owner that the director determines to have negligible FOG
discharge and insignificant impact to the public sewer system. Notwithstanding the granting of a
conditional waiver however, the FSE or property owner may nonetheless be required to provide
space and plumbing segregation for future installation of a grease interceptor. In making the
determination as to whether to grant the conditional waiver, the director shall make all of the
following findings:
1. The quantity of FOG discharge as measured or indicated by the size of the FSE based on
kitchen ventilation requirements, water usage, menu, seating capacity, number of meals served,
amount of on site consumption of prepared food, number of plumbing fixtures and other
conditions does not indicate that the FSE will materially contribute to existing or potential FOG
discharges.
2. The FSE does not appear to be a significant contributor of FOG into the sewer system, which is
based on an inspection of the property or sampling of FOG discharged from the FSE to the sewer
system.
3. The FSE has adopted and implemented adequate BMPs and has no recent history of
noncompliance with the city's FOG related regulations and requirements.
4. The size, grade and condition of the sewer lines serving the FSE do not indicate that the FSE
has discharged an excessive amount of FOG in the sewer, and the history of maintenance,
blockages and SSOs in the public sewer system lines receiving flow from the FSE do not deviate
substantially from those experienced in other adjacent sewer lines.
5. There is no reason to believe that the operations of the FSE will change in the foreseeable future
in a manner that may significantly increase the amount of FOG the FSE will discharge.
6. There is no other condition reasonably related to the generation of FOG discharges into the
sewer by the FSE that will, in the sound judgment of the director, warrant the denial of the
conditional waiver in the interest of protecting the public health, safety and welfare.
(C) Installation Not Feasible: Where the installation of a grease interceptor in an existing structure is
not feasible, an FSE and/or property owner may be granted a conditional waiver of the grease
interceptor requirement upon the payment of a grease disposal mitigation fee as described in
section 7-5-18 of this chapter. Additional requirements may also be imposed to mitigate the
discharge of FOG into the public sewer system. The director's determination to grant the waiver
upon the payment of a grease disposal mitigation fee will be based upon one or more of the
following findings:
1. There is inadequate space for installation and/or maintenance of a grease interceptor;
2. There is inadequate slope for gravity flow between kitchen plumbing fixtures and the proposed
grease interceptor and/or between the proposed grease interceptor and the lateral or the public
sewer system;
3. Any other condition reasonably related to the installation, operation, maintenance and/or
inspection of a grease interceptor, which makes installation and/or maintenance of a grease
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 345/710
interceptor infeasible.
(D) Application For Conditional Waiver Of Requirement For Grease Interceptor: An FSE or property
owner may submit to the director an application for conditional waiver from the grease interceptor
requirement. The party applying for the conditional waiver bears the burden of demonstrating that
the installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible or otherwise required. A waiver may be issued
upon determination by the director that reasons are sufficient to justify such a waiver, as provided in
subsections (B) and (C) of this section.
(E) Terms And Conditions Of Waiver: The conditional waiver shall contain the terms and conditions that
serve as the basis for its issuance. A waiver may be revoked by the director at any time upon his or
her determination that any of the terms or conditions for its issuance have not been satisfied or if
the conditions upon which the waiver was based have changed so that the justification for the
waiver no longer exists. The waiver shall be valid so long as the FSE remains in compliance with
the terms and conditions, until the expiration date specified in the waiver, or until the conditional
waiver is revoked.
(F) Revocation Of Conditional Waiver Of The Requirement To Install A Grease Interceptor: The director
may revoke any conditional waiver of the requirement to install a grease interceptor, which also
revokes the waiver to remove existing food grinders, granted pursuant to this section, subject to the
procedures and limitations provided in this subsection.
1. Should the director determine that, due to changed circumstances or failure to comply with the
terms or conditions imposed upon the issuance of the conditional waiver, a conditional waiver that
was previously issued and remains valid should be revoked, the director shall provide notice by
regular mail to the owner of the affected FSE and the property owner no less than thirty (30) days
prior to the proposed effective date of the revocation. The notice shall provide an explanation of
the facts and circumstances that the director has determined warrant revocation of the conditional
waiver and an opportunity to respond in writing to the director with information and evidence to
justify the continuation of the conditional waiver in accordance with its terms and conditions.
2. Prior to making the final determination to revoke a conditional waiver the director shall review and
consider the written information provided pursuant to subsection (F)1 of this section.
3. The determination of the director to revoke a conditional waiver granted pursuant to this section
shall be set forth in writing provided to the owner of the affected FSE and the property owner by
regular mail, and shall be based on the director's reasonable determination that one or more of
the following circumstances exists or has occurred:
(a) The owner of the affected FSE and/or the property owner has failed to abide by any term or
condition imposed upon the conditional waiver;
(b) One or more of the findings made by the director pursuant to subsection (B) or (C) of this
section, due to changes in the operation of the FSE, changes in the condition, use or available
capacity of the sewers serving the FSE or other changed circumstances, are no longer true; or
(c) A change in law bearing upon the use or operation of the city's sanitary sewer system requires
the revocation of the conditional waiver. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-14: FACILITIES MONITORING AND RIGHT OF ENTRY REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 346/710
(A) The director may require the FSE or property owner to construct and maintain in proper operating
condition at their sole expense, flow monitoring, water quality monitoring and/or sampling facilities.
(B) The location of the monitoring facilities shall be representative of actual discharge conditions.
(C) FSEs and/or owners of premises where wastewater is generated and discharged to the sewer
system shall allow the director and designees immediate and safe access to all parts of the
wastewater generating and disposal facilities for the purposes of inspection and sampling during all
times the FSE is open, operating, or any other reasonable time.
(D) The FSE or property owner shall, upon request, submit to the director waste analysis plans,
contingency plans, and other necessary information to verify compliance with these regulations.
(E) Testing procedures for waste constituents and characteristics shall be as provided in title 40 code of
federal regulations part 136.
(F) In the event of an emergency involving an actual or imminent SSO, the director and designees may
access adjoining businesses or properties that share a public sewer system with an FSE in order to
prevent or remediate the actual or imminent SSO. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-15: MONITORING AND REPORTING CONDITIONS:
(A) The director may require periodic reporting of the status of implementation of kitchen BMPs, in
accordance with the FOG control program.
(B) If, following an inspection of the FSE, it is apparent that the FSE has not used or maintained its
grease interceptor or grease removal device, has failed to properly implement kitchen BMPs, or has
failed to abide by any condition imposed upon a conditional waiver granted pursuant to section 7-5-
13 of this chapter, the director may require visual camera inspection at the sole expense of the FSE
or property owner to observe the actual conditions of the sewer lateral serving the property and
sewer lines downstream.
(C) The director may require reports for self-monitoring of wastewater constituents and FOG
characteristics from the FSE or property owner needed for determining compliance with any
conditions or requirements as specified in this chapter. Monitoring reports of the analyses of
wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics shall be in a manner and form approved by the
director and shall be submitted upon request of the director. Failure by the FSE or property owner to
perform any required monitoring, or to submit monitoring reports required by the director constitutes
a violation of this chapter and shall be cause for the city to initiate all necessary tasks and analyses
to determine the wastewater constituents and FOG characteristics for compliance with any
conditions and requirements specified in this chapter. The FSE and property owner shall be
responsible for any and all costs and expenses of the city in undertaking such monitoring analyses
and preparation of reports and such costs and expenses are deemed a debt of the owner of the
pertinent FSE and the property owner to the city, enforceable and collectible as provided by law.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 347/710
(D) Other reports may be required by the director, such as compliance schedule progress reports, FOG
control monitoring reports, grease interceptor and grease removal device operation and
maintenance reports, and any other reports deemed reasonably appropriate by the director to
ensure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-16: INSPECTIONS AND SAMPLING CONDITIONS:
(A) The director may inspect and sample or order the inspection and sampling of the wastewater
discharges of any FSE to ascertain whether the intent of these regulations is being met and the
FSE is complying with all requirements. The FSE shall allow access to the FSE premises, during
normal business hours, for purposes of inspecting the FSE's grease control devices or interceptor,
reviewing the manifests, receipts and invoices relating to the cleaning, maintenance and inspection
of the grease control devices or interceptor.
(B) The director shall have the right to place or order the placement on the FSE's property, or other
locations as determined by the director, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or
metering operations. Where an FSE or property owner has security measures in force, the FSE or
property owner shall make necessary arrangements so that the director and/or an inspector shall be
permitted to enter without delay for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.
(C) In order for the director to determine the wastewater characteristics of the FSE for purposes of
determining compliance with this chapter, the FSE shall make available for inspection and copying
by the director, an inspector, an enforcement officer and/or service personnel, all notices, monitoring
reports, waste manifests, and records including, but not limited to, those related to wastewater
generation and wastewater disposal. All such records shall be kept by the FSE a minimum of three
(3) years. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-17: PURPOSE OF CHARGES AND FEES:
It is the purpose of section 7-5-18 of this chapter to provide for the recovery of costs from FSEs and
owners of property containing FSEs for the implementation of the program established in this chapter.
(Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-18: CHARGES AND FEES:
(A) Adoption: The city shall adopt charges and fees by resolution which may include:
1. Fees for reimbursement of the costs to set up, implement and operate the city's FOG program;
2. Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this
chapter.
(B) On Site Sampling And Analyses: Costs incurred by the city for, or as a result of, any and all
required on site sampling and analysis are deemed a debt of the owner of the pertinent FSE and
the property owner to the city, enforceable and collectible as provided by law.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 348/710
(C) Closed Circuit Television Inspection: Costs incurred by the city for closed circuit television
inspection to observe the actual conditions of an FSE's sewer lateral and sewer lines downstream
are deemed a debt of the owner of the pertinent FSE and the property owner to the city, enforceable
and collectible as provided by law.
(D) Noncompliance Charge: Any FSE and/or property owner determined to be in noncompliance with
the terms and conditions specified in any provision of this chapter may be required to pay a
noncompliance charge. The purpose of the noncompliance charge is to reimburse the city for costs
of additional inspection and follow up, sampling, monitoring, laboratory analysis, treatment,
disposal, and administrative processing incurred as a result of the noncompliance, and shall be in
addition to and not in lieu of any penalties as may be assessed pursuant to section 7-5-25 of this
chapter. Noncompliance charges shall be in the amount reasonably determined by the director.
(E) Grease Disposal Mitigation Fee:
1. Any FSE and/or property owner subject to the provisions of subsection 7-5-13(C) of this chapter
shall be required to pay an annual grease disposal mitigation fee to reimburse the city for the
costs of increased maintenance of the public sewer system as a result of the FSE's inability to
adequately remove FOG from its wastewater discharge. This section shall not be interpreted to
allow a new FSE or an existing FSE undergoing remodeling and/or a change in operations to
operate without an approved grease interceptor unless the director has determined that it is
impossible or impracticable to install and/or operate a grease interceptor for the subject facility
pursuant to the provisions of section 7-5-13 of this chapter.
2. The grease disposal mitigation fee for each FSE shall be based on the estimated annual
increased cost of maintaining the public sewer system for inspection and removal of FOG and
other viscous or solidifying agents attributable to the FSE resulting from the lack of a grease
interceptor. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-19: FALSIFYING INFORMATION OR TAMPERING WITH PROCESS:
It is unlawful to make any false statement, representation, record, report, plan or other document that is
filed with the city and/or the director, or to tamper with or knowingly render inoperable any grease
control device, monitoring device or method or access point required under this chapter. (Ord. 1646, 5-
8-2012)
7-5-20: NOTIFICATION OF SPILL:
(A) In the event an FSE or property owner is unable to comply with any provision of this chapter due to
a breakdown of equipment, accidents, or human error or the FSE or property owner has reasonable
opportunity to know that their discharge will exceed the discharge provisions of this chapter, the
FSE and property owner shall immediately notify the public works department by telephone. If
material is discharged by an FSE to the public sewer system that the owner of the FSE and/or the
property owner believes or reasonably should believe has the potential to cause or result in an
imminent sewer blockage or SSO, the FSE and property owner shall immediately notify the public
works department.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 349/710
(B) Confirmation of this notification shall be made in writing to the director postmarked no later than two
(2) calendar days from the date of the incident. The written notification shall state the date of the
incident, to whom the FSE and/or property owner provided notification, the reasons for the
discharge or spill, what steps were taken to immediately correct the problem, and what steps are
being taken to prevent the problem from recurring.
(C) Such notification shall not relieve the FSE or the property owner of any expense, loss, damage or
other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage or loss to the city or any other damage or
loss to persons or property; nor shall such notification relieve the FSE or the property owner of any
fees, charges or other liability which may be imposed by these regulations or other applicable law.
(Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-21: NOTIFICATION OF PLANNED CHANGES:
The FSE and the property owner shall notify the public works department at least sixty (60) days prior
to any facility expansion or remodeling, process modifications that may result in new or substantially
increased FOG discharges, or a change in the nature of the discharge. The FSE and the property
owner shall notify the public works department in writing of the proposed expansion or remodeling and
shall submit any information requested by the public works department for evaluation of the effect of
such expansion or remodeling on the FSE's FOG discharge to the public sewer system. (Ord. 1646, 5-
8-2012)
7-5-22: HARMFUL DISCHARGE; IMMEDIATE SUSPENSION OR TERMINATION OF
WASTEWATER SERVICE:
(A) The city may immediately suspend or terminate the wastewater service of an FSE and property
owner when such suspension or termination is necessary in order to stop an actual or imminently
threatened discharge that is in violation of law, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. An imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of people or the environment;
2. An obstruction to the wastewater collection system; or
3. Any circumstance that is likely to cause a violation of any relevant permit or waste discharge
requirement of the city, or any applicable law, unless immediate action is taken to prevent its
occurrence.
(B) Any person notified of a suspension or termination of wastewater service shall immediately stop or
eliminate all discharges to the public sewer system. In the event of a failure of the person to comply
voluntarily with the suspension or termination order, the director shall take such steps as he or she
deems necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize
damage to the environment, collection system and/or the regional wastewater control facility. The
director may reinstate the wastewater service only upon proof that the circumstance that caused the
suspension or termination of wastewater service has been adequately addressed and the
circumstance no longer presents a danger to the environment or to the city's wastewater system. A
detailed written statement submitted by the FSE and the property owner describing the cause of the
harmful discharge and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to
the director within fifteen (15) days of the effective date of the suspension or termination. (Ord.
1646, 5-8-2012)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 350/710
7-5-23: FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH FOG REGULATIONS; SUSPENSION AND/OR
TERMINATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE:
(A) In accordance with the procedures and limitations provided in subsection 7-5-22(B) of this chapter,
the director may suspend and/or terminate wastewater service to an FSE and property owner when
the director determines that the FSE has failed to comply with the requirements of this chapter, with
respect to any of the following particulars:
1. Failed to comply with the terms and conditions of a compliance schedule order;
2. Knowingly provided a false statement, representation, record, report, or other document to the
city and/or the director;
3. Refused to provide records, reports, plans, or other documents required by the city and/or the
director to determine compliance with this chapter;
4. Falsified, tampered with or knowingly rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or sample
collection method;
5. Refused reasonable access to the FSE for the purpose of inspection and monitoring;
6. Failed to make timely payment of all amounts owed to the city imposed pursuant to this chapter;
7. Discharged FOG that caused an obstruction or sewer blockage in the public sewer system or an
SSO;
8. Violated grease interceptor maintenance requirements or any provision of this chapter pertaining
to maintenance and operation of any grease interceptor or grease control device;
9. Failed to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(B) For the purpose of making the determination of noncompliance pursuant to subsection (A) of this
section, the director may rely upon any evidence or information available and may gather other
necessary information as needed through imposition of reasonable sampling and inspection
requirements conducted at a time, location, manner, and frequency determined at the reasonable
discretion of the director. The inspections may include, but are not limited to, inspection of the
grease control device, grease interceptor and associated manifests and documentation, or analysis
of a grab or composite sample of the wastewater discharged from the FSE. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-24: COMPLIANCE TIME SCHEDULE IN LIEU OF SUSPENSION OR
TERMINATION OF WASTEWATER SERVICE:
(A) Upon determination that an FSE is in noncompliance with the terms and conditions specified in any
provision of this chapter, or needs to construct and/or acquire and install a grease control device or
grease interceptor, the director may require the FSE to enter into a compliance time schedule on
terms and conditions specified by the director.
(B) The compliance time schedule may contain terms and conditions including, but not limited to,
requirements for installation of a grease control device, submittal of drawings or reports, audit of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 351/710
waste hauling records, BMPs and waste minimization practices, payment of fees, or other
provisions to ensure compliance with this chapter.
(C) If compliance is not achieved in accordance with the terms and conditions of a compliance time
schedule during its term, the director may issue an order suspending or terminating wastewater
service pursuant to section 7-5-23 of this chapter. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-25: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
(A) Violations of this chapter are misdemeanors as provided in subsection 1-4-5(A) of this code.
(B) Any FSE or property owner in violation of this chapter, or the orders, rules and regulations issued
under this chapter may be ordered by the director to cease and desist operations until the violation
is cured. Continuance of operations after notice to cease and desist has been furnished to the FSE
and/or property owner shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor as provided in subsection 1-4-5(A) of
this code. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(C) The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the orders, rules and regulations issued
under this chapter, or the doing of any act prohibited or the failure or omission to do any act
required by this chapter, or the orders, rules and regulations issued under this chapter, is a public
nuisance and may be enjoined though a civil action brought by the city attorney.
(D) If any violation of this chapter, or the orders, rules and regulations issued under this chapter,
causes damage to the public sewer system and/or the regional wastewater control facility, the FSE
jointly and severally with the property owner causing such damage shall be liable therefor and the
cost thereof shall be deemed a debt to the city, enforceable and collectible as provided by law.
(E) To remedy violations of this chapter, the director is authorized to issue notices of violation,
administrative citations and impose administrative civil penalties pursuant to title 1 of this code.
(F) The remedies and provisions of this section are cumulative, and are in addition to any other remedy
or provision of law. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-2012)
7-5-26: APPEALS:
(A) Any FSE or property owner affected by a decision, action, or determination, including suspension,
revocation, refusal or termination of wastewater service, cease and desist order, or imposition of
civil penalties issued by the director, or any other action of the director in interpreting or
implementing the provisions of this chapter, may file with the director a written request for
reconsideration within ten (10) days of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail
the facts supporting the request for reconsideration. The director shall provide a written decision
regarding the request for reconsideration within thirty (30) days following the filing of the request for
reconsideration. The director shall serve the written decision upon the affected FSE and/or property
owner by either personal service, facsimile, overnight courier or regular mail.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 352/710
(B) Any FSE or property owner aggrieved by the decision of the director regarding a request for
reconsideration specified in this section may appeal said decision and request an administrative
hearing and decision in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 1-4A-61, "Judicial
Review", of this code. Appeal shall be through judicial review of the final administrative decision by
filing a petition for a writ of mandate with the superior court in accordance with the provisions of
sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the California Code Of Civil Procedure. Such writs must be filed
within ninety (90) calendar days from the date of the final administrative decision. (Ord. 1646, 5-8-
2012)
Chapter 6
MOSQUITO CONTROL
7-6-1: STANDING POOLS OF WATER PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit, within the limits of the city, any collection of standing water in
which mosquitoes breed or are likely to breed, unless the collection of water is treated so as effectually
to prevent such breeding. Any collection of water considered by this section shall be held to be those
contained in ditches, pools, ponds, excavations, holes, depressions, open cesspools, privy vaults,
fountains, cisterns, tanks, shallow wells, barrels, troughs (except horse troughs in frequent use), urns,
cans, boxes, bottles, tubs, buckets, defective house roof gutters, tanks of flush closets or other similar
water containers. (Ord. 757, 6-15-1953)
7-6-2: TREATMENT OF WATER:
The method of treatment of any collection of water, such as specified in this section, directed toward
the prevention of breeding of mosquitoes shall be approved by the accredited health officer and may be
any one or more of the following:
(A) Screening with wire netting of at least sixteen (16) meshes to the inch each way or with any other
material which will effectually prevent the ingress or egress of mosquitoes.
(B) Complete emptying every seven (7) days of unscreened containers together with their thorough
drying or cleaning.
(C) Using a larvicide approved and applied under the direction of the health officer.
(D) Covering completely the surface of the water with kerosene, petroleum, or paraffin oil once every
seven (7) days.
(E) Cleaning and keeping sufficiently free of vegetable growth and other obstructions, and stocking with
mosquito destroying fish.
(F) Filling or draining to the satisfaction of the health officer or his accredited representative.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 353/710
(G) Proper disposal by removal or destruction of tin cans, tin boxes, broken or empty bottles, and
similar articles likely to hold water. (Ord. 757, 6-15-1953)
7-6-3: FAILURE TO PREVENT MOSQUITO BREEDING:
The natural presence of mosquito larvae in standing or running water shall be evidence that
mosquitoes are breeding there, and failure to prevent such breeding within three (3) days after notice
by the health officer or his authorized representative, shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord.
757, 6-15-1953)
7-6-4: ABATEMENT BY HEALTH OFFICER; LIEN:
Should the person responsible for conditions giving rise to the breeding of mosquitoes fail or refuse to
take necessary measures to prevent the same, within three (3) days after due notice has been given to
them, the health officer is hereby authorized to do so, and all necessary cost incurred by him for this
purpose shall be a charge against the property owner or other person offending as the case may be.
(Ord. 757, 6-15-1953)
7-6-5: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR ENFORCEMENT:
For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, the health officer may at all reasonable
times enter upon any premises within his jurisdiction; and any person charged with any of the duties
imposed by this chapter failing within the time designated by this chapter or within the time stated in the
notice of the health officer, as the case maybe, to perform such duties, or to carry out the necessary
measures to the satisfaction of the health officer, shall be deemed guilty of a separate violation of this
chapter. (Ord. 757, 6-15-1953)
Chapter 7
PEAR PSYLLA CONTROL
7-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless
the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
INFESTED WITH PEAR PSYLLA: Evidence shows that pear psylla is present.
PEAR PSYLLA: The insect designated as Psylla pyricola. (Ord. 804, 5-5-1958)
7-7-2: NOTICE TO CONTROL:
The agricultural commissioner of the county, whenever he deems it necessary, may enter and make an
inspection of any premises, tree or plant in the city, and if found infested with pear psylla, he may notify
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 354/710
in writing the record owner of the premises, tree or plant, that the same is infested with pear psylla, and
require the person to eradicate, destroy or control, to the satisfaction of the agricultural commissioner,
the pear psylla within a reasonable time to be specified in the notice.
The notice may be served upon the record owner of the premises, tree or plant infested with pear
psylla, in the same manner as a summons in a civil action, if the person can be found within the city. If
no person upon whom service can be had can be found within the city, after diligent search, then the
notice may be served by posting copies of the same in three (3) conspicuous places upon the property
or premises, and by mailing a copy thereof to the owner at his last known address or to him at the
county seat of the county wherein the property is situated, if his address is not known and cannot, by
exercise of reasonable diligence, be ascertained. (Ord. 804, 5-5-1958)
7-7-3: ABATEMENT OF NEGLECTED PLANTS:
The county agricultural commissioner is hereby designated the officer authorized to abate as public
nuisances any neglected or abandoned plants or crops which, because of the existence thereon of
pests, or because of other conditions, constitute a menace to the agriculture of any county, district, or
vicinity, or which are host plants of or provide a favorable and likely harbor for pests, including pear
psylla, as provided in section 141 of the California Agricultural Code and section 3494 of the California
Penal Code. (Ord. 804, 5-5-1958)
7-7-4: VIOLATION:
Every record owner of any premises, tree or plant infested with pear psylla who has been served with
the written notice as provided in section 7-7-2 of this chapter who refuses, fails or neglects to eradicate,
destroy or control, to the satisfaction of the agricultural commissioner, the pear psylla within the time
specified in the notice is subject to penalty section 1-4-5 of this code. (Ord. 1355, 5-8-1984)
Chapter 8
NUISANCES1
7-8-1: PUBLIC NUISANCE DEFINED:
A "nuisance" is a thing, act, occupation or use of property which:
(A) Shall annoy, injure or endanger the safety, health, comfort or repose of the public.
(B) Shall unlawfully interfere with, obstruct or tend to obstruct or render dangerous for passage a public
park, square, street, alley or highway.
(C) Shall offend public decency.
(D) Shall in any way render the public insecure in life or in use of property. (1962 Code)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 355/710
7-8-2: NUISANCES AFFECTING HEALTH:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting health:
(A) Unwholesome Food: All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public.
(B) Diseased Animals: All diseased animals running at large.
(C) Stagnant Water: All ponds or pools of stagnant water.
(D) Dead Animals: Carcasses of animals not buried or destroyed within twenty four (24) hours after
death.
(E) Accumulations: Accumulations of manure or rubbish.
(F) Flytight Cans And Vaults: Privy vaults and garbage cans which are not flytight.
(G) Pollution: The pollution of any public or private well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or body of water
by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances.
(H) Weeds: All noxious weeds and other rank growths upon public or private property.
(I) Contagious Diseases: All public exposure of persons having a contagious disease.
(J) Public Drinking Cup: The use of a common public drinking cup or roller towel.
(K) Medicine Samples: The distribution of samples of medicine or drugs unless such samples are
placed in the hands of an adult person.
(L) Other Nuisances: All other acts, omissions of acts, occupations and uses of property which are
deemed by the board of health to be a nuisance to the health of the inhabitants of this city or any
considerable number thereof.
(M) Smoke And Fumes: Dense smoke, noxious fumes, gas and soot or cinders in unreasonable
quantities. (1962 Code)
(N) Domestic Pet Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control or custody of any
domestic pet:
1. To permit or allow the pet to defecate upon the public property of the city or upon the private
property of another person without the consent of the occupant or owner of that property unless
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 356/710
the owner or the person having control or custody of the pet immediately removes the feces and
properly disposes of it;
2. To walk a pet on public property of the city or upon the private property of a person without
carrying at all times a suitable container or other suitable instrument for the removal and disposal
of feces; or
3. To fail to dispose of the container of the feces in a sanitary manner.
4. Enforcement to take effect July 1995. (Ord. 1508, 5-10-1994)
7-8-3: NUISANCES AFFECTING MORALS AND DECENCY:
The following are hereby declared to be nuisances affecting public morals and decency:
(A) All houses kept for the purpose of prostitution or promiscuous intercourse, gambling houses,
houses of ill fame and bawdy houses.
(B) All domestic animals in the act of copulation exposed to public view.
(C) All places where intoxicating liquor is manufactured, sold, bartered or given away in violation of law.
(D) All indecent or obscene pictures, books, pamphlets, magazines and newspapers.
(E) Betting, bookmaking, prizefighting and all apparatus used in such occupations in violation of law.
(1962 Code)
7-8-4: NUISANCES AFFECTING PEACE AND SAFETY:
The following are declared to be nuisances affecting public peace and safety:
(A) All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent persons from having a clear view
of traffic approaching an intersection from cross streets in sufficient time to bring a motor vehicle
driven at a reasonable speed to a full stop before the intersection is reached.
(B) All limbs of trees which are less than eight feet (8') above the surface of any street or sidewalk.
(C) All wires which are strung less than fifteen feet (15') above the surface of the ground, except
clotheslines.
(D) All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner or in any
amount in violation of any law.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 357/710
(E) All use or display of fireworks in violation of law.
(F) All unnecessary noise and annoying vibrations.
(G) All buildings and alterations to buildings made or erected within the fire limits as established in this
code in violation of the regulations concerning manner and materials of construction.
(H) Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of streets, alleys, sidewalks
or public grounds except under such conditions as are provided by law.
(I) Radio aerials strung in any manner in violation of any law.
(J) Any use of property abutting upon a public street or sidewalk or any use of a public street or
sidewalk which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and the free use of the
streets and sidewalks.
(K) All hanging signs, awnings and other similar structures over the streets or sidewalks, or situated as
to endanger public safety, or constructed and maintained in violation of the provisions of this code
pertaining thereto.
(L) The allowing of rainwater, ice or snow to fall from any building or structure upon any street or
sidewalk or to flow across any sidewalk.
(M) All dangerous unguarded machinery in any public place or so situated or operated on private
property as to attract the public.
(N) All use of stationary loudspeakers in any part of the city in such manner as to annoy any of the
inhabitants of the city.
(O) All irrigation water permitted to run in the streets or alleys of the city except such as is confined in
irrigation ditches or flumes.
(P) All other conditions or things which are liable to cause injury to the person or property of anyone.
(1962 Code)
7-8-5: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Any person who shall knowingly cause or create a nuisance or permit any nuisance to be created or
placed upon or to remain upon any premises owned or occupied by him or them is subject to penalty
section 1-4-5 of this code. (Ord. 1355, 5-8-1984)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 358/710
Chapter 9
BEETLE INFESTED AND DEAD TREES
7-9-1: INSPECTING DEAD OR INFECTED TREES:
The city of Placerville and the United States forest service, through authorized employees, may go
upon private property in the city of Placerville for the purpose of inspecting dead or beetle infested
trees if there is reason to believe that there are either dead or beetle infested trees on the premises.
(Ord. 1069, 2-25-1975)
7-9-2: NOTIFYING OWNER OF INFECTED TREES:
If upon inspection it is determined that there are either dead or beetle infested trees upon the premises
which in the opinion of the person making the inspection should either be eradicated, destroyed or
controlled in order to eliminate a dangerous condition and spread of the infestation, then the recorded
owner of the premises should be notified in writing to eradicate or destroy the infested or dead trees or
to control the beetle infestation within a reasonable period of time not to exceed thirty (30) days. The
written notice should be sent to the recorded owner of the property at the last known address of the
property owner on file with the assessor of El Dorado County. (Ord. 1069, 2-25-1975)
7-9-3: FAILURE TO ERADICATE:
If the property owner fails to eradicate or destroy the infested or dead trees or to control the beetle
infestation as requested by the city of Placerville, then the city of Placerville may have this done by a
private, professional tree surgeon and the property owner shall be obligated to pay the city the amount
charged by the private, professional tree surgeon in eradicating or destroying the tree or controlling the
infestation. (Ord. 1069, 2-25-1975)
7-9-4: CITY TO INSPECT AND ADVISE ONLY:
The city of Placerville, through its employees, is not going upon the property in order to eradicate,
destroy or control the infested trees but is only going upon the premises to make inspections or to
consult with or advise the property owner with respect to the dispensation of dead trees or the control
of infested trees. (Ord. 1069, 2-25-1975)
Chapter 10
PUBLIC SPAS
7-10-1: NAME:
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the CITY OF PLACERVILLE PUBLIC SPA
chapter. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 359/710
7-10-2: PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of licensing and regulating public spas. The city council of the
city finds the use of whirlpools, spas or hot tubs when rented, used for a fee, or where use is allowed
as an amenity to another enterprise, can readily allow disease transmission if not operated in a safe
and sanitary manner and that operation in an unsafe and unsanitary manner is detrimental to the
health and welfare of the people and is a public nuisance. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-3: DEFINITIONS:
DISINFECTING OR SANITIZING AGENT: Chlorine in a "free available state" or other equally effective
compound approved for use by the health officer.
HEALTH OFFICER: The El Dorado County health officer or his deputies to include registered
sanitarians.
PUBLIC SPA: An artificial basin, container or tank constructed of impervious material and used, or
intended to be used, for recreative for hire bathing that incorporates water jets or an aeration system.
Spas used under medical supervision or the supervision of a licensed physical therapist, and of a size
only to be used by an individual, are exempt. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-4: PERMIT:
No person shall operate a public spa without a valid health permit issued by the El Dorado County
health department. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-5: SUBMISSION OF PLANS, SPECIFICATIONS AND SUPPORTING DATA:
No person shall begin construction, reconstruction or alteration of a public spa without first submitting
(in triplicate) plans, specifications and such other information as may be required to determine if the
proposed facilities comply with these regulations to the city for review and written approval in advance
of the issuance of any building or plumbing permit or construction. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-6: SHOWER AND TOILET FACILITIES:
Showers and toilets shall be clean and equipped in accordance with the California Administrative
Code, title 17, section 7781. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-7: MATERIALS OF SPA:
The materials used for the spa shall not be adversely affected by exposure to rain, snow, ice, sunlight,
local temperature extremes, local air pollution products and the mechanical, electrical and chemical
environment in and around spas. The materials used for the spa shell shall, in addition, be light
colored, smooth, easily cleanable and shall not be capable of cutting, pinching, puncturing or abrading
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 360/710
the users. The shell shall be at all times maintained in a safe and sanitary manner. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-
1980)
7-10-8: DIMENSIONAL DESIGN:
(A) Maximum water depth shall be four feet (4') (1.22 m) measured from the water line.
(B) The maximum depth of any seat or sitting bench shall be two feet (2') (61 cm) below the water line.
(C) There shall be at least one handrail. Steps or stairs shall be provided where depths are greater
than two feet (2') (61 cm).
(D) The deck area shall extend around the spa at least four feet (4') (1.22 m) on two (2) sides. Deck
shall be slip resistant, free from hazards and drain properly. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-9: WATER SUPPLY:
The water supply shall be from an approved potable supply and the supply shall be protected from
cross connections. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-10: INLETS AND OUTLETS:
(A) The inlets and outlets must be designed to allow for uniform circulation. Outlets, except skimmers,
on pump suction shall be covered with suitable antivortex grates that cannot be removed except
with tools, The spa shall be equipped with at least one surface skimming device.
(B) Spa outlets shall be designed so that each pumping system in the spa (filter and/or booster
systems) provides one of the following alternatives:
1. Provide two (2) outlets whose pipe diameter sizes are equal (this may be 2 outlet drains or an
outlet drain and a skimmer). The system shall be designed so that neither one of the two (2)
outlets can be cut out of the suction line by a valve or other means.
2. Provide a grate of at least one square foot.
3. Provide other approved means that guard against outlet entrapment. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-11: CIRCULATION SYSTEMS:
(A) The filter, pump, disinfection equipment and other related items shall be kept in an area accessible
at all times. This area shall be separate from the customer use area. The jet or air system shall be
separate from the filtration system. The one-half (1/2) hour "turnover" is required (30 minutes).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 361/710
(B) A means shall be provided to drain the spa which may include: bottom drains, circulatory system,
etc.
(C) All overflow shall be handled in a sanitary and safe manner so as not to create a nuisance. (Ord.
1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-12: DISINFECTANT AND CHEMICAL FEEDERS:
The disinfecting or sanitizing agent shall be, remain at or above one ppm or one milligram per liter (1
mg/l) at all times the spa is in use. The pH shall be kept between 7.2 and 7.8. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-13: TEMPERATURE:
The maximum temperature of the spa water shall be one hundred five degrees Fahrenheit (105°F)
(40.5°C). A thermostatic control for the water shall be required. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
7-10-14: MAINTENANCE AND SAFETY:
(A) The spa shall be brushed weekly and emptied at least once per month.
(B) There shall be depth markings plainly and conspicuously posted.
(C) Each spa shall be checked for pH and free chlorine residual every two (2) hours while in operation.
There shall be a complete log kept on each spa unit.
(D) A precaution sign is to be mounted adjacent to the entrance to the spa as follows:
CAUTION
1. Elderly persons and those suffering from heart disease, diabetes, high or low blood pressure
should not enter the spa.
2. Unsupervised use by children is prohibited.
3. Do not use while under the influence of alcohol, anticoagulants, antihistamines,
vasoconstrictors, vasodilators, stimulants, hypnotics, narcotics or tranquilizers.
4. Do not use alone.
5. Observe a reasonable time limit, then shower, cool down and, if you wish, return for another
brief stay. Long exposures may result in nausea, dizziness or fainting.
(E) A sign shall be posted in the immediate vicinity of the spa, stating the location of the nearest
telephone with references that emergency telephone numbers are posted at that location. Those
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 362/710
emergency numbers should include:
1. Name and phone number of nearest available police, fire and/or rescue unit.
2. Name and phone number of nearest available physician.
3. Name and phone number of nearest ambulance service.
4. Name and phone number of nearest available hospital.
(F) It is recommended the attendant be trained in first aid and CPR and have appropriate proof of
proficiency. There must be a twenty four (24) unit first aid kit on the premises. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-
1980)
7-10-15: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) The El Dorado County health officer shall enforce this chapter. The health officer shall have right of
entry at all times the public spa is open for business. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
(B) Any person who operates any public spa without a valid, unexpired and unrevoked permit issued by
the El Dorado County health department is subject to penalty section 1-4-5 of this code. (Ord. 1355,
5-8-1984)
(C) Any permit may be suspended or revoked by the health officer if there is a violation of this chapter.
The health officer shall issue and serve upon the permittee a notice setting forth in clear and
concise language the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged and informing him of
his rights to a hearing. At any time within the fifteen (15) day period after service of such notice, the
permittee may request a hearing before the health officer to show cause why his permit should not
be suspended or revoked. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) days shall be deemed a
waiver of a right to such hearing. The El Dorado County health officer may call a hearing for the
purpose of investigating any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1218, 2-12-1980)
Chapter 11
CLEAN INDOOR AIR AND HEALTH PROTECTION
7-11-1: PURPOSES:
The U.S. environmental protection agency (EPA) has determined that tobacco smoke is a major source
of indoor air pollution, and the surgeon general's 1986 report on the health consequences of
involuntary smoking concludes that exposure to tobacco smoke places healthy nonsmokers at
increased risk for developing lung cancer. Other health hazards of involuntary smoking include
respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance, decreased respiratory function,
bronchoconstriction, and brochospasm. While all members of the population are truly at increased risk
due to exposure to sidestream tobacco smoke, it constitutes a special health hazard for children, the
elderly and people with chronic lung disorders.
The surgeon general labels smoking "the largest single preventable cause of death and disability for
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 363/710
the U.S. population".
Employees subject to prolonged exposure to sidestream smoke in the workplace have been found in
scientifically conducted studies to experience a decrease in job productivity and some have been
forced to take periodic sick leave because of reactions to secondhand smoke.
Furthermore, studies have shown higher costs to the employer are associated with smoking in the
workplace due to increases in absenteeism, accidents, costs of medical care, loss of productivity, and
cleaning and maintenance requirements. A recent scientific study has reported that sidestream smoke
from tobacco may cause a significant amount of cardiovascular disease in the United States and that
the number of deaths from this cause may exceed the deaths caused by lung disease associated with
sidestream smoke. Smoking in public places and workplaces is a major cause of fires and damage to
merchandise and equipment as well as costly maintenance and repairs to furniture and fixtures.
The healthcare costs produced by smoking related ailments and diseases constitute a heavy and
avoidable financial drain on our community.
More than eighty percent (80%) of El Dorado County residents are nonsmokers, and the number of
nonsmokers is steadily increasing. Opinion surveys show that a majority of both nonsmokers and
smokers favor restrictions on smoking in public places and places of employment.
Air pollution caused by smoking is an offensive annoyance and irritant. Smoking results in serious and
significant physical discomforts of nonsmokers, and constitutes a public nuisance in public places and
workplaces.
This chapter attempts to find a compromise that allows smokers to smoke, and others to breathe
smoke free air.
This chapter is not to be interpreted as requiring restaurants or bars to provide a smoking area. (Ord.
1485, 12-10-1991)
7-11-2: AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Health and Safety Code for the purpose of
restricting and regulating smoking in public places and in places of work in order to reduce the hazards
and nuisance which smoking causes to those who are involuntarily exposed. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
7-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
BAR: An area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises
and in which the serving of food, if any, is incidental to the consumption of alcoholic drinks. When a bar
is operated within a building in conjunction with another use, such as a restaurant, only the area
utilized primarily for the consumption of alcoholic beverages shall constitute the bar. The dining area of
a restaurant utilized primarily for the serving and consumption of food shall not constitute a bar, even
though alcoholic beverages may be served therein. An establishment that serves food in the bar, and
where there are fewer seats where food is served in the bar than seats at the bar, qualifies as a bar.
COMMERCIAL ENTERPRISE: Any business entity formed for profit making purposes, including
professional corporations and other entities under which legal, medical, dental, engineering,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 364/710
architectural, or other professional services are delivered, and shall also include any person charged
with the responsibility of controlling conduct on behalf of the above described enterprises upon any
premises regulated by provisions of this chapter.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and ceiling which is served by a common heating,
ventilating or air conditioning system, and is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive
of door or passageways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened
by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, "office landscaping", or similar
structures.
LOBBY/RECEPTION AREA: An area that must be passed through in order to get to another
destination.
MEMBERS OF THE GENERAL PUBLIC: Includes shoppers, customers, patrons, patients, students,
clients and other similar invitees of a commercial enterprise or nonprofit entity, but excludes employees
thereof, sales representatives, service repair persons, and persons delivering goods, merchandise or
services to a commercial enterprise, nonprofit entity or county.
NONPROFIT ENTITY: Corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable,
philanthropic, educational, character building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net
proceeds from the philanthropic, educational, character building, political, social or other similar
purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to promotion of the objects or
purposes of the organization and not to private gain, together with any person charged with the
responsibility of controlling conduct on behalf of the above described entities upon any premises
regulated by the provisions of this chapter. A public agency is not a "nonprofit entity" within the
meaning of this section.
OFFICE: An area enclosed by walls containing a desk, table or similar furnishings for clerical,
administrative or supervisory work, a complex of such enclosures and a building containing such
enclosures, whether or not the building is utilized primarily for other purposes such as retailing,
wholesaling or storage, or manufacturing, together with all hallways, stairways, elevators, escalators,
restrooms, lobbies, waiting rooms, reception areas, entry areas, and conference rooms within or
associated with the complex of such enclosures, including: a) legal, medical, dental, engineering,
accounting, counseling and other professional offices; b) insurance, real estate, ticket, collection
agency, and other offices where business services are offered to or goods or services are offered to or
may be ordered by or may be paid for by members of the general public.
PERSON: Any natural person, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, joint venture,
business trust, joint stock company, club, or other organization of any kind, except the county or any
other public agency.
RESTAURANT: Any coffee shop, cafeteria, luncheonette, soda fountain, "fast food service", and other
establishment where cooked or otherwise prepared food is sold to members of the general public for
consumption on the premises. The term does not include a cafeteria or lunchroom defined as a
"workplace" by subsection (C) of the definition of "workplace" in this section, whether or not members
of the general public incidentally frequent the facility.
SMOKING: Lighting, inhaling, exhaling or burning any pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed, or plant, or carrying
any lighted pipe, lighted cigar, lighted cigarette, lighted weed, lighted plant, or other ignited combustible
substance in any manner or in any form.
TOBACCO STORE: A place utilized primarily for the sale to members of the general public at retail of
tobacco products or accessories, and in which the sale of any other products is merely incidental.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 365/710
WORKPLACE: Any enclosed area which is occupied by two (2) or more employees of a commercial
enterprise, nonprofit entity or city including, but not limited to, places:
(A) Utilized for: 1) the manufacturing, processing, assembly, maintenance, or repair of any products,
goods, equipment, tools, appliances, furnishing or other object; or 2) the physical storage for
purposes of wholesaling, future utilization for operational purposes, or future transfer preceding
consumption or other utilization of any products, goods, merchandise, materials, supplies,
equipment, tools, appliances or furnishings;
(B) Utilized or operated for a purpose described by section 7-11-4 of this chapter and from which
members of the general public are excluded;
(C) Utilized as a union hall, cafeteria, lounge, lunchroom, restroom, conference room, training room,
lecture room or classroom primarily for the use or benefit of employees.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this definition, a private residence including either an attached or
detached garage shall not constitute a workplace, except when the residence serves as a licensed
daycare facility for children. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
7-11-4: SMOKING PROHIBITIONS, PUBLIC PLACES:
(A) Unlawful To Smoke In Certain Places: Except as specifically provided, it is unlawful for any member
of the general public or any other person, including an employee, to smoke in the public places
named and described in this chapter, and other enclosed public places similarly situated, including,
but not limited to, the following areas:
1. Common work areas occupied by employees performing clerical, technical, administrative or
other business or work functions;
2. Merchandise display areas, checkout stations, and counters and other pay stations;
3. Hallways;
4. Restrooms;
5. Escalators, elevators and stairways;
6. Lobbies (unless a special room and/or outdoor ventilation system is installed);
7. Reception areas;
8. Waiting rooms;
9. Service lines;
10. Classrooms, meeting or conference rooms, or lecture halls;
11. Other places in which members of the general public congregate for service or otherwise
frequent; and
12. The El Dorado Trail within the incorporated City limits of the City of Placerville. (Ord. 1691, 8-22-
2017)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 366/710
(B) Stores: The prohibitions contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to: 1) the
enclosed common areas of shopping malls; 2) automobile dealerships, furniture or other
showrooms for the display of merchandise offered for sale at retail; 3) grocery, specialty, department
and other stores which sell goods or merchandise at retail, and 4) service stations, stores or shops
for the repair or maintenance of appliances, shoes, or motor vehicles, barbershops, beauty shops,
cleaners and laundromats, video game, and other amusement centers, and other similar
establishments offering services or products to members of the general public.
(C) Banks: The prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to banks, including
savings and loan associations, credit unions and other similar institutions which offer financial
services to members of the general public.
(D) Hotels/Motels: The prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to hotels and
motels in which guests typically rent lodging for continuous periods less than thirty (30) days.
Smoking is permissible in rental rooms and in on premises restaurants and bars as provided in this
section and section 7-11-6 of this chapter. The availability of all nonsmoking rooms will be
prominently posted in the lobby sign in area. The rooms so designated will be posted as "Smoking
Prohibited" and ash trays removed. Customers seeking accommodations will be routinely advised
of the availability of nonsmoking rooms.
(E) Terminals: The prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to depots and other
terminals utilized by members of the general public for the purpose of being transported upon or
departing from airplanes, trains, buses and taxis.
(F) Buses And Public Transit: Smoking by either passengers or operators shall be prohibited within
buses, and all public transit conveyances operated by or licensed by the County.
(G) Theaters: The prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to theaters, including
motion picture theaters, meeting halls and auditoriums where motion pictures or live theatrical
musical or dramatic productions are made to an audience consisting of members of the general
public assembled for the purpose of witnessing the performance or presentation; provided, that
neither this subsection nor subsection (A) of this section shall be construed to prevent smoking by
performers in connection with a stage production or by persons making a presentation concerning
addiction to tobacco or other drugs.
(H) Recreational Facilities: The prohibitions contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be
applicable to sports pavilions, gymnasiums, exercise rooms, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming
pools, roller and ice skating rinks, and other similar places where members of the general public
assemble to either engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports
events.
Smoking is prohibited at all times within the seating areas of an enclosed arena and in any
surrounding enclosed concourses where food and beverages are dispensed.
(I) Recreation Halls: The prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to recreation
halls and other similar facilities where members of the general public play bingo or cards, dance or
engage in recreational, character building or cultural activities. An owner or operator may permit
persons to smoke within a portion, not exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the main activities area of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 367/710
such facility and not including restrooms, lounges, and kitchens. Signs will be posted in the manner
prescribed by section 7-11-8 of this chapter. It shall not constitute a violation of this chapter to
smoke in a location where smoking has been authorized.
The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to in any manner restrict or otherwise
impair the authority of an owner or operator to prohibit smoking in such recreational facility. (Ord.
1485, 12-10-1991)
(J) Restaurants:
1. Within all restaurants, the prohibitions of subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to
lobbies, waiting areas, restrooms and such dining seating areas as are allocated for nonsmoking.
After adoption of this chapter the owner, manager, or operator shall post a notice at the restaurant
entrance that a nonsmoking section is available. It shall not constitute a violation of this chapter to
smoke in a location where smoking has been authorized.
2. The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed to in any manner restrict or otherwise
impair the authority of an owner or operator to increase the nonsmoking seating in a restaurant or
bar.
3. Smoking is prohibited and is unlawful in every publicly or privately owned restaurant except
under the following circumstances where smoking may be permitted at the option of the
establishment:
(a) Any area exterior to the building in which the establishment is located.
(b) The smoking of tobacco in any bar as defined in section 7-11-3 of this chapter.
(c) Until March 1, 1993, the smoking of tobacco in an interior area shall be limited to not more
than fifty percent (50%) of contiguous floor space of the dining area which is specifically
designated and signed as a smoking area. Restaurants shall post at their entrances a sign
stating that nonsmoking seats are available. Likewise, recreational halls shall post signs
alerting users of the availability of nonsmoking rooms. Smoking permitted areas in which
smoking is permitted will be posted as such.
(d) During the period of March 1, 1993 to January 1, 1994, the smoking of tobacco in an interior
area shall be limited to not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the contiguous floor space
of the dining area which is specifically designated and signed as a smoking area. Signs as
prescribed by section 7-11-8 of this chapter shall be used. Restaurants shall post at their
entrances a sign stating that nonsmoking seats are available. Likewise, recreational halls shall
post signs alerting users of the availability of nonsmoking rooms. Smoking permitted areas in
which smoking is permitted will be posted as such.
4. On January 2, 1994, subsections (J)3(c) and (J)3(d) of this section shall automatically be
repealed. (Ord. 1499, 12-8-1992)
(K) City Buildings: Smoking is prohibited in all city buildings.
(L) Places Of Exhibition: The prohibitions contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable
to libraries, museums, aquariums, galleries, convention halls and similar facilities where members
of the general public assemble for the purpose of viewing the exhibition of art, artifacts, objects of
historical or cultural significance, products, merchandise, equipment, appliances or services.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 368/710
(M) Hospitals: The prohibitions contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to
hospitals, rest and convalescent homes, medical clinics, physical therapy facilities and other places
where medical, dental, psychiatric or counseling services are delivered to members of the general
public. Operators of facilities treating psychiatric or chemically dependent patients may permit
smoking by patients in designated areas, provided the medical director of such facility has
determined in writing that the practice is beneficial for the recovery or treatment of such patients
and that the practice will not interfere with the recovery and treatment of nonsmoking patients, and
provided that adequate nonsmoking areas are made available for nonsmoking patients.
(N) Schools: The prohibitions contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to any
school or educational institution operated by a commercial enterprise or nonprofit entity for the
purpose of providing academic classroom instruction, trade, craft, computer or other technical
training, or instruction in dancing, artistic, musical or other cultural skills.
The prohibitions contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to public school
facilities when school district management authorizes their use by members of the general public
other than students.
(O) Daycare Facilities: The prohibitions contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be applicable to
private residences during the time when such residences are operated as licensed daycare facilities
for children. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
7-11-5: SMOKING PROHIBITIONS, WORKPLACE:
Smoking is prohibited in enclosed workplaces of commercial enterprises, nonprofit entities and all city
owned and managed buildings, including, but not limited to, open office areas, shared offices, private
offices, hallways, restrooms, escalators, elevators, stairways, lobbies, reception areas, and waiting
rooms, classrooms, meeting or conference rooms, and auditoriums.
On site cafeterias, lunchrooms and lounges shall be deemed workplaces and smoking prohibited
therein, whether or not such facilities are open to members of the general public. A completely
separate room with a separate ventilation system may be used per employer discretion.
Each commercial enterprise, nonprofit entity and the county shall comply with these smoking
prohibitions and be responsible for their implementation in the workplace, and "no smoking" signs shall
be posted in the manner prescribed by section 7-11-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
7-11-6: PLACES WHERE SMOKING IS PERMISSIBLE:
Smoking may be permitted in all locations where smoking is not prohibited by this chapter, including
the following locations:
(A) Bars, whether operated as separate business entity, or physically separated facilities within a
restaurant, nightclub or other business.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 369/710
(B) Private clubs during events attended exclusively by members of the organization and their invited
guests and from which members of the general public are excluded.
(C) Within conference/meeting rooms, public and private assembly rooms, banquet rooms, dining
rooms or areas of restaurants, hotels and motels, while these places are occupied for private
functions to which only persons specifically invited are entitled to attend and from which members of
the general public are excluded.
(D) In an enclosed place wherein this chapter specifically permits smoking, notwithstanding the fact
that such location is a workplace.
It shall not constitute a violation of section 7-11-4 of this chapter for a person to smoke in a location
where smoking has been authorized in the manner prescribed by this section.
The foregoing places are not considered workplaces subject to the provisions of section 7-11-5 of this
chapter. Employers will, however, attempt to find a reasonable alternative accommodation where
feasible for nonsmoking employees who do not wish to be assigned to work in a smoking permissible
area. The foregoing exempt places do not include city owned or managed buildings. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-
1991)
7-11-7: EXEMPTION PROCEDURES:
Any owner or manager of a business or other establishment subject to this chapter may apply to the
director of the El Dorado County department of environmental management for an exemption or
modification to its provisions. Exemptions may only be granted on: a) a showing by the petition of
significant financial hardship due to compliance, or b) the proposed implementation of an alternative
approach or technology which would provide equivalent protection from the health hazards of
sidestream smoke.
An application for exemption will be accompanied by payment of a reasonable fee established by
board of supervisors resolution which will cover the cost of preparation for the hearing, and the
application will include any data required by the department. The department will review the application
and submit it, with recommendations, for hearing by the environmental health director. The applicant
will be entitled to present evidence at the hearing, which will be scheduled within thirty (30) days of the
receipt of the application.
The department will, after taking into consideration the testimony received at the hearing, issue its
findings and recommendations within ten (10) days of the completion of the hearing. The department
will complete procedural action on the application and notify the city council and interested parties
within ten (10) days of its receipt from the director of environmental health.
The applicant or other interested parties may appeal the department's decision to the city council within
thirty (30) days of receipt of action notification by the department. Upon appeal, the city council will set
a hearing within sixty (60) days, and make a final determination at that hearing. Any establishment
holding a currently valid exemption shall not be required to pay additional administrative fees to
maintain its exemption. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
7-11-8: POSTING REQUIREMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 370/710
Each owner, operator, manager or other person having control of an establishment or facility within
which smoking is regulated by this chapter shall conspicuously post in everyplace where smoking is
prohibited "no smoking" signs, or the international "no smoking" symbol consisting of a pictorial
representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it, with letters not
less than one inch (1") in height.
An owner, operator, or manager of a building wherein, pursuant to these regulations, smoking is not
permitted in any space in the building may limit the "no smoking" posting to first floor entrances and
exists and to the elevator lobby areas of all other floors.
Motion picture theaters shall show upon the movie or live action screens for at least five (5) seconds
prior to the showing of each feature motion picture, the message that smoking is prohibited within the
audience seating and other areas as specified. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
Restaurants shall post at their entrances a sign stating that nonsmoking seats are available until
January 1, 1994. Thereafter, restaurants shall post no smoking signs or symbols as described above.
Likewise, recreational halls shall post signs alerting users of the availability of nonsmoking rooms.
Smoking permitted areas in which smoking is permitted will be posted as such. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-
1992; amd. Ord. 1499, 12-8-1992)
Motels and hotels will prominently post in the lobby a sign notifying patrons of the availability of
nonsmoking accommodations. The rooms so designated will be posted as nonsmoking rooms, and
ashtrays removed. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
7-11-9: RETALIATION PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for a commercial enterprise, nonprofit entity or city to retaliate against any members
of the general public or an employee or applicant for employment of the enterprise, entity or city
because such members of the general public, employee or applicant seeks enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
7-11-10: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES, SMOKING OR POSTING:
Any person who violates the prohibitions contained in section 7-11-4 of this chapter and any person
who violates section 7-11-8 of this chapter by failing to post the signs or take the other actions required
by this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable in the manner hereinafter prescribed: a) a fine
not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, b) a fine not exceeding two hundred
dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of this chapter within one year, c) a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. (Ord. 1485, 12-
10-1991)
7-11-11: RETALIATION REMEDIES:
Violation of any of the provisions of section 7-11-9 or 7-11-10 of this chapter shall be remedial through
civil action filed in a court of competent jurisdiction for injunctive or other appropriate relief. (Ord. 1485,
12-10-1991)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 371/710
7-11-12: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the responsibility of the El Dorado County director of the environmental management
department to enforce, on behalf of the city, the provisions of this chapter. The director shall be
authorized to prosecute, in the name of the city, pursuant to the provisions of section 25132 of the
Government Code, civil actions for recovery of fines for violations of this chapter made infractions by
section 7-11-11 of this chapter or violations of sections 7-11-4 and 7-11-5 of this chapter.
In the performance of the enforcement responsibilities assigned by this chapter, the director of the
county environmental management department shall:
(A) Affirmatively seek the support and cooperation of other local public agencies, such as fire protection
districts, to provide information, assistance and advice in the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
(B) Establish a telephone number through which all complaints by citizens relating to violations of this
chapter may be directed or referred.
(C) Reduce such complaints to writing, and analyze the frequency and volume thereof in relation to
alleged violations of this chapter by or at particular establishments or facilities.
(D) Conduct an on site inspection of any establishment or facility with respect to which the nature and
volume of complaints suggest long standing and pronounced violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter.
(E) Provide to the owner, operator or manager of any such establishment or facility a copy of the
provisions of this chapter and such advisory assistance to rectify future violations as may be
necessary to achieve compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
(F) Follow up such investigation and advice with a written directive explaining in detail the steps
required in order to achieve future compliance with the provisions of this chapter; and
(G) If the violations do not cease following the expiration of a reasonable period of time, commence
civil actions for the recovery of infraction fines pursuant to the provisions of section 7-11-10 of this
chapter or request commencement of a civil proceeding by the county counsel and/or city attorney,
pursuant to the provisions of section 7-11-11 of this chapter, as may be appropriate.
The provisions of section 7-11-9 of this chapter shall not be remedial by either the director of
environmental management, or any other county official or city official. Any member of the general
public, an employee or applicant for employment may, pursuant to the provisions of section 7-11-11 of
this chapter, commence in his or her name a civil action for injunctive relief, monetary damages or
other appropriate relief against a person who violates section 7-11-9 of this chapter pursuant to the
provisions of section 7-11-11 of this chapter. A member of the general public or employee shall also be
authorized to individually commence a civil action pursuant to the provisions of section 7-11-11 of this
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 372/710
chapter for injunctive relief, monetary damages or other appropriate relief for the purpose of remedying
any other violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1485, 12-10-1991)
Chapter 12
PROHIBITION ON SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
FROM VENDING MACHINES
7-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings:
DIRECTOR: The El Dorado County director of the environmental management department.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any cigarette or tobacco product.
TOBACCO VENDING MACHINES: Any electronic or mechanical device used for the vending of any
cigarette or tobacco product, upon the insertion of money, whether in coin or paper bill or other thing
representative of value, which dispenses or vends a tobacco product. (Ord. 1501, 5-11-1993)
7-12-2: SALE OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS FROM VENDING MACHINES
PROHIBITED:
(A) Except as provided herein, no person or business entity shall sell, dispense or give away any
cigarette or tobacco product, cigarette paper or cigarette wrapper, through the use of a vending
machine.
(B) Any tobacco vending machine in use on or after the effective date of this chapter shall be removed
on or before January 2, 1994. A limited use extension may be granted, subject to subsection (C) of
this section.
(C) Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, any person, who purchased a tobacco
vending machine for the purpose of selling or distributing tobacco products exclusively within the
city and who has not or will not have recovered his, her or its investment therein by January 2,
1994, may apply to the director for a use extension based on financial hardship. A use extension
shall be granted if the director makes the following findings:
1. That the tobacco vending machine owner has not or will not have recovered his, her or its
investment therein before January 2, 1994.
2. That the tobacco vending machine owner has no other reasonable method to recover the
investment in the tobacco vending machine other than its continued use within the city as a
tobacco vending machine.
3. The tobacco vending machine owner shall bear the burden of proof on each issue. The director
shall issue a written decision and notice within sixty (60) days after submittal of the application by
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 373/710
the owner. The director shall state the last date of operation of the vending machine. A copy of
the notice shall be posted on the tobacco vending machine in plain view by the owner.
4. The length of the use extension of the tobacco vending machine shall not exceed the time period
estimated to allow recovery of the owner's investment, and in no case, will the use extension
exceed a time period of one year.
(D) Any applicant aggrieved by the decision of the director pursuant to subsection (B) or (C) of this
section may appeal the decision to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city
council within ten (10) days after the date of the director's written decision.
The notice of appeal shall contain a brief statement of the grounds for the appeal. The city council,
or its authorized agent, shall review the application and the notice of appeal, and may, by written
decision, confirm or modify the determination of the director. The decision of the city council shall be
final. (Ord. 1501, 5-11-1993)
7-12-3: VIOLATION AND PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter are infractions and are subject to a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty
dollars ($250.00) plus penalty assessments as set by California law, per day for each violation. (Ord.
1501, 5-11-1993)
7-12-4: ENFORCEMENT:
The director shall be authorized to commence civil actions, to enforce on behalf of the city, the
provisions of this chapter or for recovery of fines in the name of the city. (Ord. 1501, 5-11-1993)
7-12-5: USE OF FINES:
The court assessing the fine set forth in section 7-12-3 of this chapter shall, to the extent allowed by
law, designate said fines for the director to support the costs of inspection and enforcement of
violations of this chapter. (Ord. 1501, 5-11-1993)
Chapter 13
ABATEMENT OF GRAFFITI
7-13-1: PURPOSE AND FINDINGS:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a program and enforcement tools in addition to those already
provided by state law for the removal of graffiti from property, buildings, structures, walls and places on
both public and private property, and to prevent and control further spread of graffiti in the city. The city
council finds and declares that graffiti on public or private buildings, structures and places, creates a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 374/710
condition of blight within the city that tends to reduce the value of property, promotes deterioration of
surrounding property, invites vandalism, and results in the loss of pride in affected neighborhoods and
loss of business to neighboring commercial enterprises, all to the detriment of the city. While state law
imposes criminal penalties for the application of graffiti, state law does not provide adequate means for
prompt abatement and removal of graffiti.
The city council further finds and declares that the proliferation of graffiti constitutes a public nuisance
that presents an imminent danger to the public safety and welfare. Law enforcement officials and other
experts agree that immediate removal of gang related graffiti is necessary to reduce the risk of violent
and other criminal activities associated with gangs and gang territories. The failure to immediately
abate graffiti encourages the proliferation of additional graffiti which results in neighborhood blight,
additional criminal activity, and increased costs of abatement. Such a public nuisance therefore
constitutes an immediate threat to public health and safety that must be abated.
The city council intends, through the adoption of this chapter, to give notice to all who disregard
property rights of others, that the city will strictly enforce all laws prohibiting graffiti, including, but not
limited to, California Penal Code sections 594, 594.1 and 640.5, California Vehicle Code section
13202.6, and all provisions of this chapter. The city council further intends by adoption of this chapter to
implement a graffiti eradication program to assist Placerville residents and businesses with the
eradication of graffiti from public and private property. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-2: DEFINED:
For the purposes of this chapter, "graffiti" shall mean any inscription, work, figure, picture, mark, design
or other graphic representation prohibited by law or unauthorized by the owner or person in possession
of the subject property, which is marked, etched, drawn, painted, pasted, or otherwise applied on any
public or private real property, and which can be seen by any person using any public right of way.
(Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-3: DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE:
The city council finds and declares that the existence of graffiti on any public or private property within
the incorporated area of the city constitutes a public nuisance that presents an imminent danger to the
public safety and welfare, and that graffiti may be abated according to the provisions and procedures
set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-4: GRAFFITI PROHIBITED:
(A) It is unlawful for any person to apply "graffiti", as defined in section 7-13-2 of this chapter, upon any
real or personal property, whether publicly or privately owned, including any buildings, structures,
fences, walls, signs, sidewalks, windows, streets, vehicles, trees, or other such places or things
within the city.
(B) No person owning or otherwise in control of any real property within the city shall permit or allow
any graffiti to remain on such property when the graffiti is visible from any public right of way or
other public or private property. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 375/710
7-13-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The chief of police and/or his/her designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1561, 8-
24-1999)
7-13-6: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
The chief of police and his/her designee, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, may enter
upon private property within the city for the purposes of administering and enforcing this chapter, to
inspect graffiti on any property within the city, and to remove, or cause to be removed, graffiti on any
property within the city. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-7: NOTICE:
Whenever the chief of police or his/her designee determines that graffiti exists on any real property in
the city, which is visible from a public right of way or other public or private property, the chief of police
or his/her designee shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. The property owner shall
have ten (10) days after the date of the notice to remove the graffiti, or the property will be subject to
abatement by the city. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-8: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
The notice to abate graffiti pursuant to section 7-13-7 of this chapter shall be served upon the owner of
affected real property, as such owner's name and address appears on the last equalized property tax
assessment rolls of the county of El Dorado. If there is no known address for the owner, the notice shall
be sent in care of the property address. The notice required by this chapter may be served in any one
of the following manners:
(A) By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property; or
(B) By registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner at the last known address of said owner. If
this address is unknown, the notice will be sent to the property address.
(C) In addition to the above manners of service, a copy of the notice shall be posted on the real
property.
The notice shall be substantially in the following form:
NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE GRAFFITI
DATE:
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required by law at your expense to remove or paint
over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as , Placerville, California, which is visible
to public view, within ten (10) days after the date of this Notice, or, if you fail to do so, City
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 376/710
employees or private contractors employed by the City will enter upon your property and abate the
public nuisance by removal or painting over the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City
employees or its private contractors will be assessed upon your property and such costs will
constitute a lien upon the real property until paid.
You may also consent to the City removing the graffiti by executing the enclosed Consent to
Enter Release of Liability form and returning it to the City within ten (10) days of the date of this
letter.
In the event you desire to contest the City's determination that a nuisance exists on your real
property with respect to said graffiti, you may request a hearing in front of the City Manager, at
which time you will be given an opportunity to be heard regarding the proposed abatement.
Request for such a hearing must be made within ten (10) days of the date of this notice. Failure to
request such a hearing waives your right to contest the City's determination that a nuisance exists
with respect to your property, and, unless said nuisance is abated by you, will result in the City
entering upon your property to abate said nuisance.
(Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-9: HEARING PRIOR TO ABATEMENT; NOTICE OF HEARING:
In the event a hearing before the city manager is requested pursuant to section 7-13-8 of this chapter,
the city manager shall schedule such hearing and provide notice thereof to the requesting party, not
less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. Said notice shall be served in accordance with the
provisions of section 7-13-8 of this chapter. The failure of any person to receive the notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-10: HEARING BEFORE CITY MANAGER:
The hearing to determine whether a nuisance exists shall be conducted by the city manager. At the
hearing, the city manager shall receive and consider all relevant evidence. Any interested person shall
be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard in conjunction therewith. Based on the evidence
presented, the city manager shall determine whether a nuisance exists within the meaning of this
chapter. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-11: ORDER OF ABATEMENT:
Within five (5) days after the hearing, the city manager shall give written notice of the decision to the
owner and any other person requesting the same. Said notice shall be served in accordance with the
provisions of section 7-13-8 of this chapter. If a nuisance is determined to exist, the notice shall contain
an order of abatement directed to the owner of the affected property, or the person in control and/or
charge of the property, and shall set forth the nature of the graffiti, its location on the premises, and the
time and manner for its abatement. The city manager may impose such conditions as are reasonably
necessary to abate the graffiti. The decision of the city manager may be appealed to the city council by
filing a written request for appeal with the city clerk within ten (10) days after the city manager's notice
of decision to the owner. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-12: ABATEMENT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 377/710
If the city manager's decision is not appealed and the nuisance is not abated within the time set by the
notice of intent to remove graffiti, the chief of police or his/her designee is authorized to enter upon the
premises and abate the graffiti nuisance through the utilization of labor, equipment and materials as
directed by the chief of police. The graffiti shall be removed as authorized herein, but the removal shall
not involve the painting or repair of a more extensive area than is necessary for such removal. The
chief of police shall then prepare a statement of the fact of such abatement, and the expense incurred
in abatement, and shall file the statement with the city clerk. Such statement shall identify the
premises, state the costs of the action taken, and shall be done in accordance with section 7-13-15 of
this chapter. If the premises includes more than one parcel of real property, each separate parcel, or all
of the parcels, may be set forth in the same statement. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-13: REMOVAL:
(A) The Property Owner's Consent To Remove: Whenever the chief of police, or his/her designee,
determines that graffiti is located on public or private property so that graffiti may be viewed by a
person using any public right of way or other public property, the chief of police or his/her designee
is authorized to provide for and use public funds, if necessary, to remove graffiti upon the following
conditions:
1. Public Property: Whenever the chief of police or his/her designee determines that graffiti exists
upon property owned by the city, it shall be removed by the city public works department, or
through the utilization of other city resources, as soon as possible, or within five (5) days. When
the property is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of graffiti is authorized
after securing written consent of the public agency having jurisdiction over the property.
2. Private Property: Where the subject property is privately owned, the removal of graffiti is
authorized after the chief of police or his/her designee secures the written consent of the owner of
the property, and the owner executes a release and waiver approved as to form by the city
attorney.
3. Painting Or Repair: The graffiti shall be removed as authorized herein, but the removal shall not
involve the painting or repair of a more extensive area than is necessary for such removal.
(B) Removal By City Without Consent Of The Property Owner: When the property owner has failed to
either remove the graffiti or consent to its removal by the city within the time period specified in the
notice set forth under section 7-13-7 of this chapter, the chief of police or his/her designee may
remove such graffiti and abate the nuisance according to the provisions of sections 7-13-7 through
7-13-12, inclusive, of this chapter. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-14: SUMMARY ABATEMENT; IMMINENT DANGER TO PUBLIC SAFETY:
The chief of police or his/her designee may summarily abate graffiti at the expense of the city when it
appears the continued presence of such graffiti presents an imminent danger to the public safety and
welfare. If the chief of police or his/her designee intends to take such action as allowed by this section,
the chief of police or his/her designee shall notify the property owner and/or possessor of the property
of his/her intent to enter the property and take such action, at least twenty four (24) hours prior to
entering on the property. If the property owner and/or person possessing the property has not objected
within said twenty four (24) hour period, such person(s) will be deemed to have consented to summary
abatement by the city. If the chief of police or his/her designee is notified either in writing or verbally
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 378/710
that the property owner and/or person in possession of the property objects to the summary abatement
of graffiti on his or her property, the chief of police or his/her designee shall terminate his/her efforts to
summarily abate such graffiti, and comply with the hearing procedure set forth in section 7-13-9 of this
chapter. Any such hearing will receive priority, and shall be set as soon as practicable. (Ord. 1561, 8-
24-1999)
7-13-15: RECORD OF COSTS:
The chief of police or his/her designee shall keep an account of costs (including incidental expenses) of
abating such nuisance on each separate parcel of land where the work is done, and shall render an
itemized report in writing to the responsible party, and as appropriate, the owner of the property.
Incidental expenses shall include, but not be limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the
preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work, the costs of printing,
and mailing required hereunder. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-16: COST HEARING:
The responsible party or owner may request a cost hearing. The cost hearing shall be in front of the
city council, at which time the responsible party or owner or any interested party may contest the
appropriateness of the costs of abatement, as well as present evidence of financial or physical
hardship with respect to the abatement of the nuisance and/or the paying of the costs of abatement.
Notice of the cost hearing shall be provided to the requesting party at least ten (10) days before the
date of said hearing and shall be served in accordance with section 7-13-8 of this chapter. At the time
and place fixed for receiving and considering the record of costs, the city council may make such
revision, correction or modification in the report as it deems just. The decision of the city council on all
protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-17: LIEN:
As to such property where the responsible party is the owner, if all or any portion of the costs of
abatement remain unpaid after thirty (30) days, pursuant to the authority created by law, including
Government Code section 38773 et seq., such portion shall constitute and is hereby declared to
constitute a lien on the property which was the subject matter of the abatement effort. Resolution of lien
shall be presented to the city council, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified
copy of the lien to be recorded with the recorder's office of El Dorado County.
A graffiti nuisance abatement lien shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder in El Dorado
County. From the date of recording, the lien shall have the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien.
A graffiti nuisance abatement lien or a special assessment authorized by this chapter shall specify the
amount of the lien or special assessment; the name of the agency on whose behalf the lien or special
assessment is imposed; the date of the abatement order; the street address; legal description and
assessor's parcel number of the parcel on which the lien or special assessment is imposed; and the
name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-18: NUISANCE ABATEMENT COSTS AND LIENS; MINORS AND PERSONS
CREATING GRAFFITI:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 379/710
Procedure to correct abatement and related administrative costs from persons creating, causing,
committing or maintaining any nuisance created by graffiti or other inscribed material.
In addition, parents or legal guardians are jointly liable with the minor for costs associated with the
abatement of graffiti due to the misconduct of their children.
(A) Graffiti abatement costs shall include, but not be limited to, court costs, attorney fees, costs of
removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced
property, the law enforcement costs incurred by the city in identifying and apprehending the minor
or persons creating the graffiti.
(B) The expense of abatement of any nuisance resulting from graffiti or other inscribed material on the
property of another by a minor may result in a lien against the property and a personal obligation of
the parent or guardian of the minor.
(C) Notice to the minor and notice to the parent or guardian of the minor shall be made prior to the
collection of abatement and related costs and prior to the recordation of a lien on a parcel of land
owned by the parent or guardian, pursuant to the requirements of law as set forth in section 7-13-15
of this chapter. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-19: NUISANCE ABATEMENT LIEN; PROPERTY OWNER:
Procedure to collect abatement and related administrative costs from property owner on whose
property the graffiti is located.
(A) Nuisance abatement costs shall include, but not be limited to, the costs of removal of the graffiti or
other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and any
administrative costs incurred regarding the processing of a lien.
(B) Notice is required prior to the recordation of the lien to the owner of record of the land where the
graffiti is located, based on the last equalized assessment roll, or the supplemental roll, whichever is
more current.
(C) Notice to the property owner shall be made prior to the collection of abatement and related costs
and prior to the recordation of the lien on a parcel of land pursuant to the requirements of law as set
forth in section 7-13-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-20: ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE AS SPECIAL ASSESSMENT:
As an alternative to the lien procedures outlined in this chapter, the city also establishes the following
procedure for collection of nuisance abatements costs as a special assessment against a parcel of
property owned by the property owner on whose property the graffiti is located, and against a parcel of
property owned by a person creating graffiti, or owner by a parent or guardian of a minor who is
responsible for creating graffiti:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 380/710
(A) Notice to the property owner shall be by certified mail if the property owner's identity can be
determined from the records of the county assessor or county recorder. The notice shall be given at
the time of imposing the assessment and shall specify that the property may be sold after three (3)
years by the tax collector for unpaid delinquent assessments. All laws applicable to the levy,
collection and enforcement of taxes shall be applicable to the special assessment, subject to any
restrictions set forth in the special assessment law related to graffiti and other inscribed material
nuisance abatement law.
(B) Notice of special assessment against the property shall be recorded in El Dorado County. (Ord.
1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-21: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
The owner, occupant or agent of any parcel of real property within the city who shall permit or allow the
existence of a public nuisance as defined in this chapter, upon any parcel of real property owned,
occupied or controlled by him or her, or who shall violate any provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty
of an infraction, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second
violation of the same provision within one year, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00)
for each additional violation of the same provision within one year. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-22: LIMITATION OF FILING JUDICIAL ACTION:
Any owner, lessee, occupant, or other interested person having any objections or contesting any
proceeding taken on appeal by the city council in ordering the abatement of any public nuisance under
the provisions of this chapter, must bring an action to contest such decision within thirty (30) days after
the date of such decision of the city council. Otherwise, all objections to such decision shall be deemed
waived. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
7-13-23: CUMULATIVE REMEDIES:
The procedures set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and nothing contained herein shall be
deemed to preclude the pursuit of any available remedy, whether it is civil or criminal. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-
1999)
7-13-24: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to
be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declares that it would
have adopted each provision or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that portions of this chapter may
be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1561, 8-24-1999)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 381/710
Chapter 14
WATER SYSTEM BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTION
CONTROL
7-14-1: PURPOSE:
In order to protect the public water system, the city is implementing a cross connection control and
prevention of backflow program (program).
The objectives of the program are to:
(A) Protect the public water system at the service connection against any actual or potential cross
connection between the public water system and any source or system containing any substance
that is not, or cannot be, approved as safe, wholesome and potable for human consumption;
(B) Promote the elimination or control of existing cross connections, actual or potential, between a
customer's potable water system and that customer's nonpotable water system, plumbing fixtures
and/or industrial piping systems;
(C) Outline city and customer responsibilities for protection of the public water system;
(D) Outline criteria determining when backflow protection is required;
(E) Specify requirements for backflow prevention assemblies to protect the water system;
(F) Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross connection control which will
systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems;
and
(G) Comply with federal, state, and local laws and policies and to allow the city to meet applicable
regulatory requirements and standards. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-2: AUTHORITY:
These regulations are adopted pursuant to the state of California Administrative Code, title 17, section
7583 et seq. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-3: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 382/710
AWWA STANDARD: An official standard developed and approved by the American Water Works
Association (AWWA).
AIR GAP SEPARATION: A physical vertical separation between the free flowing discharge end of a
potable water supply pipeline and an open or nonpressurized receiving vessel. The air gap shall be at
least double the diameter of the supply pipe measured vertically above the top rim of the vessel, in no
case less than one inch (1").
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY OR ABPA: Any assembly that is currently
included on the El Dorado irrigation district approved backflow prevention assemblies list and that has
passed laboratory and field evaluation tests performed by a recognized testing organization which has
demonstrated their competency to perform such tests to the California department of public health.
BACKFLOW: A flow condition, caused by a differential in pressure that causes the flow of water or
other liquids, gases, mixtures or substances into the distributing pipes of a potable supply of water from
any source or sources other than an approved water supply source.
CITY: The city of Placerville.
CITY BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY TESTER: A backflow prevention assembly general
tester with current AWWA certification or city approved organization with equivalent certification
requirements.
CONTAMINANT: A degradation of the quality of the potable water by any foreign substance which
creates a hazard to the public health or which may impair the usefulness or quality of the water.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water
system used to supply water for drinking purposes and any source or system containing unapproved
water or a substance that is not or cannot be approved as safe, wholesome, and potable. Bypass
arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover assemblies, or other
assemblies through which backflow could occur, shall be considered to be cross connections.
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL SPECIALIST: A cross connection control program specialist with
current AWWA certification or city approved organization with equivalent certification requirements.
CUSTOMER: The person(s) or entity whose water service is served from the public water system and
in whose name the utility water account is registered.
DEACTIVATED WELL: Any well in which all pumping components, including, but not limited to, pump,
piping, and power supply (if equipped) shall be removed from the well casing. Additionally, the top of
the well or well casing shall be provided with a cover that is secured by a lock or by other means to
prevent its removal without the use of equipment or tools.
DIRECTOR: The community services director of the city of Placerville.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY (DC): An assembly composed of two (2) single, independently
acting check valves, two (2) tightly closing shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly, and four
(4) test cocks for the testing of the check valves.
MANUAL OF CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL: The most current edition of the "Manual Of Cross
Connection Control" as published by the University Of Southern California's Foundation For Cross
Connection Control And Hydraulic Research.
POINT OF SERVICE CONNECTION: The point of connection of a customer's piping to the water
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 383/710
supplier's facilities.
POLLUTION: An impairment of the quality of the water to a degree which does not create a hazard to
the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such
waters for domestic use.
PREMISES: Any and all areas on a customer's property which are served or have the potential to be
served by the public water system.
RECYCLED WATER: Water which, as a result of treatment of waste, is suitable for a direct beneficial
use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur and is therefore considered a valuable resource.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY (RP): A backflow
preventer incorporating not less than two (2) check valves, an automatically operated differential relief
valve located between the two (2) check valves, a tightly closing shut off valve on each side of the
check valve assembly, and equipped with necessary test cocks for testing.
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DETECTOR ASSEMBLY (RPDA): A specially designed assembly
composed of a line size approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly with a
bypass containing a specific water meter and an approved reduced pressure principle assembly. This
assembly shall be used to protect against a nonhealth hazard (i.e., pollutant) or a health hazard (i.e.,
contaminant). The RPDA is primarily used on fire sprinkler systems.
UNAPPROVED AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the approved water supply. An unapproved auxiliary water supply includes, but is not limited to, a
well, spring, pond, storage tank or any other water source that is piped or captured in any fashion that
would facilitate its use as an unapproved auxiliary water supply on the premises. An unapproved
auxiliary water supply does not include a decorative or natural water feature that serves solely for
aesthetic and/or recreational purposes and lacks piping and/or equipment that would facilitate its use
as an unapproved auxiliary water supply on the premises. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-4: RESPONSIBILITIES:
Responsibilities for protection of the public water system are shared by the city and the customer.
(A) City Responsibilities: The city, and its duly authorized employees, shall operate the public water
system and implement a cross connection control program. The purpose of this chapter is to: 1)
protect the city water system against actual or potential cross connections by isolating within the
premises contamination that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross
connection on the premises; 2) eliminate existing connections between potable water systems and
nonpotable systems that create a hazard to public health; 3) eliminate existing cross connections
between potable water systems and sources of contamination; and 4) prevent the making of cross
connections in the future. Except as otherwise provided, city staff shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this program. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the director
may be delegated to a duly authorized employee or the director's designated agent.
(B) Customer Responsibilities: All customers of the city are subject to the conditions of this program, as
set forth herein, as well as California code of regulations (CCR) title 17, section 7584, which
requires the city to comply with public law 99-339 - 1986 amendments of the safe drinking water act
of 1974, as they are now constituted, or as they may hereafter be amended or recodified. The
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 384/710
customer will have the prime responsibility of preventing contaminants and/or pollutants from their
water systems entering the public water system. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-5: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM:
(A) Compliance Enforcement: If it is determined that a backflow prevention assembly is required, the
installation of such an assembly shall be a condition of continued water service. The customer shall
be notified in writing and given no more than sixty (60) calendar days from the date of the initial
notice to comply. If a customer fails to comply, then the city shall proceed with enforcement up to
and including termination of water service to the premises being served. In the event the city
determines a customer's water system poses an immediate health risk to the public water supply,
the city reserves the right to immediately terminate water service without prior notification and must
do so to comply with title 17 of the CCR.
(B) Cross Connection Control Surveys: A cross connection control survey (survey) shall be performed
by city or contractor staff certified as an AWWA cross connection control program specialist
(specialist). The city shall conduct surveys of existing unprotected premises and premises
suspected to have existing inadequate backflow protection. If an actual or potential hazard is
determined to exist, a backflow prevention assembly shall be installed by the customer in
accordance with current city specifications upon notification. All expenses of the installation shall be
the customer's responsibility. Existing premises not required to install backflow prevention
assemblies as a result of a city survey shall be subject to subsequent regular city surveys for the
purpose of confirming continued compliance pursuant to this program.
(C) Backflow Prevention Assembly Inspection, Testing And Repair: During installation and prior to
covering trenches, the city shall visually inspect the connection and entire length of pipeline from
the meter or service connection to the downstream side of the approved backflow prevention
assembly (ABPA) before city acceptance. In accordance with and subject to the provisions of
subsection 7-14-8(D) of this chapter, backflow prevention assemblies require initial testing by the
customer and annual testing thereafter, the cost of which will be borne by the customer and which,
subject to subsection 7-14-8(D) of this chapter, shall be performed by the city. City may elect, in its
sole discretion, to assign any or all annual testing responsibilities to a duly authorized
representative. The city will attempt to flush, clean, and retest an assembly that does not pass
annual testing. If the assembly fails the test, then the customer will be notified of the requirement to
repair or replace the assembly. The city's current fee for performance of initial inspection and
annual testing shall be set by resolution of the city council and set forth in the city's master fee
schedule.
Any repair or replacement of any assembly components, including, but not limited to, assembly
housing, shut off valve, or relief valve housing shall be performed by the customer and subject to
inspection by the city. Any replacement of irreparable assembly or installation of a new ABPA,
including initial testing of repaired or replaced assembly, shall be performed by the customer and
subject to inspection by the city. The city shall not be responsible for any loss or damage directly or
indirectly resulting from or caused by any improper or negligent installation, operation, use, repair or
maintenance of, or interference with, any backflow prevention assembly required by this program,
by any customer or any other person. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-6: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLIES REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 385/710
(A) No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the
water supply is protected as required by this code, sections 7583 through 7605 of the California
code of administrative regulations, and other applicable state laws and regulations. The city shall
discontinue service of water to any premises in the following situations: 1) if a backflow prevention
assembly required by this code is not installed; 2) if a backflow prevention assembly has been
removed or bypassed; or 3) if an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises. Service will
not be restored until such condition or defects are corrected.
(B) In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply that is not or may not be of safe
bacteriological or chemical quality and that is not acceptable to the director as an additional source,
the property owner shall protect the public water system against backflow from the premises by
installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line.
(C) In the case of a premises having: 1) internal cross connections that cannot be permanently
corrected or controlled; 2) intricate plumbing and piping arrangements where entry to all portions of
the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes; or 3) a condition that in the opinion
of the director constitutes a hazard to health, the property owner shall protect the public water
system against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly
in the service line.
(D) The type of protection that shall be provided to prevent backflow into the approved water supply
shall be commensurate with the degree of hazard that exists on the premises. The types of
protective assembly that may be required (listed in an increasing level of protection) include:
1. Double check assembly (DC);
2. Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly (RP); and
3. Air gap separation (AG).
The customer may choose a higher level of protection than required by the city. Situations shall
be evaluated on a case by case basis and the appropriate backflow protection shall be
determined by the city. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-7: MINIMUM CROSS CONNECTION PROTECTION REQUIREMENTS:
(A) Minimum Protection Levels: Minimum protection levels shall be determined by the city. The
following list of circumstances shall require backflow prevention and is not exclusive:
1. All new nonresidential connections;
2. Premises determined by the city to have unusually complex plumbing configurations that cannot
be adequately evaluated;
3. Premises with limited access or that deny access to the city for internal inspections;
4. Existing nonresidential connections where city water facilities and connections are modified,
upgraded or improved;
5. Each service connection that supplies water to premises on which any substance is or may be
handled in such a manner as to permit entry into the public water system, including water
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 386/710
originating from the public water system which is or may be subjected to deterioration in sanitary
quality;
6. Parcels having more than one service connection;
7. Premises where there are irrigation systems into which fertilizers, herbicides, or pesticides are, or
can be injected;
8. Premises where a cross connection exists, or the potential for one that could result in the
pollution or contamination of the public water system;
9. Residential parcels used for business purposes determined by the city to pose a threat to the
public water system;
10. Premises with any unapproved auxiliary water supply, whether or not it is interconnected with
the public water system, except those premises with a deactivated well;
11. Premises with internal pressure boosting system; and
12. All sewage/wastewater treatment facilities and sewage lift stations.
(B) Fire District's System: Nothing in this program shall be construed as affecting the customer's
responsibility for meeting the local fire district's fire flow system requirements. Nothing in a local fire
district's fire flow system requirements shall be construed as affecting the customer's responsibility
for meeting the requirements of this program.
(C) Existing Nonresidential Service Connections: Existing unprotected nonresidential connections are
subject to city evaluation and on site cross connection control surveys. The city must be provided
unimpeded access to perform internal inspections for the purpose of determining cross connection
hazards. If city access is impeded for any reason, then the customer will be required to install a
minimum of an RP to protect the public water system.
(D) New Nonresidential Fire Suppression System Connections: All new nonresidential fire suppression
system connections shall be protected with a city approved RPDA installed according to city
specifications.
(E) Existing Nonresidential Fire Suppression System Connections: Nonresidential fire suppression
systems currently protected with a minimum of a single detector check valve will be allowed to
continue in service until such system is modified, updated, improved, or hazard classification is
determined to require an RPDA. If existing protection is determined inadequate or is modified,
improved, or updated as identified under this program, the customer shall install an RPDA at the
point of connection to city water system according to city specifications. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY INSTALLATION, INSPECTION,
TESTING AND REPAIR:
(A) The customer shall own and bear all cost for the installation, initial testing, repairs and retesting of
all ABPAs required in accordance with this program. Upon notification by the city, the customer shall
repair or replace existing assemblies determined to be unapproved, defective, damaged or not
providing the level of protection specified by this program. All installations shall comply with the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 387/710
California plumbing code and the city's current design and construction standards. The customer
shall contact the city to request necessary inspections prior to covering pipe and/or connections
associated with the installation.
(B) The customer shall bear all costs that the customer determines are necessary in their sole
discretion, for the installation of pumps or renovation of existing customer piping, as a result of any
decreases in line pressure or flow attributed to upgrading or installing an ABPA.
(C) The customer shall provide the city and its agents with unimpeded access to backflow prevention
assemblies for routine testing and repairs. The city recognizes the potential of freeze damage to
ABPAs and associated aboveground piping. Commercially available insulated "soft" covers are
authorized to be installed by the customer for the purpose of freeze protection if such cover
provides access for required testing and maintenance. The customer shall not, without city's prior
written authorization, install any enclosure or any other apparatus for the purposes of freeze
protection or theft deterrent that impedes access to the assembly. Upon determination by city staff,
enclosures posing a safety hazard or impeding access shall be upgraded or removed by the
customer to assure the safety of city staff and completion of testing.
(D) It shall be the duty of the city at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed
to have certified inspections and operational tests made at least once a year. In those instances
where the director or his designated agent deems the hazard to be great enough, he may require
certified inspections at more frequent intervals. These inspections and tests shall be at the expense
of the customer and shall be performed by city personnel or the city's designated agent. The cost of
the inspection and testing shall be paid by the customer and shall be invoiced to the customer by
the city. The cost shall be the amount set by resolution of the city council and set forth in the city's
master fee schedule. Prior to testing, the city or its designated agent shall contact the customer as
to the scheduled testing date. The customer may elect to have the inspection and testing performed
by a qualified, certified tester, acceptable to the city, by so notifying the city in writing prior to the
scheduled testing date. The customer shall be responsible for all costs associated with such annual
testing and shall cause the city to be provided with the test report within ten (10) days after the
scheduled testing date. If the customer has not submitted the test report by this date, the city will
test the backflow prevention assembly and the customer will be charged as set forth hereinabove.
In the event that the backflow prevention assembly fails to pass the test, the customer shall be
notified and within thirty (30) days of the date of notification, either repair or replace and test the
assembly as provided in this chapter or water service will be discontinued. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-9: TEMPORARY METER CONNECTION:
Temporary meter connections to city hydrants, blow offs, or other city infrastructure shall be protected
with a minimum of an RP. The temporary meter and RP shall be installed by the city upon customer
submittal of appropriate request form and accompanying deposit to the city. The location of the
installed temporary meter connection shall be determined by the city in its sole discretion following
review of request form. Customer shall access water at approved location through city installed gate
valve located downstream of RP. Under no circumstances shall customer operate hydrant, blow off, or
other city infrastructure. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-10: TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION CONNECTIONS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 388/710
Temporary construction connections to city water mains used for the purpose of testing and flushing
noncity water lines shall be protected with a minimum of an RP. They shall be installed in accordance
with El Dorado irrigation district's current design and construction standards and shall be inspected and
certified by the city utility services technician prior to use and annually thereafter until completion of
project. Failure to contact city in a timely manner for annual certification may result in termination of
connection to city water main. Each RP must also be retested by the city upon relocation. (Ord. 1661,
2-25-2014)
7-14-11: VIOLATION DECLARED A NUISANCE:
Any activity in violation of this chapter that will adversely and seriously affect the public health, safety
and welfare, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be remedied as provided in this
chapter, any other applicable portion of this code or applicable state law. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-12: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to the provisions of sections 1-4-1 to 1-4-10 of this code,
inclusive, any other enforcement mechanism available to the city under this code and/or applicable
law.
(B) Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the director shall enforce the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-13: PENALTIES:
(A) Goal: The goal of the provisions of this chapter is to achieve voluntary compliance from the
customer, and the city will take reasonable measures to assure the customer has information
available to promptly and efficiently address cross connection issues. Where voluntary compliance
cannot be achieved through initial contacts and warnings, then appropriate administrative penalties
and further action are required.
(B) Penalties:
1. A violation of this chapter shall also be an administrative violation as defined in title 1, chapter 4A
of this code.
2. Based on the criteria for imposition of administrative sanctions set forth in title 1, chapter 4A of
this code, each day a violation of this chapter continues shall be deemed a level A violation as
that term is described in section 1-4A-3 of this code with an initial penalty of up to one hundred
dollars ($100.00).
3. Violations of this chapter that are deemed to be wilful noncompliance may be subject to level B
violation as determined by the director.
(C) Appeal: There shall be no appeal of the level of protection required in sections 7-14-6 and 7-14-7 of
this chapter and any appeal of administrative penalties shall follow the request for hearing
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 389/710
procedures provided for in title 1, chapter 4A of this code. Any order to discontinue water service or
any other orders or decisions of the director shall be appealable to the city manager, provided,
however, that the city manager's decision shall be final and there shall be no appeal to the city
council. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-14: REMEDIES CUMULATIVE:
The remedies set forth in this chapter are cumulative to any other remedy available to the city. Pursuit
of one remedy shall not preclude any other remedy, and nothing contained in this chapter shall limit or
be deemed to prevent the city from pursuing any other remedy available to the city under this code or
any other applicable law. (Ord. 1661, 2-25-2014)
7-14-15: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect other provisions of this chapter that can be given effect without the invalid
provision or its application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 1661, 2-
25-2014)
Chapter 15
STORMWATER QUALITY
7-15-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the PLACERVILLE STORMWATER QUALITY ORDINANCE, and may
be so cited. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
(A) The purpose of this chapter is to ensure that the city of Placerville is compliant with state and
federal laws and fulfills its requirements to: 1) protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the
citizens of the city of Placerville; 2) enhance and protect the quality of waters of the state in the city
of Placerville by reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable
and controlling nonstormwater discharges to a stormwater facility; and 3) to cause the use of best
management practices (section 7-15-4 of this chapter) by the city and its citizens that will reduce the
adverse effects of polluted runoff discharges on waters of the state.
(B) This chapter seeks to promote these purposes by: 1) prohibiting illicit discharges to a stormwater
facility; 2) establishing authority to implement and enforce requirements for stormwater
management, including source control requirements, to reduce pollution to the maximum extent
practicable; 3) establishing authority to implement and enforce requirements for development
projects to reduce stormwater pollution and erosion both during construction and after the project is
complete; and 4) establishing authority that will enable the city to implement and enforce any
stormwater management plan, low intensity development (LID) standards, development standards
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 390/710
contained in the city's development guide, or standards and specifications contained in any other
development guide or manuals as adopted by the city. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter applies to all incorporated areas within the city of Placerville. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have meaning respectively
ascribed to them in this section, unless the context of a particular provision clearly requires a different
definition:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Methods that have been determined to be the most
effective, practical means of preventing or reducing pollution from nonpoint sources, such as pollutants
carried by stormwater runoff. "BMP" is a broad term that refers to many of the actions that are required
under or could be completed as part of the national pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES)
permit, including behavioral BMPs such as education (e.g., placing inlet stencils and regularly
educating municipal staff and others about measures to reduce pollution in stormwater) or discharging
wash water to the sanitary sewer instead of the storm drain, structural BMPs such as source controls
(e.g., double containment for hazardous materials) and treatment controls (e.g., vegetated swales and
detention basins) to treat runoff before it is discharged to the storm drain or local waterway, and other
practices that prevent or reduce pollutants from reaching the storm drain or other waters.
CITY: The incorporated area of the city of Placerville.
CLEAN WATER ACT (CWA): The primary federal law in the United States governing water pollution.
Formerly referred to as the federal water pollution control act or federal water pollution control act
amendments of 1972, is public law 92-500, as amended by public law 95-217, public law 95-576,
public law 96-483 and public law 77-117, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
CONSENT: To permit, approve, or agree; comply or yield.
DEVELOPMENT: Any activity that moves soils or substantially alters the preexisting vegetated or
manmade cover of any and all land. Development includes any activity that may be considered new
development or redevelopment. This also includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting,
scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil, placement of fill materials, paving, pavement removal,
exterior construction, substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including, but not
limited to, removal by clearing or grubbing, or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves
streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Development does not include
routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of
the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to
protect public health and safety.
DISCHARGE: The release or placement of any material into stormwater facilities within the city's
jurisdiction, including, but not limited to, stormwater, wastewater, solid materials, liquids, hazardous
waste, raw materials, debris, litter, or any other substance.
ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The city of Placerville development services department is the primary
enforcement agency for the purposes of this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 391/710
ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: Any city employee or agent of the city with the authority to enforce any
provision of this chapter and the authority to make any decision on behalf of the director required or
called for by this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTION: Illicit connections include pipes, drains, open channels, or other conveyances
that have the potential to allow an illicit discharge to enter the MS4.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE: Illicit discharges include all nonstormwater discharges not otherwise authorized
by this chapter, including discharges from organized car washes, mobile cleaning, and pressure wash
operations.
INCIDENTAL RUNOFF: Unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal
overspray from sprinklers that escapes the area of intended use. Water leaving an intended use area is
not considered incidental if it is part of the facility design, if it is due to excessive application, if it is due
to intentional overflow or application, or if it is due to negligence.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES permits as defined in 40 code of federal
regulations 122.26(b)(14).
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP): The minimum required performance standard for
implementation of municipal stormwater management programs to reduce pollutants in stormwater.
Clean water act section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) requires that municipal permits "shall require controls to reduce
the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, including management practices, control
techniques and system, design and engineering methods, and such other provisions as the
administrator or the state determines appropriate for the control of such pollutants". MEP is the
cumulative effect of implementing, evaluating, and making corresponding changes to a variety of
technically appropriate and economically feasible BMPs, ensuring that the most appropriate controls
are implemented in the most effective manner. This process of implementing, evaluating, revising, or
adding new BMPs is commonly referred to as the iterative process.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4): A conveyance or system of conveyances
(including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, municipal stormwater facilities, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, manmade channels, or storm drains) owned or operated by a state, county, city,
town, or other public body, that is designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, which is not
a combined sewer, and which is not a part of a publicly owned treatment works.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES): The primary permitting
program under the clean water act (33 USC section 1251 et seq.) which regulates most discharges to
surface waters.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to municipal stormwater collection systems that is
not composed entirely of stormwater except discharges pursuant to an NPDES permit and discharges
resulting from firefighting activities.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution, as defined herein. Pollutants include,
but are not limited to: sediment, chlorine, paints, varnishes, solvents, fuel, oil, grease, automotive
fluids, yard wastes, refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, food related wastes, discarded or abandoned
objects, floatable materials, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, detergents, soaps, hazardous
substances, hazardous waste, sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens, dissolved and particulate metals,
animal wastes, wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure or from grading
(including, but not limited to, sediments, slurries, and concrete residue), and noxious or offensive
matter of any kind.
POLLUTION: "The man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 392/710
radiological integrity of water" (CWA section 502(19)). Pollution also means, "alteration of the quality of
the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects either the waters for beneficial
uses of facilities which serve these beneficial uses" (California Water Code section 13050(L)(1)).
PORTER-COLOGNE ACT: The Porter-Cologne water quality control act, as amended (California Water
Code section 13000 et seq.).
PROPERTY OWNER: Any person, entity, company, and/or authorized representative having title to real
property within the geographic area affected by this chapter.
REGIONAL WATER QUALITY CONTROL BOARD: The California regional water quality control board
valley region.
STORMWATER: Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface runoff and drainage (40 code of
federal regulations 122.26(b)(13)). As stormwater flows over the land or impervious surfaces, it
accumulates debris, chemicals, sediment or other pollutants that could adversely affect water quality if
the stormwater is discharged untreated.
STORMWATER FACILITY: Structures that are designed to capture, convey and treat stormwater runoff
while removing pollutants and controlling flow rates. These facilities include pipes, ditches, swales,
filters, ponds, basins, underground vaults, and drop inlets. Facilities require maintenance in order to
remain functional.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN (SWPPP): The construction site water quality
management plan required by the state's construction general stormwater permit.
SURFACE WATER: Includes, but is not limited to, perennial and ephemeral streams, lakes, wetlands,
springs, and similar waters which flow or reside in natural or artificial impoundments or drainageways.
WATERS OF THE STATE: All surface watercourses and water bodies, including lakes, bays, ponds,
impounding reservoirs, springs, wells, rivers, streams, creeks, marshes, inlets, canals, and all other
bodies of surface waters (Porter-Cologne section 13050(e)), and which are within the incorporated
areas of the city of Placerville. This definition includes, but is broader than, waters of the United States.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: Surface watercourses and water bodies as defined by 40 code of
federal regulations section 122.2, including all natural waterways and definite channels and
depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water
during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons.
Any term(s) defined in the federal clean water act, as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for
the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the environmental protection agency, as
amended, and which are not specifically defined above, shall, when used in this chapter, have the
same meaning as set forth in said act or regulation. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-5: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The city of Placerville shall administer the provisions of this chapter with all participating departments
with responsibility for implementation and enforcement of the stormwater management plan. (Ord.
1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-6: CONFLICTS WITH OTHER LAWS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 393/710
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law or regulation or city
ordinance, that requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health shall govern. To the
extent permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law,
regulation, order, permit, or city ordinance. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-7: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
Except as provided in section 7-15-8 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to make or cause to
be made any illicit connection to or illicit discharge into a stormwater facility.
Notwithstanding the exemptions provided by section 7-15-8 of this chapter, if the enforcement agency
determines any otherwise exempt discharge causes or significantly contributes to violations of any
water quality standard, or conveys significant quantities of pollutants to stormwater facilities, surface
water(s) or watercourse(s), or is a danger to public health or safety, then the enforcement agency may
give written notice to the property owner or occupant that the otherwise applicable exemption will not
apply to the subject discharge following expiration as noted by the applicable notice. Any such
discharge shall thereafter be prohibited from entering the stormwater facility or surface water. (Ord.
1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-8: EXEMPTIONS TO PROHIBITED DISCHARGES:
Discharges from the following activities shall not be prohibited unless the enforcement agency
determines that the discharge causes or significantly contributes to violations of any plan standard, or
conveys significant quantities of pollutants to surface water or watercourses, or is a danger to public
health or safety. The enforcement agency may give written notice to the property owner or occupant
that the otherwise applicable exemption will not apply.
(A) Water line flushing and discharges from potable water sources.
(B) Incidental runoff from landscape irrigation and lawn watering. (See section 7-15-15 of this chapter
for minimum runoff control requirements.)
(C) Diverted stream flows and irrigation water.
(D) Springs, rising groundwater, and flows from riparian habitat and wetlands.
(E) Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration (as defined at 40 code of federal regulation section
35.2005(b)(20)) to separate stormwater sewers.
(F) Uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation drains, footing drains, fountain drains and water
from crawl space pumps.
(G) Air conditioning condensation.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 394/710
(H) Individual residential car washing.
(I) Dechlorinated, pollution free swimming pool and spa water discharges.
(J) Firefighting flows. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-9: DISCHARGE IN VIOLATION OF EXISTING NPDES PERMIT:
Any person subject to any individual and/or industrial NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall
comply with all provisions of such permit, SWPPP, and any regulations or ordinances promulgated
thereto. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the enforcement
agency: a) prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development,
redevelopment, or improvement plan; b) upon inspection of the facility; c) during any enforcement
proceeding or action; or d) for any other reasonable cause at any other time. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-10: DISCHARGE IN VIOLATION OF CITY'S NPDES PERMIT;
INDEMNIFICATION:
Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of the city's NPDES permit issued by the
regional water quality control board and any amendment, revision or reissuance thereof, either
separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such
discharge shall be the responsibility of the person(s) so causing or responsible for the discharge, and
such persons shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, employees,
representatives, and volunteers from any and all claims in any administrative or judicial enforcement
action relating to such discharge. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-11: ACTS POTENTIALLY RESULTING IN VIOLATION OF FEDERAL CLEAN
WATER ACT AND/OR PORTER-COLOGNE ACT:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are minimum standards. This
chapter does not intend or imply that compliance with these minimum standards will ensure that there
will be no contamination, pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the state.
This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, and its officers, agents, employees,
representatives, and volunteers for any damage that results from any discharger's reliance upon this
chapter or any administrative decision made hereunder. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-12: RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTIONS:
(A) Entry Authorized; Inspection: The enforcement official is authorized to enter any building or
premises upon consent through existing permit or written/verbal consent in accordance with the
provisions of this section for the purpose of making an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
chapter and to assure the proper implementation of BMPs. Inspections/investigations shall be
based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the
objectives of the chapter, including, but not limited to: visual evidence, complaints received,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 395/710
knowledge or physical evidence of industrial activities or other pollutant sources, random sampling,
sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illicit connections, illicit discharge, or
similar factors.
(B) Right To Inspect: Unless inspections are authorized pursuant to an existing permit issued to the
property owner or occupant, prior to commencing any inspection as hereinabove authorized, the
enforcement official shall obtain either the consent of the property owner or occupant or shall obtain
an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant.
(C) Compliance Assessments: The enforcement official may inspect property for the purpose of
verifying compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to: 1) identifying products produced,
processes conducted, chemicals used and materials stored on or contained within the property, 2)
identifying point(s) of discharge of all wastewater, process water systems and pollutants, 3)
investigating the natural slope, including drainage patterns and manmade conveyance systems, 4)
establishing the location of all points of discharge from the property, whether by surface runoff,
snowmelt, or through a stormwater facility, 5) locating any illicit connection or the source of any illicit
discharge, and 6) evaluating compliance with any stormwater discharge permit.
(D) Portable Equipment: For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the enforcement official
may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment that may pose a threat
to surface waters, stormwater facilities or the MS4.
(E) Records Review: The enforcement official may inspect all records of the property owner or
occupant of property relating to state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans,
monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, illicit discharges, or
any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to a stormwater facility.
(F) Sample And Test: The enforcement official may inspect, sample and test any runoff, soils area,
process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any container contents),
and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of
pollutants to a stormwater facility. The enforcement official may investigate the integrity of all
stormwater facilities or other pipelines on the property using appropriate tests, including, but not
limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The enforcement official may take photographs or
video tape, make surveys, measurements or drawings, and create any other record reasonably
necessary to document conditions on the property.
(G) Monitoring: The enforcement official may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of
measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to a stormwater facility.
(H) Test Results: The property owner or occupant of property subject to inspection shall, on submission
of a written request to the enforcement official, receive copies of all monitoring and test results
conducted during the investigation. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-13: CONCEALMENT AND ABETTING:
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 396/710
constitute a violation. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-14: REDUCTION OF POLLUTANTS IN STORMWATER; BEST MANAGEMENT
PRACTICES:
(A) General Requirements: Any person engaging in activities that may result in pollutants entering a
stormwater facility shall implement best management practices to the maximum extent practicable
(MEP), or as determined by the enforcement agency, to prevent such pollutants.
(B) Maintenance: All BMPs shall be protected and maintained to ensure continuous and fully effective
performance as designed.
(C) Illicit Connection: It is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to establish, use, or
maintain any unauthorized connection to a stormwater facility or MS4.
(D) Waste Disposal: No person shall throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, in or
upon any public or private property, driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, component of a
stormwater facility or waters of the state, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that the same may cause or contribute to
pollution, as further proscribed by chapter 2 of this title.
(E) Construction Activities: Any person performing construction work within the city shall implement
appropriate BMPs to prevent the discharge from the site of pollutants, soil, or construction wastes or
debris, including contaminants from construction materials, tools, and equipment to a stormwater
facility.
(F) Watercourse Protection: Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or
such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property
reasonably free of trash, debris, and other obstacles that would pollute or contaminate the
watercourse.
(G) Development/Redevelopment: The city may require development and/or redevelopment projects to
incorporate appropriate BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant loading of
stormwater runoff from such development/redevelopment. These required BMPs may be contained
in any land use entitlement, conditions of approval, grading plans, improvement plans, or any
construction or building related permit to be issued relative to such development/redevelopment.
The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use
entitlements and building permits as required elsewhere in this code and adopted stormwater
management plans. The city may withhold final approvals or other authorizations if the owner or
developer is in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-15: ILLICIT DISCHARGES:
Any person owning or occupying premises who has knowledge of any illicit discharge from or across
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 397/710
those premises which might enter a stormwater facility, except as provided in section 7-15-8 of this
chapter, shall:
(A) Cease and desist and/or take all reasonable action to contain, cleanup and abate the illicit
discharge within seventy two (72) hours of notification or, if high risk spill, immediately, and
(B) Notify the enforcement agency or its designated contact person within twenty four (24) hours of
discovery of the illicit discharge. The enforcement agency may require the property owner and/or
the responsible person to take corrective actions within thirty (30) days or less for uncontrolled
sources that could pose an environmental threat.
Additionally, any party responsible for controlling runoff in excess of incidental runoff shall do the
following: 1) detect leaks and correct the leaks within seventy two (72) hours of learning of the leak;
2) properly design and aim sprinkler heads; 3) not irrigate during precipitation events; and 4)
manage ponds containing recycle water such that no discharge occurs unless the discharge is a
result of a 25-year, 24-hour storm event or greater, and the regional water quality control board is
notified by e-mail no later than twenty four (24) hours after the discharge. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-16: ENFORCEMENT:
Any person who violates a provision of this chapter may be subject to administrative, civil, or criminal
liability as provided in title 1, chapters 4, 4A, and 4B of this code.
(A) Primary Authority: The enforcement agency is empowered to use any of the provisions of this
section through section 7-15-21 of this chapter, and the provisions found in title 1, chapters 4, 4A,
and 4B where appropriate to correct violations of, and secure compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
(B) Warning Not Required: Issuance of a warning shall not be a requirement prior to using any
enforcement provision of this chapter. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-17: VIOLATION:
(A) Informal Warning; Educational Materials: Whenever the enforcement official determines that a
violation of a provision of this chapter has occurred or may occur, the enforcement official may
provide a warning to any person and/or owner responsible for the condition giving rise to such
violation or potential violation. Such warning may include the distribution of educational materials to
assist in future compliance with this chapter. This warning may be provided in person or in writing.
(B) Notice Of Noncompliance: Whenever the enforcement official determines that a violation has
occurred, the enforcement official may serve a notice of noncompliance to any person and/or
property owner responsible for the violation. Each notice of noncompliance shall contain the
following information:
1. The date of the violation;
2. The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 398/710
3. The chapter section violated and a description of the violation;
4. A description of how the violation can be corrected;
5. A time limit by which the violation shall be corrected, after which further enforcement and/or
corrective actions may be taken by the city if the violation is not fully corrected;
6. The name and signature of the individual preparing the notice of noncompliance;
7. A statement outlining the procedure for appeal of the notice of noncompliance; and
8. Notice of potential liability under the federal clean water act or state Porter-Cologne water quality
act.
(C) Administrative Compliance Order: Whenever the enforcement official determines that a violation
has occurred, the enforcement official may serve an administrative compliance order to any person
and/or property owner responsible for the violation. Each administrative compliance order shall
contain the following information:
1. The date of the violation;
2. The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred;
3. The chapter section violated and a description of the violation;
4. An order to cease all activities which are believed to be causing the violation;
5. A time limit by which the violation shall be corrected, after which corrective actions will be taken
by the city if the violation is not fully corrected;
6. A statement that the city will charge the person and/or owner for all administrative costs
associated with enforcement actions;
7. An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the violation;
8. The name and signature of the individual preparing the citation;
9. A statement outlining the procedure for appeal of the order;
10. Notice to the violator of potential liability under the federal clean water act or state Porter-
Cologne water quality act; and
11. Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the
terms, conditions, and requirements of any permit issued pursuant hereto.
(D) Citation: The enforcement official is authorized to issue citations for infractions of this section using
the provisions found in title 1, chapters 4, 4A, and 4B of this code.
(E) Misdemeanor: Any violation of this chapter may, at the discretion of the enforcing agency, be
considered a misdemeanor and, as such, may be punished using the provisions of section 1-4-5 of
this code, including a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), imprisonment for a
period not to exceed six (6) months, or both.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 399/710
(F) Cost Recovery: The enforcement official may deliver to the property owner or occupant, any
permittee, or any other person who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative
compliance order, an invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to
the city for the actual costs incurred by the city in issuing and enforcing any notice or order.
If any owner or occupant, permittee, or any other person subject to an invoice for costs fails to
either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs or the underlying notice
or order in accordance with this section, then the county may institute collection proceedings or
resort to any collections methods authorized by title 1, chapters 4A and 4B of this code.
(G) Service: The enforcement officer shall use the provisions of title 1, chapter 4A of this code to serve
a notice of noncompliance, citation, administrative compliance order, or invoice for costs to
effectuate the provisions of this chapter.
(H) Separate Violation Intent:
1. Each day in which a violation occurs and each separate failure to comply with any provision of
this chapter is a separate offense and punishable by penalties in accordance with this chapter.
2. A violation of the provisions of this chapter shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of
the violator to construct, maintain, operate, or utilize an illicit connection, or to cause, allow or
facilitate any illicit discharge or threatened illicit discharge. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-18: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
(A) Any person receiving a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, or citation under
section 7-15-17 of this chapter, or any person required to perform monitoring, analysis, reporting or
corrective activities by any enforcement official and who is aggrieved by such decision may appeal,
in accordance with section 1-4A-32 of this code, the notice of noncompliance, administrative
compliance order, citation, or decision in writing to the hearing officer within ten (10) days following
the effective date of the subject action. Upon receipt of such appeal, the hearing officer shall
request a report and recommendation from the authorized city employee and shall set the matter for
hearing at the earliest practical date. At said hearing, the hearing officer may base his or her
decision on additional evidence, and may reject, affirm or modify the enforcement official's decision.
(B) The decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city council by filing a notice of appeal
with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the decision of the hearing officer. Such
appeals shall be in writing and shall set forth fully the grounds for the appeal. The city council shall
thereupon fix a time and place for a public hearing of such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to
the appellant of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the U.S.
post office, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his last known address at least five (5)
days prior thereto.
At the hearing before the city council, the appellant may appear in person or by counsel and
present any relevant evidence relating to the grievance; the enforcement agency may present
evidence in rebuttal thereof. The hearing may be continued from time to time, not to exceed thirty
(30) days in all. The city council shall conduct a hearing and make findings as appropriate. The
decision of the city council shall be final.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 400/710
(C) Notwithstanding the foregoing, these administrative appeal procedures shall not apply to criminal
proceedings initiated to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-19: NUISANCE ABATEMENT; SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
(A) Nuisance Abatement: The enforcement official may, in addition to other authorized procedures set
forth in this chapter, take action to abate any nuisance in accordance with the procedures found in
title 1, chapters 4A and 4B of this code. The costs of any such abatement undertaken by the city
shall be borne jointly and severally by the property owner and the person creating, causing,
committing, allowing, or maintaining the nuisance and shall be collectable in accordance with the
provisions of title 1, chapters 4A and 4B of this code.
(B) Summary Abatement: The enforcement official may, in addition to other authorized procedures,
take immediate action to abate any illicit discharge or threatened illicit discharge from any source to
a stormwater facility when, in the discretion of the enforcement agency, the illicit discharge or
threatened illicit discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition which presents an imminent
danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the environment, or a violation of a permit. The
enforcement official must first make reasonable attempts to contact and compel the responsible
person and/or property owner to abate the illicit discharge or threatened illicit discharge in a
satisfactory manner. The costs of any such abatement shall be borne jointly and severally by the
property owner and the person creating, causing, committing, allowing, or maintaining the nuisance
and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of title 1, chapters 4A and 4B of this
code. Following the summary abatement hearing, within ten (10) days of taking action in
accordance with this section, there shall be a postabatement hearing in accordance with title 1,
chapter 4A and/or chapter 4B of this code. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-20: CIVIL ACTIONS:
In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this chapter may be enforced
by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate and allowed by
law, any or all of the following remedies:
(A) A temporary restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction;
(B) Reimbursement for the costs of any investigation, inspection or monitoring survey which led to the
establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing action under
this chapter;
(C) Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse effect(s) resulting from the
violation; and
(D) Compensatory damages for loss or destruction of water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Costs
and damages under this subsection shall be paid to the city and shall be used exclusively for costs
associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control system and/or
implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 401/710
7-15-21: REGULATORY FEE STRUCTURE AUTHORIZED:
The enforcement official shall collect such fees as may be authorized by the city council to establish
and collect regulatory costs, which include routine inspections/investigations, and other regulatory
functions associated with this chapter. Any such fees shall be established by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-22: NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES:
Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be nonexclusive and it is
within the discretion of the enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies, including those specified
in title 1, chapter 4A of this code, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available
for any single violation of this chapter. Moreover, the remedies available to the city pursuant to this
chapter shall not limit the right of the city to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. (Ord.
1672, 9-22-2015)
7-15-23: SEVERABILITY:
(A) If any section, subsection, phrase, or clause of this chapter is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(B) The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section,
subsection, phrase or clause thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections,
subsections, phrases, or clauses be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 1672, 9-22-2015)
Title 8
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Chapter 1
SIDEWALKS
8-1-1: ENCROACHMENTS TO SIDEWALK SPACE:
All electric light, telephone, telegraph or other poles and all trees, when such poles and trees stand
within the space used for sidewalks, or in the surface drainways of the streets, and constitute
obstructions thereto, are hereby declared to be nuisances. It shall be the duty of the superintendent of
streets to demand, in writing, of the parties responsible therefor, that the obstructions be removed and
in case of failure of the parties to so remove any of the obstructions within thirty (30) days after
notification, the superintendent of streets shall proceed immediately thereafter to remove the
obstructions. (Ord. 507, 8-9-1901)
8-1-2: SIDEWALK REPAIRS REQUIRED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 402/710
It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having charge or control of any building, lot or premises in
the city fronting on any portion of an improved street or where a sidewalk is laid, to allow any portion of
the sidewalk in front of the building, lot or premises to be out of repair, and the person must at all times
keep the sidewalk in such condition that it will not endanger persons or property passing thereon, and
will not interfere with public convenience in the use thereof. (Ord. 743, 9-24-1951)
8-1-3: NOTICE; FAILURE TO REPAIR; LIEN:
Whenever any sidewalk within the city becomes defective from want of repair or renewing, the
superintendent of streets may, by notice in writing, notify the owner of the real property to renew or
repair the sidewalk, specifying in the notice what repairs are required. After the expiration of ten (10)
days time from the day of service of the notice, the city shall be deemed to have acquired jurisdiction to
contract for the making of necessary repairs if such repairs be not commenced and diligently
prosecuted to completion, and the superintendent of streets may enter into contract with any proper
person to make the repairs at a reasonable price and at the expense of the city; and all such expenses
with the cost of collecting the same shall become a lien upon all of the lots or subdivision of land that
the sidewalk may be contiguous to; and the lien may be enforced and foreclosed as hereinafter
provided. (Ord. 1480, 8-27-1991)
8-1-4: SERVICE OF NOTICE:
The notices provided for in this chapter may be served personally by the superintendent of streets or
by any citizen of the United States over the age of twenty one (21) years; or they may be served if the
person upon whom service is to be made resides outside of the city, by the superintendent by mail, by
depositing the same in the United States post office in a sealed envelope, with the postage thereon
prepaid, and directed to the person sought to be served, at his last known address or place of
residence; and the certificate of the superintendent of personal service or the affidavit of any other
person as hereinbefore provided or in case of service by mail, the affidavit of the superintendent as to
the necessary facts as herein required, shall constitute prima facie evidence of service of the notice. In
case the owner is a nonresident of the city, then the occupant of the property, if there is one, must also
be served with a duplicate of the notice served by mail on the owner. (Ord. 507, 8-9-1901)
8-1-5: ACTION FOR RECOVERY OF LIEN:
Whenever the superintendent of streets shall have caused any repairs to be made as in this chapter
provided, and the bills therefor shall have been presented to the council, and the council shall have
ordered the same to be paid and a warrant upon the treasurer to be drawn therefor, the council may at
the same time or at any subsequent meeting, order the attorney to commence an action to recover the
amount so ordered paid, and enforce and foreclose the lien of the city against the real property liable
thereto. (Ord. 507, 8-9-1901)
Chapter 2
RESERVED
(Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 403/710
Chapter 3
ENCROACHMENT ONTO CITY STREETS
8-3-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS; DEFINITIONS:
(A) Construction: Unless the context otherwise requires, the definitions and general provisions set forth
in this section govern the construction of this chapter.
(B) Definitions:
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of Placerville, El Dorado County, California.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer or his authorized agent of the city.
ENCROACH, ENCROACHMENT: Includes going upon, over, under, or using any right of way in
such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, or interfere with the normal use of that way, including the
performance thereon of any of the following acts:
(A) Excavating or disturbing the right of way;
(B) Erecting or maintaining any post, sign, pole, fence, guardrail, wall, loading platform, or other
structure on or over or under the right of way;
(C) Planting any tree, shrub, grass or other growing thing within the right of way;
(D) Placing or leaving on the right of way any rubbish, brush, earth or other material of any nature
whatever;
(E) Constructing, placing, or maintaining on, over, under, or within the right of way any pathway,
sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, any culvert or other surface drainage or subsurface
drainage facility, any pipe, conduit, or cable;
(F) Traveling on the right of way by any vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of dimension,
weight or other characteristic prohibited by law without a permit;
(G) Lighting or building a fire;
(H) Constructing, placing, planting or maintaining any structure, embankment, excavation, tree or
other object adjacent to the right of way which causes or will cause an encroachment.
PERMITTEE: Any person(s), firm, company or corporation, association, public agency, or
organization that proposes to do work or encroach upon a public "right of way" as herein defined
and has been issued a permit for said encroachment by the city engineer. All obligations,
responsibilities, and other requirements of the permittee as herein described, shall be binding on
subsequent owners of the encroachment.
PUBLIC STREET: The full width of the right of way of any road, street, lane, alley, or pedestrian
walkway used by or for the general public, whether or not those roads, streets, lanes, alleys, and
pedestrian walkways have been accepted as and declared to be part of the city system of public
streets, except streets forming a part of the state highway system.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Any utility company, such as the Pacific Gas and Electric Company, or the Pacific
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 404/710
Telephone and Telegraph Company, which is regulated by the public utilities commission of the
state of California, and conducts business in the city under authority of a duly executed franchise
agreement with the city.
RIGHT OF WAY: Land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or
process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the use of the general public for street, highway,
lane, alley, or pedestrian walkway purposes.
(C) Right Of Lawful Use: Any permit granted under this chapter shall be subject to the right of the city,
or any other person, district or other body of persons entitled thereto, to use that part of the public
highway for any purpose for which it may be lawfully used, and no part of the highway shall be
unduly obstructed at any time.
(D) Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to any officer or employee of the city acting in the
discharge of his official duties, or to any work performed by any person under contract with the city.
This chapter shall not apply to any duly authorized employee of a public utility maintaining existing
aerial facilities or underground facilities accessible through manholes, vaults, junction boxes,
providing no excavation, boring or other earthwork is performed and a normal flow of traffic can be
maintained on the public street or right of way.
(E) Acts Requiring Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person(s), firm, company, corporation,
association, public agency, or organization, without first obtaining a written permit to encroach or to
make or cause to be made any encroachment of any nature whatever within, upon, over or under
the limits of any right of way in the incorporated territory of the city, or to make or cause to be made
any alteration of any nature within, upon, over, or under such right of way, or to construct, put upon,
maintain or leave thereon, or to cause to be constructed, put upon, maintained or left thereon, any
obstruction or impediment of any nature whatever; or to remove, cut or trim trees thereon; or to set
a fire thereon, or to place on, over or under such right of way any pipe line, conduit or other fixture;
or to move over or cause to be moved over the surface of any right of way or over any bridge,
viaduct, or other structure maintained by the city any vehicle or combination of vehicles or other
object or dimension or weight prohibited by law or having other characteristics capable of damaging
the right of way, or to place any structure, wall, culvert or similar encroachment or to make any
excavation or embankment in such a way as to endanger the normal usage of the right of way.
(Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
(F) Nonacceptable Permit Applications: No application will be approved nor permit issued for
constructing or maintaining a loading platform upon or in the right of way of a public street or for
erecting or maintaining therein or thereon a post, pole, column or structure for support for
advertising signs; provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall prohibit an
application being made for the erection or maintenance of a directional sign. (Ord. 1067, 10-10-
1974)
(G) Emergency Work Authorized: This chapter shall not prevent any person from maintaining any pipe,
conduit, wire or cable lawfully on, over or under any public street, or from making excavation, as
may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity therefor arises
during the hours the offices of the city are closed, except that the person making an emergency use
or encroachment on a public street shall apply for a permit therefor within one calendar day after
the offices of the city are again opened. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 405/710
8-3-2: PERMITS AND FEES:
(A) Issuance Of Written Permits: The written permits required by this chapter shall be issued by the city
engineer, subject to conditions set forth in this chapter or required by law.
(B) Application For Permits: The city engineer shall prescribe and provide a regular form of application
for the use of any applicant for a permit required by this chapter. The application form shall contain
space for the name, address and principal places of business of the applicant, together with such
detail as in the judgment of the city engineer is necessary to establish the exact location,
dimensions, duration and purpose of the proposed use or encroachment.
(C) Permit Application Exhibits: The applicant shall enclose with, attach or add to the application for a
permit a map, plat, sketch, diagram or similar exhibit when required by the city engineer, and of a
size and in such quantity as he may prescribe, on which shall be plainly shown any and all
information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate, or identify the proposed use or encroachment
and the right of applicant to so use or encroach thereon.
(D) Consent Of Public Bodies; Evidence Of To Be Filed: The applicant shall also enclose with, attach or
add to the application the written order or consent to any work thereunder, required by law of the
public utilities commission, sanitary districts, water districts or any other public body having
jurisdiction. A permit shall not be issued until and unless such order or consent is first obtained and
evidence thereof filed with the city engineer. The permittee shall keep himself adequately informed
of all state and federal laws and local ordinances and regulations which in any manner affect the
permit. The applicant shall at all times comply with and shall cause all his agents and employees to
comply with all such laws, ordinances, regulations, decisions, court and similar authoritative orders.
(E) Liability For Damages: Permittee shall be responsible for all liability imposed by law for personal
injury or property damage proximately caused by work permitted and done by permittee under the
permit, or proximately caused by failure on permittee's part to perform his obligations under said
permit in respect to maintenance. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its officers or
employees, permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them, and each of them, harmless from
such claim insofar as permitted by law.
(F) Fees: The schedule of fees will be those recommended by the city engineer and established and
adopted by the council from time to time by resolution. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall
deposit with the city cash or check, in a sufficient sum to cover the fee for issuance of the permit,
charges for field investigation, and the fee for necessary inspection, all in accordance with schedule
established and adopted by the council.
Public utilities may, at the city engineer's option, make payment for the above charges as billed by
the city instead of advance deposit as required above. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
Fees will not be required of any public agency which is authorized by law to establish or maintain
any works or facilities in, under or over any public street or right of way. Reference is hereby made
to section 4-8-1 of this code for development fees. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970; amd. Ord. 1263, 5-26-
1981)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 406/710
(G) Permit To Move Certain Vehicles Or Object: Before a vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of
weight or dimension or characteristic, prohibited by law without a permit, is moved on any public
right of way, a permit to do so must first be granted by the city engineer as set forth in specifications
established by the city engineer, or as otherwise required by him.
(H) Term Of Permit; Beginning Of Work: The permittee shall begin the work or use authorized by a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter within ninety (90) days from date of issuance, unless a
different period is stated in the permit. If the work or use is not begun within ninety (90) days, or
within the time stated in the permit, then the permit shall become void. A permit for continuing a use
or maintaining an encroachment previously authorized shall be valid for a term of one year from
date of issuance, unless sooner terminated by discontinuance of the use, or removal of the
encroachment, for which the permit was issued.
(I) Term Of Permit: The permittee shall complete the work or use authorized by a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter within the time and according to the terms specified in the permit. If the
work is unduly delayed by the permittee and if the interest of the public reasonably so demands, the
city engineer shall have authority to complete the work or any portion thereof. The actual cost of
such a work by the city plus twenty percent (20%) as an overhead charge shall be charged to and
paid by the permittee or his surety.
(J) Display Of Permit: The permittee shall keep any permit issued pursuant to this chapter at the site of
work or in the cab of a vehicle when movement thereof on a public street is involved, and the permit
must be shown to any authorized representative of the city engineer or law enforcement officer on
demand.
A permit issued for continued use or maintenance of an encroachment may be kept at the place of
business of the permittee or otherwise safeguarded during the term of validity, but shall be made
available to an authorized representative of the city engineer or law enforcement officer within a
reasonable time after demand therefor is made.
(K) Changes In Permit: No changes may be made in the location, dimension, character or duration of
the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except upon written authorization of the city
engineer. No permit shall be required for the continuing use or maintenance of encroachments
installed by public utilities, or for changes therein or thereto where such changes or additions
require no excavation of the right of way. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-3: BONDS:
(A) Surety Bond Required: Unless this part is waived in the permit and prior to the issuance of a permit,
the applicant must file with the city engineer a bond equal to the cost plus twenty percent (20%) of
the work required to be done in order to comply with all the terms and conditions of such permit as
established by the city engineer.
(B) Cash In Lieu Of Surety Bond: In lieu of a surety bond required by subsection (A) of this section, the
applicant may deposit cash in the amount named in subsection (A) of this section to secure the
performance of the terms and conditions of the permit and the compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 407/710
(C) Annual Bond: As an alternative to the requirements of subsection (A) of this section, the applicant
may, upon approval of the city engineer, annually file with the city engineer a bond equal to the
estimated costs plus twenty percent (20%) of the work required to be done in order to comply with
all of the terms and conditions of permits issued during the year and this chapter.
(D) Bond For Continuing Use: An applicant for a permit for a use or encroachment which is to continue
or remain within, under, or upon the right of way of a public highway beyond the time authorized for
construction or installation, shall file with the clerk a cash deposit or surety bond equal to the cost
plus twenty percent (20%) in making the right of way safe and convenient for travel to the general
public.
(E) Additional Bond Or Cash Deposit: The city engineer may require an additional bond or cash deposit
required by subsections (A) through (D) of this section at any time when in his opinion the amount
of the bond or cash deposit previously made is insufficient.
(F) Requirements Of Bond Provisions: The aforesaid bonds shall be executed by the applicant or
contractor doing work as principal and by a surety company authorized to do business in this state
as a surety. The bond shall name the city as obligee and shall be conditioned as follows:
1. That each and all of the terms and conditions of the permit shall be fully performed and complied
with to the satisfaction of the city engineer;
2. That each and all of the provisions of this chapter are complied with.
An extension of time for performance of work may be granted by the city engineer, but no such
extension of time shall be valid unless written and no such extension shall release any surety
company upon any bond.
(G) Bond Payable To The City: Any bond or cash deposit required by the city engineer pursuant to this
chapter shall be payable to the city. Upon satisfactory completion of all work authorized in the
permit according to the terms of the permit and this chapter, the bond or cash deposit shall be
released. In the event of noncompliance, the city may deduct from the cash deposit the actual cost
to the city plus twenty percent (20%) of work done by the city pursuant to subsection 8-3-2(I) of this
chapter before returning the deposit to the depositor. In the event of a bond having been posted, the
city may proceed against the surety and principal for the actual cost to the city plus twenty percent
(20%) of work done by the city pursuant to subsection 8-3-2(I) of this chapter.
(H) Exclusions: Cash deposits or bonds will not be required of any public utility or public agency which
is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under, or over any public
street or right of way. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-4: ERECTION AND MAINTENANCE OF SAFETY PROVISIONS:
The permittee in the conduct of the work, use, or maintenance of an encroachment authorized by a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall provide, erect, and/or maintain such lights, barriers,
warning signs, patrols, watchmen, and other safeguards as are necessary to protect the traveling
public. Any omission on the part of the city engineer to specify in the permit what lights, barriers, or
other protective measures or devices shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 408/710
requirements of law and appropriate regulations and ordinances for adequately protecting the safety of
those using public streets. If, at any time, the city engineer finds that suitable safeguards are not being
provided, the city may provide, erect, maintain, relocate, or remove such safeguards as are deemed
necessary or may cancel the permit and restore the right of way to its former conditions, all at the
expense of the permittee.
A permittee making any excavation or erecting or leaving any obstruction within, under, or upon the
right of way, or causing the same to be made, erected, or left, shall place and maintain lights at each
end of the excavation or obstruction, at not more than fifty foot (50') intervals along the excavation or
obstruction, from one-half (1/2) hour before sunset of each day to one-half (1/2) hour after sunrise of the
next day, until the excavation is entirely refilled or the obstruction removed and the right of way made
safe for use. In addition, reflectorized warning signs conforming to the requirements of the California
division of highways shall be placed two hundred feet (200') and four hundred feet (400') from each
excavation or obstruction, in such a position as to adequately warn public traffic.
The warning signs, lights and other safety devices shall conform to the requirements of section 465.7
of the Vehicle Code and of any sign manual issued by the department of public works of the state of
California. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-5: NOTIFICATION:
(A) Beginning Of Work: Before beginning any work which is or includes excavation, construction of
concrete sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveway approaches, planting, trimming or removing trees,
making, placing or causing an obstruction in the traveled way, the permittee shall notify the city
engineer.
Before starting work on which an inspector is required, the permittee shall notify the city engineer
twenty four (24) hours in advance of beginning such work.
(B) Completion Of Work: The permittee shall upon completion of all work authorized in the permit,
notify the city engineer. No work shall be deemed to be completed until notification of completion is
given pursuant to this section and the work is accepted by the city engineer. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-6: CARE OF DRAINAGE:
If the work, use or encroachment authorized in the permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall interfere
with the established drainage, the permittee shall provide for proper drainage as directed by the city
engineer. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-7: INTERFERENCE WITH USE:
All work or use shall be planned and executed in a manner that will least interfere with the safe and
convenient travel of the general public at the place where the work or use is authorized. Free and
unobstructed access shall be provided to all mailboxes, fire hydrants, water gates, valves, manholes,
drainage structure, and/or other public service structures and property as may be required for
emergency use. Such public service structures or property shall not be removed or relocated without
proper accordance with the properly constituted authorities charged with their control and maintenance.
The work area shall be confined so as not to obstruct roadways and walks unnecessarily. Temporary
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 409/710
roadways, driveways, and walks for vehicles and pedestrians shall be constructed where required.
(Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-8: RESTORING OF STREET; MAINTENANCE OF ENCROACHMENT:
Upon completion of the work, acts or things for which the permit was issued, or when required by the
city engineer, the permittee shall replace, repair or restore the public street at the place of work to the
same condition existing prior thereto unless otherwise provided in the permit. The permittee shall
remove all obstructions, impediments, material or rubbish caused or placed upon the right of way of the
public street under the permit, and shall do any other work or perform any act necessary to restore the
public street to a safe and usable condition.
After completion of all work, the permittee shall exercise reasonable care in inspecting and maintaining
the area affected by the encroachment. For a period of one year after the completion of the work the
permittee shall repair and make good any injury or damage to any portion of the street which occurs as
the result of work done under the permit, including any and all injury or damage to the street which
would not have occurred had such work not been done. By the acceptance of the permit the permittee
agrees to comply with the above. The permittee shall, upon notice from the city engineer, immediately
repair any injury, damage or nuisance, in any portion of the right of way, resulting from the work done
under the permit. In the event that the permittee fails to act promptly or should the exigencies of the
injury or damage require repairs or replacement to be made before the permittee can be notified or can
respond to notification, the city may, at its option, make the necessary repairs or replacements or
perform the necessary work and the permittee shall be charged with all expenses incurred in the
performance of said work. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-9: RELOCATION OR REMOVAL OF ENCROACHMENTS:
If any future construction, reconstruction, or maintenance work by the city on a public right of way
requires the relocation, removal or abandonment of installations or encroachments in, on or under the
public right of way, the permittee, owning, controlling, or maintaining such installations or
encroachments shall relocate, remove or abandon the same at his sole expense; provided, however,
that this provision shall apply to and remain in force and effect only so long as the right of way upon
which such installations or structures are located shall be used for usual street purposes and not as a
freeway, and this provision shall cease to apply when such street shall become a freeway. When
removal, relocation or abandonment is required, the city engineer shall give said permittee a written
demand specifying the place of relocation, or that the installations or encroachment must be removed,
relocated or abandoned. If said permittee fails to comply with said instructions, the city may cause the
removal, relocation or abandonment of the encroachment at the expense of the permittee. (Ord. 994,
5-26-1970)
8-3-10: STANDARDS, SUPERVISION AND INSPECTION:
All work done under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall conform to specifications established
by the city engineer, or in the absence of established specifications to recognized standards of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 410/710
construction and approved practices in connection with the work to be done. All work shall be done
subject to the supervision of, and to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-11: STORAGE OF MATERIAL:
No material shall be stored within the traveled way or sidewalk, unless otherwise approved by the city
engineer. Excess earth materials from trenching or other operations shall be removed from the
pavement, traveled way, or shoulder as the trench is backfilled or other work carried forward unless
otherwise approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-12: SMALL PIPES:
Utility services and other small diameter pipes or rigid conduits shall be jacked or otherwise forced
underneath a paved surface. The paved surface of a road shall not be cut, trenched, or otherwise
disturbed unless specifically authorized in the permit. No tunneling will be permitted except as
specifically set forth in the permit. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-13: MINIMUM COVER:
The minimum cover over any and all pipes or conduits larger than two and one-half inches (21/2")
installed within the right of way shall be three feet (3') of earth or imported materials, unless otherwise
specified in the permit. Within the public street, the minimum cover of three feet (3') shall be measured
from the surface, existing or planned. The city engineer is authorized to permit installation of pipes or
conduits where three feet (3') of cover cannot be provided because of topography, structures, or other
engineering necessity. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-14: BACKFILLING:
Backfilling of an excavation shall be in accordance with specifications established by the city engineer
or as otherwise required by him, both as to material and method; and backfill shall not be placed in any
excavation without compaction of the material used therein, the degree and method thereof to be to the
satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-15: POLES AND TRANSMISSION LINE CARRIERS:
Clearances and types in the construction of poles and transmission line carriers shall be in accordance
with rules, regulations, and orders of the public utilities commission and other public agencies having
jurisdiction. No guy wires are to be attached to trees without specific authorization to do so in the
permit, and in no event shall guy wires be so attached as to girdle the tree or interfere with its growth.
Guy wires shall not be below the minimum elevation above the ground, prescribed in the rules, orders,
and regulations of the public utilities commission.
When a pole, brace, stub, or similar timber is removed and not replaced, the entire length thereof shall
be removed from the ground and the hole backfilled and compacted. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 411/710
8-3-16: AIDS TO VISIBILITY:
When the location or position of a pole or other obstruction makes accentuation of its visibility to
vehicular traffic necessary, the city engineer may require that the pole or other obstruction be painted
or equipped with reflectors or other aids to visibility prescribed or authorized by the public utilities
commission or the department of public works of the state of California at the expense of the permittee.
(Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-17: MOVEMENT OF VEHICLES:
When authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter to move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles or load or dimension or weight in excess of that permitted by law, the permittee shall comply
with the general law regulating travel over a public street, including posted signs or notices which limit
speed or direction of travel, or weight which may be placed upon a structure, or the width or height that
may be moved thereon or thereover, or otherwise restrict or control travel on a public street. The
permittee shall at all times conform to and abide by the practice and procedure necessary to make safe
and convenient the travel of the general public, and to keep safe and preserve the public highway over
and on which movement is being made. Any violation of this section shall cancel the permit issued to
the permittee. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-18: MAILBOXES:
All mailboxes must be placed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States post
office department, but no box shall be so placed within the road right of way as to endanger the life or
safety of the traveling public. A permit is not required for the placing of mailboxes. (Ord. 994, 5-26-
1970)
8-3-19: PLANTING TREES:
The applicant for a permit to plant trees in the right of way of a public street shall show in his
application the exact location of and the kind of tree to be planted. No change shall be made in either
location of trees or in kind of trees without the approval of the city engineer.
The city engineer may refuse to issue a permit authorizing the planting of trees in the right of way of a
public street when, in his judgment, the location as described in the application, or the nature of growth
above or below ground of the kind of tree proposed, will impede or inconvenience travel on a public
highway or unduly disturb the right of way thereof, or in any way impede construction or maintenance
of necessary facilities. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-20: HEDGES OR FENCES:
No hedge, shrub, or other planting whatever, fence or similar structure, except as provided in section 8-
3-22 of this chapter, shall be planted, erected or maintained in a right of way without a permit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 412/710
No hedge, shrub, or other planting whatever, fence or similar structure, shall be maintained across any
existing walkway in a sidewalk area or shoulder. The intent of this restriction is to keep free a walkway
for pedestrians or other lawful public travel without interference by or with vehicular travel. No
encroachment of any nature will be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs, or denies such
pedestrian or other lawful travel within the limits of the right of way of a public street, or which impairs
adequate sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
The permittee, or the owner of the adjacent property, shall maintain the hedges, shrubs, walls, fences
or similar structures erected for landscaping purposes in a neat and orderly condition at all times. If the
encroachment is not maintained as specified in this chapter, the city engineer may direct the permittee
or property owner to remove the encroachment and restore the right of way to its former condition, at
the expense of the permittee or property owner. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-21: TRIMMING OR REMOVING TREES:
Trimming of trees will be permitted only when and in the manner authorized by a permit issued
pursuant to this chapter, that the shapeliness of the tree may be preserved.
An application for removal of a tree will be approved and permit issued only when a necessity for
removal exists, and adjacent property owners concur, or when deemed necessary by the city engineer.
When a tree is removed under authority of a permit, the entire stump shall be taken out for a distance
of at least two feet (2') below the ground surface unless otherwise specified in the permit, and the hole
backfilled and tamped. All debris from trimming or removal shall be removed from the site and the right
of way restored to its former condition. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-22: LAWN; NO PERMIT REQUIRED:
Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, it is lawful for a person, or body of persons to plant
and maintain a lawn of any grass, or type not prohibited by other law, within the right of way of a public
street without a written permit. However, the lawn shall not extend into the traveled way of the public
street nor into the drainage ditches, gutter or other drainage facilities.
The general public may not be denied the use of the planted area for pedestrian or other lawful travel.
The city may use the planted area for any purpose whatever, and may issue a permit to any applicant
to go thereon to perform work or otherwise encroach pursuant to this chapter. If the lawn is damaged or
disturbed in the course of an authorized encroachment, it shall be removed and replaced by the
permittee unless the permit specifically states otherwise. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-23: MARKING OF STREETS, CURBS AND SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit, to solicit, on a commercial or
donation basis, to place, or maintain any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design, or other
marking upon any street, sidewalk, or curb; except that markings for the purpose of identifying survey,
utility or construction locations shall not be subject to this chapter. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-24: MONUMENTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 413/710
Any monument of granite, concrete, iron or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or
preserving the lines and/or elevation of any public street or right of way, property subdivision, or a
precise survey point or reference point shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or
disturbed without first obtaining permission from the city engineer to do so, said permission to be
granted in conformance with requirements as set forth in specifications established by the city
engineer. Replacement of removed or disturbed monument will be at the expense of the permittee.
(Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-25: CURBS; GUTTER CONSTRUCTION BY DRIVEWAY APPROACHES:
The city engineer shall have the power to require property owners to remove driveway approaches
where they are an obstruction to the gutter and to reconstruct driveway approaches where drainage or
other conditions are unsatisfactory.
Where a curb has been broken to provide a driveway to a residence or a business and such driveway
is no longer needed or used as a driveway, the owner of the property or owner or operator of the
business shall replace the curb and repair any damage done to the sidewalk by use of such driveway.
Such work shall be done in conformity with the requirements for the construction of curbs and
sidewalks of the city. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-26: STREET SURFACES; HARMFUL SUBSTANCES:
It shall be unlawful for any person having in his possession any gasoline, kerosene, coal oil, benzine,
distillate or other oil or liquid destructive or harmful to the street surface, to permit the same to drip
upon the asphalt or bitumen surface of any street within the city. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-27: APPEALS:
Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a permit required by this chapter may appeal to the council.
Administration of this chapter is hereby referred to the city engineer of the city.
If the council finds all of the following to be true, the permit shall be granted:
(A) That the applicant will be substantially damaged by the refusal to grant the permit as requested.
(B) That no other reasonable method of obtaining the desired results is available except as proposed
by applicant.
(C) That the granting of the permit will not be materially detrimental to the public interest, safety, health
and welfare or injurious to other property. (Ord. 994, 5-26-1970)
8-3-28: HANGTOWN CREEK ENCROACHMENT:
The city council of the city does hereby adopt the following policy relative to the issuance of permits in
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 414/710
the Hangtown Creek area:
It is the policy of the city to allow reasonable private uses of Hangtown Creek to the end that the
owners of properties adjacent thereto will be encouraged to upgrade their respective properties thereby
promoting the health and safety of the community, and concurrently therewith beautifying the city itself.
However, no permits shall be issued in the Hangtown Creek area which will unreasonably interfere with
the city's right to use and maintain the creek for drainage, sewer flows and other reasonable municipal
public uses and rights.
The creek area is recognized as an asset to the city which needs to be kept open to the greatest extent
possible. It is also recognized that increased improvement, usage and access to the creek area needs
to be encouraged.
The city engineer shall be responsible for issuance of encroachment permits in accordance with this
chapter. However, when an encroachment involves the construction or reconstruction of a structure in
the Hangtown Creek area, site plan review shall be required as provided in section 10-4-9 of this code.
For the purposes of this section, "Hangtown Creek" is defined as the area designated "creek" on the
official map and in the field notes of the official survey of said city, and now on file and of record in the
office of the county recorder of the county of El Dorado, state of California. (Ord. 1329, 8-9-1983)
Chapter 4
WEEDS1
8-4-1: ACCUMULATION OF WEEDS PROHIBITED:
No property owner, lessee or occupant of property shall allow weeds, dry grass, rubbish, or other
debris to grow or collect upon his property within thirty feet (30') of any fence, house, or building
whether the fence, house or building is on his property or on adjacent properties, to such an extent that
it is a fire hazard. Any accumulation of weeds, dry grass, rubbish, or other debris in violation of this
section shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 1380, 10-22-1985)
8-4-2: WEEDS; NUISANCE DECLARED:
If the fire chief determines that a fire hazard exists on any property in the city as a result of the growth
of weeds, dry grass, or by the accumulation of debris or rubbish on the property within thirty feet (30')
of any fence or building, he shall then post the property setting forth the fact that there is a fire hazard
on the property and directing the property owner to eliminate the weeds, dry grass or debris within
thirty feet (30') of any fence, house or building within fourteen (14) days from the date the notice is
posted. (Ord. 1380, 10-22-1985)
8-4-3: ABATING NUISANCE:
In the event that the property owner does not appeal the determination of the fire chief that there is a
fire hazard to the council and if the weeds, dry grass, rubbish, or other debris have not been eliminated
as required in section 8-4-2 of this chapter, then the fire chief may enter upon the property to abate the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 415/710
nuisance. Such removal shall be at the expense of the owner, lessee, or occupant. (Ord. 1380, 10-22-
1985)
8-4-4: NOTICE TO REMOVE; DEFAULT; REMOVAL BY CITY; EXPENSES; LIENS;
FORECLOSURES:
The expense of removing or destroying such a fire hazard by the city, as set forth in section 8-4-3 of
this chapter, shall be a lien upon the real property on which such fire hazard is situated from the date of
the removal or destruction by the city and shall be for the amount of the expense of such removal or
destruction. In the event such amount is not paid in full within a period of six (6) months after such
removal or destruction, the council may direct the city attorney to foreclose the lien by court action in
the manner provided by law for the foreclosure of mortgages upon real estate. Upon obtaining the
decree in the action of foreclosure, the real property shall be sold at a foreclosure sale in the same
manner as sales by a sheriff upon execution. After deducting from the sales price all costs of the
destruction or removal, together with all attorney fees, court costs, and expenses of sale, the balance
remaining, if any, shall be refunded to the owner of such property. (Ord. 1380, 10-22-1985)
8-4-5: ALTERNATIVE PROCEDURE:
The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be an alternative method of removing or destroying
objectionable obstructions and are not intended to deprive the city of the right to proceed to abate such
conditions under any alternative methods that may be provided by law. (Ord. 1380, 10-22-1985)
8-4-6: APPEAL:
If the property owner is of the opinion that there is no fire hazard as the result of the accumulation of
weeds, dry grass, rubbish, or other debris, he may then appeal the decision of the fire chief to the
council within fourteen (14) days of the date the notice was posted. If an appeal has been filed, the
council shall hear the appeal within thirty (30) days, and notice of the date of hearing shall be mailed to
the property owner by the clerk at least five (5) days prior to the hearing of the appeal. (Ord. 1380, 10-
22-1985)
8-4-7: HEARING:
At the hearing the council may by either motion or resolution rule either in favor of or against the
appeal. In the event that the council denies the appeal then the property owner shall have five (5) days
after the denial of the appeal to remove the weeds, dry grass, rubbish, or other debris and in the event
that this is not done by the property owner within five (5) days, the fire chief may then enter upon the
property to abate the nuisance. (Ord. 1380, 10-22-1985)
8-4-8: MAILING OF NOTICE:
A copy of any notice shall be mailed to the property owner at his address on the last assessment roll.
(Ord. 1380, 10-22-1985)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 416/710
Chapter 5
TREES AND SHRUBBERY
8-5-1: TREES TO BE TRIMMED:
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall trim all trees on property owned or occupied by him,
overhanging any public thoroughfare, so that the branches thereon will not interfere with pedestrians or
public travel or conceal signs or road markers. (1962 Code)
8-5-2: HEDGES AND SHRUBBERY:
Any owner or occupant of any real property shall maintain all hedges and shrubbery adjacent to public
sidewalks so that no part of said hedges and/or shrubbery shall extend over any part of a public
sidewalk in the city. (1962 Code)
8-5-3: INJURY TO TREES AND/OR SHRUBBERY:
It is hereby declared unlawful for any person, not the owner thereof, or without lawful authority so to do,
wilfully to injure, deface, disfigure or destroy any tree or shrub, or to injure, destroy, cut or pick any
flower or plant, located either on private ground or on any public place or thoroughfare. (1962 Code)
8-5-4: REMOVAL AND REPLACEMENT OF CITY STREET TREES:
It is unlawful to remove a public street tree without lawful authority to do so. Street trees may be
removed with justifiable cause, through a formal request and by the authority of the public services
director. "City street trees" are defined as all trees designated to be the responsibility of the city within
easements, rights of way or as established through maintenance agreements.
Justifiable cause may include, but is not limited to, the following: diseased trees, damaged/disfigured
trees, trees which cause concern for public safety or a public nuisance, trees which are deemed to not
meet the standards of the streetscape or are aesthetically deficient, trees which are deemed to
adversely affect the economic vitality of the area, or other reasons deemed justifiable for the betterment
of the city.
Tree replacement of public street trees shall be at the discretion of the city through the authority of the
public services director. It is the intent of this section to require replacement of any removed city street
tree, unless deemed inappropriate by the city. The variety and species of tree replacement shall be
from an approved list on file with the city. The city reserves the right to require full compensation for
replacement of trees. Appeals to the policies as set forth within this section may be appealed to the city
council. (Ord. 1554, 2-23-1999)
Chapter 6
PUBLIC UTILITIES
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 417/710
8-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever used in this chapter, unless therein otherwise expressly provided, the following terms shall
have the meanings herein ascribed to them:
OPERATION: The construction, installation, conduct or maintenance of any equipment, facilities, or
improvements of any public utilities or the making of additions to or the repair, replacement, alteration
or extension of any part thereof.
PUBLIC UTILITY: The utilities and persons operating same, as defined and used in sections 2, 2-1/4,
2-1/2 and 2-3/4 of the public utilities act of the state, as now in effect and shall also include bus lines.
(Ord. 667, 3-21-1939)
8-6-2: POWERS OF COUNCIL TO GRANT FRANCHISES:
The general power of the council to grant franchises for the construction or operation of public utilities
in, on, or over any of the public streets, ways, or other public property within the city shall be exercised
in the manner provided by the constitution and statutes of the state. The council may, however, in such
franchises, impose such other and additional conditions, provisions and regulations, whether
governmental or contractual in character, as in its judgment are to the public interest, and which are not
inconsistent with the constitution, the general laws, or statutes of the state, or of this chapter. (Ord. 667,
3-21-1939)
8-6-3: UTILITY FRANCHISE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any public utility in, on or over any of the public streets,
ways or other public property within the city without first having obtained from the council thereof a
franchise therefor. (Ord. 667, 3-21-1939)
8-6-4: POLES AND CONDUITS:
Whenever in the operation or maintenance of any public utilities, whether under a franchise or
otherwise, or whether under a constitutional or legislative grant, or whether under a franchise
heretofore granted, the council shall have the power to direct where poles and overhead wires shall be
used and where underground conduits shall be used; to direct the removal of poles and overhead
wires, and the installation of underground conduits in their place; to designate the location and order
the change of location of poles and guy wires, and the height of wires thereto attached, the type and
size of poles, their replacement and the painting of same; to require a joint use of poles by two (2) or
more persons where practicable; and, without charge, to use said poles for the affixing thereto of fire
alarm boxes and police telephones, and alarms and the wires therefor when practicable; to require the
installation of switches for the operation of fire alarms, police telephones and alarms and to regulate
the installation and maintenance of all other equipment used for the disposition of electrical energy or
used on the public streets, ways, alleys or property. (Ord. 667, 3-21-1939)
8-6-5: EXCAVATION FOR POLES; PERMIT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 418/710
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any public utility, whether under a franchise granted by the
city, or under a so called constitutional or public grant franchise or otherwise, to excavate or lay in any
street any pipe or conduit, or to excavate or install in any street any poles or wires, without first
obtaining from the superintendent of streets a written permit therefor. (Ord. 667, 3-21-1939)
8-6-6: BACKFILL AND PAVEMENT:
Every person operating a public utility who shall disturb any pavement in the operation of same shall
promptly replace the same and put it in as good condition as it was before disturbed. If the person shall
fail to perform his duty hereunder, the city may do the work and the person shall pay the cost thereof.
All backfill work shall be done in a good and workmanlike manner. All work shall be done in an
expeditious manner, shall not block more than one-half (1/2) of any street, and proper barricades,
danger signs and lights shall be maintained in connection therewith. All work shall be done and
materials shall be furnished to the satisfaction and approval of the superintendent of streets. (Ord. 667,
3-21-1939)
8-6-7: GUARANTEE:
By the operation of any public utility, in, on or over any of the public streets, ways or other public
property within the city, whether under a franchise granted by the city, or under a so called
constitutional or public grant franchise, or otherwise, the person operating same shall be deemed to
have guaranteed to save the city harmless from any and all damages or claims for damage to persons
or property, and all costs and expenses in connection therewith, arising from the use of the public
streets or ways and other public property within the city in connection with the operation of the public
utility; and that he will remove and replace its facilities on public property made necessary by any
change of grade, alignment or widening of any street or other public place, and that if he shall fail to
perform his duty hereunder the city may perform the same and he will pay the cost thereof. (Ord. 667,
3-21-1939)
8-6-8: POLICE POWER:
The city hereby reserves the right to impose upon any person operating or who may hereafter operate
any public utility, whether they now have or may hereafter obtain a franchise from the city therefor, or
whether the operation is under a so called constitutional or public grant franchise, or otherwise,
reasonable regulations for the preservation of the public peace, health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 667, 3-21-1939)
8-6-9: AMENDMENT OF FRANCHISE:
Any franchise issued by the city may be amended by mutual consent in a manner not in conflict with
this chapter, which amendment shall be expressed by ordinance.
All franchises hereafter granted shall be deemed to have expressly included the terms of this chapter,
and the operation of all public utilities under any franchise shall be subject to the terms of this chapter.
(Ord. 667, 3-21-1939)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 419/710
Chapter 7
GRADING, EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
8-7-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as the GRADING ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF PLACERVILLE. (Ord.
1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-2: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of regulating grading on private property within the
incorporated area of the city to safeguard life, limb, health, property and public welfare; to avoid
pollution of watercourses with nutrients, sediments or other earthen materials generated on or caused
by surface runoff on or across the permit area; and to ensure that the intended use of a graded site is
consistent with the city's general plan, any specific plans adopted thereto, and applicable ordinances
including the zoning ordinance and the California building code. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
8-7-3: SCOPE:
This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction,
including fills and embankments; establishes the administrative procedures for issuance of permits;
and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading construction and all grading specific to
single parcel site improvements, except single-family residence construction unless exceeding
prescriptive standards as defined in the city's design and improvement standards manual. Where the
grading or earthwork involves multiple parcels, parcel maps, subdivisions, land divisions, or roads the
design and improvement standards manual shall be used for design purposes. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-4: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, wherever the following terms are used
in this chapter, they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION: Any land related activity for the purpose of cultivating or raising plants
or animals or conserving or protecting lands for such purposes when conducted on agriculturally zoned
lands and is not surface mining or borrow pit operations.
AMERICAN SOCIETY FOR TESTING AND MATERIALS (ASTM): A membership society that is the
foremost United States source of information on the specifications and testing of materials.
BEDROCK: The solid undisturbed rock in place either exposed at the ground surface or beneath
superficial deposits of loose rock or soil.
BENCH: A relatively level step excavated into sloping natural ground on which engineered fill or
embankment fill is to be placed.
BORROW: Earth material acquired from an off site location for use in grading on a site.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 420/710
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer of the city, acting either directly or through his authorized deputies.
CIVIL ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered as a civil engineer by the state of California.
CIVIL ENGINEERING: The application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of
mechanics and the properties of materials to the evaluation, design, and construction of civil works for
the beneficial uses of mankind.
COMPACTION: The increase of density of a soil or rock fill by mechanical means.
CUT: See definition of Excavation (Cut).
DEPTH OF CUT: The vertical dimension from the exposed cut surface to the original ground surface at
the cut's deepest point, generally at the hinge point. Where the construction slope is steeper than three
to one (3:1) the depth shall be measured from the top of the cut.
DEPTH OF FILL: The vertical dimension from the exposed fill surface to the original ground surface at
the fill's deepest point, generally at the hinge point. Where the construction slope is steeper than three
to one (3:1) the depth shall be measured from the toe of the slope.
EARTH MATERIAL: Any rock, natural soil or fill and/or any combination thereof.
EMBANKMENT (FILL): The deposit of soil, rock or other materials placed by man and includes the
conditions resulting therefrom.
ENCROACHMENT PERMIT: A written permit issued by the engineering department authorizing certain
work within a publicly maintained right of way.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST: A registered geologist certified as an engineering geologist by the state
of California.
ENGINEERING GEOLOGY: The application of geologic knowledge in the investigation and evaluation
of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH SPECIALIST: A professional, registered as an environmental health
specialist by the state of California.
EROSION: The wearing away of earth material as a result of the movement of wind, water or ice.
EXCAVATION (CUT): The removal of earth materials by mechanical means, and includes the
conditions resulting therefrom. It excludes temporary stockpiles.
EXISTING GRADE: The elevation of the ground surface at a given point prior to excavating or filling.
EXPANSIVE SOIL: Any soil which exhibits significant expansive properties as determined by the
procedures defined in the California building code.
FILL: See definition of Embankment (Fill).
FINISHED GRADE: The grade of the site after excavating or filling which conforms to the approved
final grading plan. The finished grade is also the grade at the top of a paved surface (final grade).
GENERAL GRADING: The movement of earth for any purpose, including, but not limited to, earthwork
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 421/710
required to establish grade for construction projects (i.e., the preparation of a lot or parcel for a future
building pad, or the placement of embankment or excavation of materials for improvement of the lot or
parcel where no structure is planned, small earthen dams, access roads and driveways, etc.).
GEOLOGIC HAZARD: Any condition in naturally occurring earth materials which may endanger life,
health or property.
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER: A civil engineer registered by the state of California who is qualified in
the field of soil mechanics and soil engineering and has the authority to use the title "soil engineer".
GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING: The application of the principles of soil mechanics in the
investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and may include
the inspection, testing and construction thereof. Any civil engineer who is competent to do so may
practice geotechnical engineering.
GRADE: The vertical location (elevation) of the ground surface, either natural or manmade.
GRADE, ROUGH: The stage at which the grade approximately conforms to the approved plan.
GRADING: Any land excavation or filling or combination thereof, or the removal, plowing under or
burial of vegetative ground cover.
GRADING PLAN: A plan prepared in accordance with this chapter showing grading and related work.
GRADING WORK: Grading and related work such as, but not limited to, drainage improvements and
erosion and sediment control.
INSPECTION: Checking or testing permit construction against established standards, rejecting
materials and workmanship not in conformity with permit requirements and enforcing the provisions of
the permit. For the geotechnical professional, inspection is equivalent to observation, evaluations,
consultation and the documentation of conformity or nonconformity.
KEYWAY: A special excavation for placing of compacted fill slopes which is constructed beneath the
toe area of a planned fill slope on sloping ground to improve the stability of the slope.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A landscape architect registered by the state of California.
LOT: See definition of Parcel.
MASS PAD GRADING (MASS LOT GRADING): The grading of any lot or parcel more than the
following percentage of surface area:
(A) Two thousand (2,000) square feet through five thousand nine hundred ninety nine (5,999)
square feet, eighty percent (80%);
(B) Six thousand (6,000) square feet through nineteen thousand nine hundred ninety nine (19,999)
square feet, sixty percent (60%);
(C) Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet through forty three thousand five hundred fifty nine
(43,559) square feet, fifty percent (50%);
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 422/710
(D) One acre to two (2) acres, thirty percent (30%);
(E) Greater than two (2) acres, twenty percent (20%).
OWNER: The person shown as the legal owner of the property on the latest equalized assessment roll
in the office of the county assessor.
PARCEL (LOT): Land described as a lot or parcel in a recorded deed or shown as a lot or parcel on a
subdivision map or parcel map on file in the county recorder's office.
PERMIT: An approved grading permit issued pursuant to this chapter authorizing certain grading work.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter.
PERSON: Any natural person, firm, corporation or public agency whether principal, agent, employee,
or otherwise.
PRELIMINARY GRADING PLAN: A plan that shows the proposed grading work in relation to the
existing site prepared and submitted with the application for a grading permit.
RAINY SEASON: The period of the year during which there is a substantial risk of rainfall. For the
purpose of this chapter, the "rainy season" is defined as from October 15 to May 1, inclusive.
SEDIMENT: Any material transported or deposited by water, including soil debris or other foreign
matter.
SITE: Any lot or parcel of land or combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land, whether held
separately or joined together in common ownership or occupancy, where grading is to be performed or
has been performed, except within city rights of way.
SLOPE: An inclined ground surface the inclination of which may be expressed as the ratio of horizontal
distance to vertical distance.
SOIL: All earth material of any origin that overlies bedrock and may include the decomposed zone of
bedrock which can be excavated readily by mechanical equipment.
SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE: The United States department of agriculture soil conservation
service acting as staff for the resource conservation district.
SOIL SCIENTIST: A professional soil scientist certified by the American registry of certified
professionals in agronomy, crops and soils (ARCPACS).
TERRACE: A relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage,
maintenance or other purposes.
VEHICULARWAY: Any public or private roadway or driveway designed for or used by vehicles (as
defined by the California Vehicle Code).
WATERCOURSE: Any natural or manmade channel flowing continuously or intermittently in a definite
direction and course or used for the holding, delay or storage of waters, which functions at any time to
convey or store stormwater runoff as shown on the city's one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100')
topographic maps.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 423/710
WORK: See definition of Grading Work. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995; amd. Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
8-7-5: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS; GRADING PERMIT REQUIRED:
Except for the specific exemptions listed hereinafter, no person shall do or permit to be done any
grading on any site in the incorporated area of the city without a valid permit obtained from the city
engineer. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The following grading may be done without obtaining a permit. Exemptions from the administrative
requirement of obtaining a permit shall not be deemed as permission to violate any provision of this
chapter, which includes among others the compliance with CEQA.
(A) Minor projects which have cut or fill slopes which are less than two feet (2') in vertical depth, and
which include all of the following:
1. Less than fifty (50) cubic yards of graded material.
2. The removal, plowing under or burial of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of vegetation
on slopes ten percent (10%) or steeper or any amount of vegetation on slopes flatter than ten
percent (10%).
3. No unstable or erodible slopes are created.
4. No encroachment onto sewage disposal systems or areas is created.
5. Are not intended for support of a structure and having fills less than two feet (2') in depth.
6. Will not alter previously placed erosion control items or alter natural drainage courses.
(B) Grading done by or under the supervision or construction control of a public agency or utility that
assumes full responsibility for the work to the extent required by law.
(C) Excavations in connection with a building, structure, or swimming pool authorized by a valid
building permit provided that the prescriptive standards herein are met.
(D) Grading necessary for agricultural operations unless such grading will create a cut or fill whose
failure could endanger any structure intended for human or animal occupancy or any public road, or
could obstruct or increase the sediment in any watercourse or drainage conduit.
(E) Trenching, excavation, and grading incidental to the construction or installation of city approved
underground pipe lines, septic tank disposal fields, conduits, electrical or communication facilities,
and drilling or excavation for approved wells or post holes.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 424/710
(F) Excavations for soil, geotechnical, geological, or environmental studies by engineers, geologists,
environmental health specialists or soil scientists.
(G) Grading in accordance with plans incorporated in an approved surface mining permit, reclamation
plan or sanitary landfill.
(H) Maintenance of existing firebreaks and roads to keep the firebreak or road substantially in its
original condition.
(I) Routine cemetery excavations and fills.
(J) Performance of emergency work necessary to protect life or property when an urgent necessity
therefor arises. The person performing such emergency work shall notify the city engineer promptly
of the problem and work required and shall apply for a permit therefor within ten (10) calendar days
after commencing said work. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR GRADING:
No person shall do or permit to be done any grading:
(A) In such a manner that quantities of dirt, soil, rock, debris, or other material substantially in excess of
natural levels are washed, eroded, or otherwise moved from the site, except as specifically provided
for by a permit.
(B) Prior to obtaining the required land use approvals (i.e., general plan amendment, zoning change,
conditional use permit, and other applicable land use ordinances). (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-8: WATER OBSTRUCTION:
No person shall do or permit to be done any grading which may obstruct, impede or interfere with the
natural flow of stormwaters, whether such waters are unconfined upon the surface of the land or
confined within land depressions or natural drainageways, unimproved channels or watercourses, or
improved ditches, channels or conduits, in such manner as to cause flooding where it would not
otherwise occur, aggravate any existing flooding condition or cause accelerated erosion except where
said grading is in accordance with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, these permit
requirements. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-9: CONSTRUCTION IN PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY:
No person shall perform any grading work within the right of way of a public road or street, or within a
public easement under the jurisdiction of the city or any other appropriate jurisdiction (county, utility
district, etc.), without prior approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 425/710
8-7-10: HAZARDS:
Whenever the city engineer determines that any grading on private property constitutes a condition
which is a hazard to public safety, endangers property, adversely affects the safety, use or stability of
adjacent property, or an overhead or underground utility, or a public way, watercourse or drainage
channel, or could adversely affect the water quality of any water bodies or watercourses, the owner of
the property upon which the condition is located, or other person or agent in control of said property,
upon receipt of notice in writing from the city engineer shall, within the period specified therein, obtain a
grading permit and conform to the conditions of said permit. The city engineer may require the
submission of plans or soil or geological reports, detailed construction recommendations, or other
engineering data prior to and in connection with any corrective or proposed work or activity. (Ord. 1523,
4-11-1995)
8-7-11: ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be administered for the city by the development services department. (Ord. 1523, 4-
11-1995; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
8-7-12: APPLICATION PROCEDURE:
Applications for permits shall be filed with the development services department. Each application shall
include a plan checking fee and other fees as required, preliminary or final grading plans and a
statement of the intended use of the site. Only one application and permit is allowed for grading work to
be done on a site. The city engineer shall determine whether the application is complete in accordance
with provisions of this chapter and may require additional information from the applicant before
accepting the application as complete. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
8-7-13: COMPLIANCE WITH CEQA:
The California environmental quality act (CEQA) may require the preparation of environmental
documents concerning a proposed grading project. In such event, the city will function as the lead
agency. The city engineer will advise the applicant as to any additional information required with the
permit application. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-14: REFERRAL TO OTHER PUBLIC AGENCIES:
The city engineer may refer an application to other interested public agencies for their
recommendations. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-15: PERMIT CONDITIONS:
(A) No permit shall be issued until the city engineer is satisfied that a proposed project conforms with
the city general plan, any specific plans adopted thereto, and applicable ordinances including the
zoning ordinance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 426/710
(B) Where a proposed grading project is part of the subdivision of land, no grading permit shall be
issued prior to approval by the applicable planning authority.
(C) The permit shall be limited to work shown on the grading plans as approved by the city engineer. In
issuing a permit, the city engineer may impose any condition deemed necessary to protect the
health, safety and welfare of the public, to prevent the creation of a hazard to public or private
property, and to assure proper completion of the grading, including, but not limited to:
1. Mitigation of adverse environmental impacts as disclosed by any environmental document
findings.
2. Improvement of any existing grading to comply with the standards of this chapter.
3. Requirements for fencing or other protection of grading which would otherwise be hazardous.
4. Requirements for dust, erosion, sediment and noise control, hours of operation and season of
work, weather conditions, sequence of work, access roads and haul routes.
5. Requirements for safeguarding watercourses from excessive deposition of sediment or debris in
quantities exceeding natural levels.
6. Requirements for safeguarding areas reserved for on site sewage disposal.
7. Assurance that the land area in which grading is proposed and for which habitable structures are
proposed is not subject to hazards of land slippage or significant settlement or erosion and that
the hazards of seismic activity or flooding can be eliminated or adequately reduced. (Ord. 1523,
4-11-1995)
8-7-16: PERMISSION OF OTHER AGENCIES OR OWNERS:
No permit shall relieve the permittee of responsibility for securing other permits or approvals required
for work which is regulated by any other department or agency of the city, or other public agency, or for
obtaining any easements or authorization for grading on property not owned by the permittee. (Ord.
1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-17: LOCATION OF PROPERTY LINES:
Whenever the location of a property line or easement or the title thereto is disputed during the
application process or during a grading operation or lis pendens has been filed, a survey by a licensed
land surveyor or civil engineer, or resolution of title by a decision of the courts, all at the expense of the
applicant, may be required by the city engineer prior to the application being approved or the grading
operation resuming. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-18: TIME LIMITS:
(A) The permittee shall perform and complete all the work required by the permit within time limits
specified in the permit. If the work cannot be completed within the specified time, a request for an
extension of time setting forth the reasons for the requested extension shall be presented in writing
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 427/710
to the city engineer no later than fifteen (15) days prior to the expiration of the permit. The city
engineer may add additional time for the work.
(B) If all the permit work required is not completed within the time limit specified in subsection (A) of this
section, no further grading shall be done without renewing the permit. A written request for renewal
shall be submitted to the city engineer who may require a new application and fees depending on
the time between the expiration date and the renewal request, revisions in regulations, or changed
circumstances in the immediate area. Any revised plan shall be submitted to the city engineer for
review, and any costs thereof shall be at the applicant's expense. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-19: VALIDITY:
The issuance of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed as an approval
of any violation of the provisions of this chapter or of any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-20: APPEALS:
Appeals from decisions pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the city council in writing setting forth
the specific grounds thereto within ten (10) working days from the date of such decision. (Ord. 1523, 4-
11-1995)
8-7-21: APPLICATION, PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
(A) Two (2) or more complete sets of plans, as determined by the city engineer, including, but not
limited to, profiles, cross sections, topographic maps and specifications, and a legal description
shall be submitted to the city engineer with each application for a grading permit, or when otherwise
required by the city engineer for enforcement of any provision of this chapter. At the time of
application, the applicant may provide those items determined by the city engineer to be necessary
to establish the scope of the grading project from the list required for preliminary grading plans. At
the completion of an on site investigation, the city engineer shall determine if any additional
preliminary grading plan items shall be required. Prior to the issuance of a grading permit, the
applicant must furnish final grading plans. Preliminary grading plans or other acceptable substitutes
contained in this section, with appropriate changes and additions thereto may be accepted as final
grading plans. When the final grading plans and other required documents have been approved, a
grading permit will be issued by the city engineer. The work shall be done in strict compliance with
the approved plans and specifications which shall not be changed or altered except in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) Single-family (if exceeding prescriptive standards), multi-family, commercial, and industrial grading
plans shall be part of the building permit process to be reviewed by the engineering division as site
improvements.
(C) For single-family residence grading, the engineering division shall conclude review, determining
completeness of plan, within ten (10) working days of receipt of submittal by the engineering
division or it shall be approved. For all other grading, including commercial, multi-family, industrial,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 428/710
parcel and subdivision maps, the review shall be completed within thirty (30) working days of receipt
of submittal by the engineering division or it shall be approved. If it is determined the plan requires
revision, rechecks of the plan will be completed within ten (10) working days of receipt of the
recheck submittal. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-22: PRELIMINARY GRADING PLANS:
Preliminary grading plans provide for review and determination of grading permit requirements prior to
approval of final plans and issuance of a grading permit. Precise design at this stage is not required.
The plans shall be clearly and legibly drawn and entitled "Preliminary Grading Plan", shall contain a
statement of the purpose of the proposed grading, and shall include the following:
(A) On a map of appropriate scale, but not smaller than one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'), or as
approved by the city engineer, and include all specifications:
1. A plan entitled "Preliminary Grading Plan" and the name and signature of preparer and date of
preparation.
2. A vicinity sketch (not at map scale) indicating the location of the site relative to the principal
roads, lakes and watercourses in the area.
3. A site plan indicating the site of the work and any proposed divisions of land.
4. The complete site boundaries and locations of any easements and rights of way traversing and
adjacent to the property, appropriately labeled and dimensioned.
5. The location of all existing and proposed roads, buildings, wells, pipelines, watercourses, septic
systems or areas reserved for on site sewage disposal, and other structures, facilities, and
features of the site, and the location of all improvements on adjacent land within fifty feet (50') of
the proposed work.
6. Location and nature of known or suspected soil or geologic hazard areas addressed in the soils
or geologic report.
7. Contour lines of the existing terrain on a topographic map and proposed approximate finished
grade at intervals not greater than two feet (2') vertically, or as approved by the city engineer,
showing all topographic features and drainage patterns throughout the area where proposed
grading is to occur. The contour lines shall be extended to a minimum of fifty feet (50')
horizontally beyond the affected area, and further if needed to define intercepted drainage, and
shall be extended a minimum of one hundred feet (100') horizontally outside of any future road
rights of way.
8. Approximate location of cut and fill lines and the limits of grading for all the proposed grading
work, including borrow and stockpile areas.
9. Location, width, direction of flow and approximate location of tops and toes of banks of any
watercourse.
10. Approximate boundaries of any areas with a history of flooding or wetlands and floodplains as
shown on the national insurance rate map.
11. Proposed provisions for storm drainage control and any existing or proposed flood control
facilities or septic tank disposal fields or areas reserved for on site sewage disposal in the vicinity
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 429/710
of the grading.
12. A conceptual plan for erosion and sediment control including both temporary facilities and long
term site stabilization features such as drought resistant planting or seeding for the area affected
by the proposed grading. This requirement may be waived by the city engineer for sites having no
slopes greater than five percent (5%) unless the large size of the site, its proximity to sensitive
areas or other conditions make an erosion or sediment discharge hazard possible.
13. North arrow and scale.
14. General location and character of vegetation covering the site. The approximate location of all
trees which are healthy and have a circumference of twenty four inches (24") or greater
measured twenty four inches (24") above the ground, or trees twenty feet (20') in height or
greater. Indicate by marking with "X" those trees that are proposed to be removed.
(B) Typical cross sections (not less than 2) of all existing and proposed graded areas taken at intervals
not exceeding two hundred feet (200') and at locations of maximum cuts and fills.
(C) An estimate of the quantities of excavation and fill, including quantities to be moved both on and off
site.
(D) The estimated starting and completion dates of grading. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-23: FINAL GRADING PLANS; ENGINEER REQUIRED:
Final grading plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer, except as
otherwise provided herein, on sheets twenty four inches by thirty six inches (24" x 36"). The plans or
specifications shall include the following, in addition to all requirements for preliminary grading plans:
(A) A title block. Plans shall be entitled "Grading Plan" and state the purpose of the proposed grading
and the name of the engineer or firm by whom this plan was prepared.
(B) Project data including:
1. Owner name and address.
2. Assessor's parcel number.
3. Property deed reference.
(C) Accurate contour lines at intervals not greater than two feet (2') or as approved by the city engineer,
showing topographic features and drainage patterns and the configuration of the ground before and
after grading, relative to a bench mark established on site with an elevation established from a
USGS datum point or as approved by the city engineer.
(D) Location, extent and finished surface slopes of all proposed grading and final cut and fill lines.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 430/710
(E) Cross sections, profiles, elevations, dimensions and construction details based on accurate field
data.
(F) Construction details for roads, watercourses, culverts, bridges and drainage devices, retaining
walls, cribbing, dams, and other improvements existing or to be constructed, together with
supporting calculations and maps as required.
(G) Complete construction specifications, including estimate of progress schedule of work (actual
progress schedule to be provided after the grading permit is issued prior to the beginning of
construction).
(H) A detailed erosion and sediment control plan provided by September, including specific locations
construction details, and supporting calculations for temporary and permanent sediment control
structures and facilities if project is not to be completed by October 15.
(I) A landscaping plan, including temporary erosion control plantings, permanent drought resistant
slope plantings, replacement of temporary ground cover, and irrigation facilities.
(J) An estimate of the quantities of excavation and fill, adjusted for anticipated swell or shrinkage.
(K) The location of any borrow site or location for disposal of surplus material.
(L) A projected schedule of operations, including, as a minimum, the dates of:
1. Commencement of work.
2. Start and finish of rough grading.
3. Completion of drainage facilities.
4. Completion of work in any watercourse.
5. Completion of erosion and sediment control facilities.
6. Completion of hydromulching and other drought resistant landscaping. If rough grading is
proposed between October 15 and May 1, a more detailed schedule of grading activities and use
of erosion and sediment control facilities shall be required. (Final schedule to be provided after
the grading permit is issued prior to the beginning of construction.)
(M) Itemized cost estimate of the proposed grading and related work. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-24: FINAL GRADING PLANS; ENGINEER NOT REQUIRED:
All plans and specifications shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer except that the city
engineer may waive this requirement if the grading is minor in nature; would not endanger the public
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 431/710
health, safety or welfare as determined by the city engineer; and would not involve or require any of the
following:
(A) Cuts and fills with a combined total of one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic yards or more.
(B) An access road serving three (3) or more existing or potential residences.
(C) A cut or fill that is intended to support structures.
(D) A cut or fill that is located so as to cause unduly increased pressure or reduce support upon any
adjacent structure or property.
(E) The construction of any extensive drainage or sediment control structures, culverts, or facilities or
alteration of any existing drainage course.
(F) The creation or aggravation of an unstable slope condition. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-25: MODIFICATION OF APPROVED PLANS:
(A) Modifications of an approved final plan shall be submitted to the city engineer for his written
approval.
(B) All necessary soils and geological information and design details shall accompany any proposed
modification.
(C) The modification shall be compatible with any subdivision map or land use requirements. (Ord.
1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-26: SEASONAL REQUIREMENTS:
Implementation of erosion and sediment control plans shall be based on the season of the year and the
stage of construction at forecasted periods of rainfall and heavy storms. Erosion and sediment control
plans shall allow for possible changes in construction scheduling, unanticipated field conditions, and
relatively minor changes in grading. Modifications to plans may be required after initial plan approval.
(Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-27: DISTRIBUTION AND USE OF APPROVED PLANS:
Two (2) sets of approved plans and specifications shall be retained by the city engineer and one or
more sets of approved and dated plans and specifications shall be provided to the applicant or his
engineer. One set of approved plans and permit shall be retained on the site at all times during the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 432/710
work. A set of reproducible plans may be submitted at application for approval and appropriate number
of sets distributed after copies made, but prior to beginning of grading. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-28: GENERAL PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
The city engineer will issue a grading permit if final grading plans satisfy the provisions of this chapter
or any of the conditions imposed. The city engineer shall identify the provision, requirement or
condition which has not been met or performed by the applicant in the event the issuance of a grading
permit is denied. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-29: FEES:
(A) The schedule of fees and costs shall be those established and accepted by the city council from
time to time by resolution. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit cash or a check in a
sufficient sum to cover the fee for issuance of the permit, charges for review of plans, specifications
and reports, other engineering services, field investigations, necessary inspection on other work
and routine laboratory tests of materials and compaction, all in accordance with schedules
established and adopted by the city council.
(B) The fee required of public agencies may be waived by the city.
(C) Public utilities may, at the option of the city engineer, make payment for the above charges as billed
by the city engineer instead of by advance deposit as required above.
(D) If grading work is done in violation of this chapter or such work is not done in accordance with an
approved permit, a fee covering investigation of any violation and inspection and plan checking of
work required to correct such violation shall be charged to the violator to cover all actual costs.
(Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-30: GEOTECHNICAL STUDY REQUIRED:
A soil or geologic study report shall accompany the application in any of the following circumstances:
(A) When the proposed grading includes a cut or fill exceeding ten feet (10') in depth at any point;
however, for vehicularways, a soil study shall not be required unless the grading includes a
proposed cut or fill that exceeds ten feet (10') in depth and the slope of the natural ground exceeds
thirty percent (30%).
(B) When expansive soils are present.
(C) In areas of known or suspected geological hazards, including landslide hazards and hazards of
ground failure stemming from seismically induced ground shaking. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 433/710
(D) As part of the building permit process per the California building code. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
8-7-31: STUDIES:
(A) Those portions of the soil or geologic study that constitutes "civil engineering" as defined by section
6734 of the Business And Professions Code of the state shall be conducted by a geotechnical
engineer or civil engineer competent to do so. Those portions of the investigation that involve the
practice of "geology" as defined by section 7802 of the Business And Professions Code of the state
shall be conducted by an engineering geologist.
(B) The study shall be based on observations and tests of the material exposed by exploratory borings
or excavations and inspections made at appropriate locations. Additional studies may be necessary
to evaluate soil and rock strength, the effect of moisture variation on soil bearing capacity,
compressibility, expansiveness, stability and other factors. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-32: REPORTS; GENERAL:
Any soil or geologic study report shall be subject to the approval of, and supplemental reports and data
may be required by, the city engineer. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the
city engineer shall be incorporated in the final plans and specifications. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-33: SOIL/GEOLOGIC STUDY REPORT:
The soil or geologic study report shall contain all of the following as they may be applicable to the
subject site:
(A) An index map showing the regional setting of the site.
(B) A site map showing the topographic features of the site and locations of all soil borings and test
excavations.
(C) A classification of the soil types (unified soil classification); pertinent laboratory test data; and
consequent evaluation regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils.
(D) A description of the geology of the site and geology of the adjacent areas when pertinent to the
site.
(E) A suitably scaled map and cross sections showing all identified areas of land slippage.
(F) A description of any encountered ground water or excessive moisture conditions.
(G) A description of the soil and geological study techniques employed.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 434/710
(H) A log for each soil boring and test excavation showing elevation at ground level and the depth of
each soil or rock strata.
(I) An evaluation of the stability of pertinent natural slopes and any proposed cut and fill slopes.
(J) An evaluation of settlement associated with the placement of any fill.
(K) Recommendations for grading procedures and specifications, including methods for excavation and
subsequent placement of fill.
(L) Recommendations regarding drainage and erosion control.
(M) Recommendations for mitigation of geologic hazards. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-34: FINAL REPORT:
Upon completion of rough grading work, the city engineer may require a final geotechnical report that
includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the following:
(A) A complete record of all field and laboratory tests including location and elevation of all field tests.
(B) A professional opinion regarding slope stability, soil bearing capacity, and any other pertinent
information.
(C) Recommendations regarding foundation and roadway design, including soil bearing potential, and
building restrictions or setbacks from the top or toe of slopes.
(D) A declaration by the geotechnical engineer or civil engineer competent to do so or engineering
geologist in the format required by the city engineer that all work was done in substantial
accordance with the recommendations contained in the soil or geologic study reports as approved
and in accordance with the approved plans and specifications. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-35: CHANGED CONDITIONS:
Where soil or geologic conditions encountered in the grading operation deviate from that anticipated in
the soil and geologic study reports or where such conditions warrant changes to the recommendations
contained in the original soil studies, a revised soil or geologic report shall be submitted for the
approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-36: SPECIAL INSPECTION:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 435/710
(A) As a condition of the permit, the city engineer may require the permittee to provide, at permittee's
expense, a geotechnical engineer or civil engineer competent to do so to perform continuous
inspection work, and upon completion of the work to provide a written statement acknowledging that
he has inspected the work and that in his professional judgment the work was performed in
accordance with the approved plans and specifications. The permittee shall make his own
contractual arrangements for such services and be responsible for payment of all costs. Continuous
inspection by a geotechnical engineer or civil engineer competent to do so shall include, but not be
limited to, the following situations:
1. During the preparation of a site for the placement of fills which exceed five feet (5') in depth on
slopes which exceed ten percent (10%) and during the placing of such fills; however, for vehicular
pathways, fill placement shall be continuously inspected when fills exceed ten feet (10') in height.
2. During the preparation of a site for the placement of any fill and during the placement of such fill
which is intended to support any building or structure.
3. During the installation of subsurface drainage facilities.
(B) Reports filed by the geotechnical engineer or civil engineer competent to do so regarding special
inspection shall state in writing that from his personal knowledge the work performed during the
period covered by the report has been performed in substantial accordance with the approved plans
and specifications.
(C) The use of a geotechnical engineer or civil engineer competent to do so for inspections shall not
preclude the city engineer from conducting inspections using his other authorized inspectors as
may be necessary. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-37: NONCOMPLIANCE NOTIFICATION BY GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER OR
CIVIL ENGINEER COMPETENT TO DO SO:
The permittee shall cause the work to be done in accordance with the approved plans. If during the
course of construction the geotechnical engineer or civil engineer competent to do so finds that the
work is not being done substantially in accordance with the approved plans and specifications, he shall
immediately notify the person in charge of the work and the city engineer of the nonconformity and the
corrective measures to be taken. When changes in the plans are required, he shall prepare such
proposed changes and submit them to the city engineer for approval. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-38: PERIODIC PROGRESS REPORTS BY PRIVATE GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEER
OR CIVIL ENGINEER COMPETENT TO DO SO:
As a condition of the report, periodic progress reports shall be rendered by the geotechnical engineer
or civil engineer competent to do so as required by the city engineer including, but not limited to,
laboratory tests, slope stability, placement of materials, retaining walls, drainage, utilities and any
special permit or plan requirements. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-39: PROGRESS REPORT BY PERMITTEE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 436/710
Periodic progress reports, subject to verification by the city engineer, shall be rendered by permittee on
specified calendar dates and at commencement and completion of major key grading and erosion and
sediment control operations. The date of operations upon which such reports are required and their
content shall be as required by the city engineer in the permit. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-40: SUBMIT AS BUILT PLANS:
Permittee, subject to verification by the city engineer, shall submit to the city engineer an as built
grading plan following completion of grading operations. As built plans shall show any significant
deviations from the final plans. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-41: PERFORMANCE OF WORK; INSPECTION:
The city engineer may inspect any work done pursuant to a permit under this chapter. No permittee
shall be deemed to have complied with this chapter until a final inspection of the work has been made
by the city engineer and he has certified in writing that the work has been completed in accordance
with all requirements and conditions of the permit. The permittee shall provide adequate access to the
site for inspection by the city engineer during the performance of all work and for a minimum period of
one year after acceptance by the city engineer of all improvements pursuant to subsections herein.
(Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-42: OTHER RESPONSIBILITIES OF PERMITTEE:
The permittee shall also be responsible for the following:
(A) Protection Of Existing Utilities: The permittee shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to
any existing public utilities or services.
(B) Protection Of Adjacent Property: The person(s) doing and causing the grading is responsible for the
prevention of damage to adjacent property. No person(s) shall excavate on land sufficiently close to
the property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or other public or private
property, without supporting and protecting such property from damage which might result.
(C) Advance Notice: The permittee shall construction stake and notify the city engineer at least forty
eight (48) hours prior to the start of work.
(D) Erosion And Sediment Control: It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to prevent discharge of
sediment from the site in quantities greater than before the grading occurred, to any watercourse,
drainage system, or adjacent property and to protect watercourses and adjacent properties from
damage by erosion, flooding, or deposition which may result from the permitted grading. Permittee
shall implement all measures necessary to discharge this responsibility even if such measures
exceed the requirements of an approved erosion and sediment control plan prepared pursuant to
this chapter. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 437/710
8-7-43: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
No permit issued under this chapter may be transferred or assigned in any manner whatsoever without
the express consent of the city engineer. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-44: DESIGN AND REVIEW FOR MASS PAD GRADING:
(A) Due to the severe terrain encountered in the city, grading may be required to ensure proper vertical
alignment of building sites to streets and to provide for proper drainage. The degree of grading
should be tempered to fit the physical characteristics of the site being considered. It is the intent of
this provision that all grading shall reflect, to the greatest extent possible, the natural gradient and
contours of the site. Grading shall be designed to minimize the appearance of extensive, artificial
banks or terraces which may be visible from public streets or other public views. The design
standards shall be identified in the design and improvement standards manual.
(B) Parcel maps shall be reviewed for mass pad grading during the tentative parcel map review
process by the engineering division under the authority of the city engineer.
(C) Tentative subdivision, commercial, industrial, multi-family, and general grading projects shall be
reviewed for mass pad grading during the site plan review or tentative map review process by the
planning commission, engineering division, and building division for conformance at site
improvements, under the authority of the city engineer.
(D) Mass pad grading for single-family dwellings (if prescriptive standards are exceeded) will be
reviewed by the engineering division and building division during the building permit process.
(E) If the decision by the city engineer is not acceptable to the applicant, then the applicant can appeal
the decision pursuant to section 8-7-20, "Appeals", of this chapter. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-45: EXCAVATION:
Excavations shall be constructed or protected so that they do not endanger life or property. (Ord. 1523,
4-11-1995)
8-7-46: EXCAVATION SLOPE:
The slope of cut surfaces of permanent excavations shall not be steeper than two (2) horizontal to one
vertical exclusive of terraces and exclusive of roundings described herein. Steeper slopes will be
permitted in competent bedrock provided such slope inclinations are in accordance with
recommendations contained in the geotechnical or geological report. The bedding planes or principal
joint sets in any formation when dipping towards the cut face shall not be daylighted by the cut slope
unless the soils and geologic studies contain recommendations for steeper cut slopes. Cut slopes shall
be rounded into the existing terrain to produce a contoured transition from cut face to natural ground.
(Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 438/710
8-7-47: FILL PLACEMENT:
Fills shall be constructed in layers. The loose thickness of each layer of fill material before compaction
shall not exceed eight inches (8"). Completed fills shall be stable masses of well integrated material
bonded to adjacent materials and to the materials on which they rest. Fills shall be competent to
support anticipated loads and be stable at the design slopes shown on the plans. Proper drainage and
other appropriate measures shall be taken to ensure the continuing integrity of fills. Earth materials
shall be used which have no more than minor amounts of organic substances and have no rock or
similar irreducible material with a maximum dimension greater than twelve inches (12"). The placement
of larger rock may be permitted when the geotechnical engineer or civil engineer competent to do so
properly devises a method of placement, continuously inspects its placement and approves the fill
stability. The following conditions shall also apply:
(A) Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal areas shall be delineated on the
grading plan.
(B) Rock sizes greater than twelve inches (12") in maximum dimension shall be two feet (2') or more
below finish grade, measured vertically.
(C) Rocks shall be placed so as to assure filling of all voids with fines. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-48: FILL COMPACTION:
All fills shall be compacted throughout their full extent to a minimum of ninety percent (90%) of
maximum density as determined by appropriate ASTM standard methods or other alternate methods
approved by the city engineer. Tests to determine the density of compacted fills shall be made on the
basis of not less than one test for each two foot (2') vertical lift of the fill but not less than one test for
each one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of material placed. Additional density tests at a point
approximately one foot (1') below the fill slope surface shall be made on the basis of not less than one
test for each one thousand (1,000) square feet in slope surface but not less than one test for each ten
foot (10') vertical increase of slope height. All tests shall be reasonably uniformly distributed within the
fill or fill slope surface. Results of such testing and location of tests shall be presented in the periodic
and final reports. Compaction may be less than ninety percent (90%) of maximum density, as
determined by the above test, within six inches (6") of the slope surface when such surface material is
placed and compacted by a method acceptable to the city engineer for the planting of the slopes.
Compaction of temporary storage fills, to be used for a period of not greater than six (6) months, shall
not be required, except where the city engineer determines that compaction is necessary as a safety
measure to aid in preventing saturation, sliding, or erosion of the fill. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-49: GROUND PREPARATION FOR FILL PLACEMENT:
The natural ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill,
top soil, and other unsuitable material, and where slopes are five (5) horizontal to one vertical or
steeper, by benching into competent material in a manner acceptable to the city engineer. The keyway
under the toe, if specified, shall be at least ten feet (10') wide. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 439/710
8-7-50: FILL SLOPES:
The slope of permanent fills shall not be steeper than two (2) horizontal to one vertical exclusive of
terraces and exclusive of roundings described herein. Steeper slopes will be permitted in competent
material provided such slope inclinations are in accordance with recommendations contained in the
geotechnical or geological report. The city engineer may require that the fill be constructed with an
exposed surface flatter than two (2) horizontal to one vertical or may require such other measures as
he deems necessary for stability and safety. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-51: SLOPE FENCING:
All cut and fill slopes exceeding eight feet (8') in height with a slope of one and one-half (11/2)
horizontal to one vertical or steeper may be fenced at the top of the cut with the need for fencing
subject to final determination of safety by the building official. The minimum fence height shall be four
feet (4'), the maximum opening shall be six inches (6") square, decision to be approved by the building
official or, in the case of a discretionary project, the planning commission. The fence shall be capable of
supporting a lateral uniform load of thirty (30) pounds per linear foot at the top of the fence together
with a concentrated lateral load of two hundred (200) pounds at any point. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-52: ADJACENT STRUCTURES PROTECTION:
Footings which may be affected by any excavation shall be underpinned or otherwise protected against
settlement and shall be protected against lateral movement. Fills or other surcharge loads shall not be
placed adjacent to any building or structure unless such building or structure is capable of withstanding
the additional loads caused by such fill or surcharge. The rights of coterminous owners shall be as set
forth in section 832 of the Civil Code of the state. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-53: SETBACKS:
(A) General: Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance with this section.
Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary.
(B) Top Of Cut Slope: The top of cut slopes shall be made not nearer to a site boundary line than onefifth
(1/5) of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of two feet (2') and a maximum of ten feet (10').
The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains.
(C) Toe Of Fill Slope: The toe of fill slope shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line than onehalf
(1/2) the height of the slope with a minimum of two feet (2') and a maximum of twenty feet (20').
Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off site property is
developed, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the city engineer deems
necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These
precautions may include, but are not limited to:
1. Additional setbacks.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 440/710
2. Provision for retaining or slough walls.
3. Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion.
4. Provisions for the control of surface waters. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-54: DRAINAGE; GENERAL:
The drainage structures and devices required by this chapter shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with standards herein and criteria authorized by the city engineer. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-55: DRAINAGE; DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
All drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface and subsurface waters to the nearest adequate
street, storm drain, natural watercourse or other juncture, and shall be subject to the approval of the
city engineer. Drainage areas shall conform to patterns established by the city engineer. Erosion of
ground in the area of discharge shall be prevented by installation of nonerosive down drains or other
devices.
Building pads shall have a drainage gradient of two percent (2%) toward approved drainage facilities,
unless waived by the city engineer.
(A) Exception: The gradient from the building pad may be one percent (1%) if all of the following
conditions exist throughout the permit area:
1. No proposed fills are greater than ten feet (10') in maximum depth.
2. No proposed finish cut or fill slope faces have a vertical height in excess of ten feet (10').
3. No existing slope faces, which have a slope face steeper than ten (10) horizontally to one
vertically, have a vertical height in excess of ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-56: DRAINAGE; WATER ACCUMULATION:
All areas shall be graded and drained so that water will not pond or accumulate. Drainage shall be
effected in such a manner that it will not cause erosion or endanger the stability of any cut or fill slope
or any building or structure. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-57: DRAINAGE PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY:
When surface drainage is discharged onto any adjoining property, it shall be discharged in such a
manner that it will not cause erosion or endanger any cut or fill slope or any building or structure. A
grading and drainage plan shall be required which includes the analysis of the effect of the discharge.
(Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-58: DRAINAGE CONTROL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 441/710
(A) Terraces: Terraces at least eight feet (8') in width shall be established at not more than twenty five
feet (25') in height intervals for all cut and fill slopes exceeding thirty feet (30') in height. Where only
one terrace is required, it shall be a approximately mid height. Suitable access shall be provided to
permit proper cleaning and maintenance of terraces and terrace drains. Swales or ditches on
terraces shall have a minimum depth of one foot (1'), a minimum longitudinal grade of four percent
(4%), a maximum longitudinal grade of twelve percent (12%). Down drains or drainage outlets shall
be provided at approximately three hundred foot (300') intervals along the drainage terrace.
(B) Interceptor Drains: Surface lined interceptor drains shall be provided above all cut slopes if the
tributary drainage area above the cut slopes toward the cut and has a drainage path greater than
forty feet (40') measured horizontally. Interceptor drains shall have a minimum of three inches (3")
of concrete or gunite and be reinforced. They shall have a minimum depth of twelve inches (12")
and a minimum width of thirty inches (30") measured horizontally across the drain. Actual sizes of
the drains shall be verified by calculations prepared by a registered civil engineer or as approved by
the city engineer.
(C) Omission Or Modification: Terraces or interceptor drains may be omitted or modified provided such
is in accordance with the recommendations contained in an engineering report addressing the
drainage, written by a registered civil engineer or registered geotechnical engineer competent to do
so.
(D) Down Drains And Drainage Outlets: Down drains and drainage outlets for terraces and interceptor
drains shall be of approved construction and materials and shall be of adequate capacity to convey
the intercepted waters to the point of disposal. If the drainage discharges onto natural ground,
adequate erosion protection shall be provided. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-59: SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE:
Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with surface and/or subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.
(Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-60: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
The following shall apply to the control of erosion and sediment from grading operations:
(A) Grading plans shall be designed with long term erosion and sediment control as a primary
consideration.
(B) Grading operations during the rainy season shall provide erosion and sediment control measures
except upon a clear demonstration to the satisfaction of the city engineer that at no stage of the
work will there be any substantial risk of increased sediment discharge from the site.
(C) Should grading be permitted during the rainy season, the smallest practicable area of erodible land
shall be exposed at any one time during grading operations and the time of exposure shall be
minimized.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 442/710
(D) Wherever possible, natural features, including vegetation, trees, terrain, watercourses, wetlands
and similar resources shall be preserved. Limits of grading shall be clearly defined and marked to
prevent damage by construction equipment. Wetlands and trees shall be protected from
construction activity as described in the design and improvement standards manual.
(E) Permanent drought resistant vegetation and structures for erosion and sediment control shall be
installed as soon as possible.
(F) Adequate provision shall be made for long term maintenance of permanent erosion and sediment
control structures and vegetation.
(G) No topsoil shall be removed from the site unless otherwise directed or approved by the city
engineer. Topsoil overburden shall be stockpiled and redistributed within the graded area after
rough grading to provide a suitable base for seeding and planting. Runoff from the stockpiled area
shall be controlled to prevent erosion and resultant sedimentation of receiving water.
(H) Runoff shall not be discharged from the site in quantities or at velocities substantially above those
which occurred before grading except into drainage facilities of which the design has been
specifically approved by the city engineer.
(I) Permittee shall take reasonable precautions to ensure that vehicles do not track or spill earth
materials into public streets and shall immediately remove such materials if this occurs. (Ord. 1523,
4-11-1995)
8-7-61: EMERGENCY CONDITIONS:
Should increased sediment discharge occur or become imminent, permittee shall take all necessary
steps to control such discharge. Such steps may include construction of additional facilities or removal
or alteration of facilities required by approved erosion and sediment control plans. Facilities removed or
altered shall be restored as soon as possible afterward or appropriate changes in the plan shall be
immediately requested pursuant to this chapter. Permittee shall take prompt action to resolve
emergency problems; otherwise, the city engineer may institute abatement proceedings according to
the provisions herein. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-62: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLANS:
Erosion and sediment control plans prepared pursuant to this chapter shall comply with all of the
following:
(A) The erosion and sediment control plan need not be a separate sheet if all facilities and measures
can be shown on the grading sheets without obscuring the clarity of either the grading plan or the
erosion and sediment control plan.
(B) An erosion and sediment control plan shall be required whenever:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 443/710
1. The graded portion of the site includes more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of area
having a slope greater than ten percent (10%).
2. There is a significant risk that more than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet will be
unprotected or inadequately protected from erosion during any portion of the rainy season.
3. Grading will occur within twenty feet (20') of any watercourse or within the 50-year floodplain.
4. The city engineer determines that the grading will or may pose a significant erosion or sediment
discharge hazard for any reason.
(C) The applicant shall submit, with his erosion and sediment control plans, a detailed cost estimate
covering this work.
(D) Erosion and sediment control plans shall include an effective revegetation program to stabilize all
disturbed areas which will not be otherwise protected. All such areas where grading has been
completed between May 1 and October 15 shall be planted by November 1, or at the
recommendation of the soil conservation service. Graded areas completed at other times of the
year shall be planted within fifteen (15) days. If revegetation is unfeasible or cannot be expected to
stabilize an erodible area with assurance during any part of the rainy season and the unstable area
exceeds two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, additional erosion and sediment control
measures or irrigation of planted slopes may be required as appropriate to prevent increased
sediment discharge.
(E) Erosion and sediment control plans shall be designed to prevent increased discharge of sediment
at all stages of grading and development from initial disturbance of the ground to project
completion. Every feasible effort shall be made to ensure that site stabilization is permanent. Plans
shall indicate the implementation period and the stage of construction where applicable.
(F) Erosion and sediment control plans shall comply with the recommendations of any civil engineer,
geotechnical engineer, engineering geologist, or landscape architect involved in preparation of the
grading plans.
(G) The structural and hydraulic adequacy of all storm water containment or conveyance facilities
shown on the erosion and sediment control plans shall be verified by a civil engineer, and he shall
so attest on the plans. Sufficient calculations and supporting material to demonstrate such
adequacy shall accompany the plans when submitted.
(H) Erosion and sediment control plans shall be designed to meet anticipated field conditions.
(I) Erosion and sediment control plans shall provide for inspection and repair of all erosion and
sediment control facilities at the close of each working day during the rainy season and for specific
sediment cleanout and vegetation maintenance criteria.
(J) Erosion and sediment control plans shall comply with any and all standards and specifications
adopted herein for the control of erosion and sedimentation on grading sites. These standards and
specifications shall be in general compliance with the "Erosion And Sediment Control Guidelines
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 444/710
For Developing Areas Of The Sierras", published by High Sierra Resource Conservation and
Development Council. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-63: VEHICULAR WAYS; GENERAL:
Vehicular ways shall conform to the grading requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-64: VEHICULAR WAYS; DRAINAGE:
Vehicular ways shall be graded and drained in such a manner that will not allow erosion or endanger
the stability of any adjacent slope. Surface discharge onto adjoining property shall be controlled in such
a manner that it does not cause erosion or endanger existing improvements. Bridges and culverts
installed in watercourses shall be approved by the city engineer or his designee and shall be designed
by a registered civil engineer to ensure structural and hydraulic adequacy. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-65: SECURITY REQUIRED:
(A) Security May Be Condition Of Permit: As a condition for the issuance of a permit, the city engineer
may require the deposit of improvement security in sufficient amount deemed necessary by him to
assure faithful performance of the work in the event of default on the part of permittee or, in the
case of a subdivision, where the permittee does not proceed with preparation and obtaining the
approval of a final map. Said security shall be in the form of cash, a certified or cashier's check, a
letter of credit, or a faithful performance bond executed by the applicant and a corporate surety
authorized to do business in this state. Public agencies are exempted from this provision by law.
(B) Subdivisions: In the case of subdivisions, the improvement security shall remain in effect until final
inspections have been made and all grading work and subdivision improvements have been
accepted as being complete by the city engineer.
(C) Projects Other Than Subdivisions: For projects other than subdivisions, the improvements security
shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all grading work has been
accepted as being complete by the city engineer.
(D) Maintenance Security: In addition to the improvement security, the city engineer may also require
the deposit of maintenance security in sufficient amount deemed necessary by him to guarantee
and maintain the grading work to assure the proper functioning of drainage systems and adequate
erosion and sedimentation control. Said maintenance security shall be in the form of cash, a
certified or cashier's check, a letter of credit, or a faithful performance bond executed by the
applicant and a corporate surety authorized to do business in this state and shall remain in effect for
a period of one year after the date of expiration of the improvement security as designated in
subsections (B) and (C) of this section.
(E) Payable To City: Any bond or deposit required by the city engineer pursuant to this chapter shall be
payable to the city.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 445/710
(F) Refunds: Upon satisfaction of applicable provisions of this chapter, the improvement and
maintenance security deposits or bonds will be released. However, upon failure to complete the
work, failure to comply with all of the terms of the permit, or failure of the completed site to function
properly to provide proper drainage or erosion and sedimentation control, the city may do the
required work, or cause it to be done, and collect from the permittee or surety all costs incurred
thereto, including administrative and inspection costs. Any unused portion of a deposit or bond shall
be refunded to the permittee after deduction by the city of the cost of the work.
(G) Insurance: The engineer may require the applicant or his contractor to provide a liability insurance
policy insuring the city, its officers and employees against liability for any occurrences resulting from
bodily injuries or property damage in connection with this project or claimed to be in connection with
this project, which insurance policy shall be in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for
bodily injury and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for property damage. Applicant shall
provide the city with a certificate of the insurance company showing that the city and all its officers
and employees are insured against such liability, which certificate shall provide further that the
insurance company must give to the city, through the city engineer's office, at least thirty (30) days'
written notice prior to termination or cancellation of said policy for any reason whatsoever.
Said certificate shall be provided before starting work and shall remain in effect for a period of one
year after completion of work. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-66: ENFORCEMENT, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
The city engineer may suspend or revoke a permit for good cause, subject to appeal to the city council.
However, no work shall be performed pending appeal except as authorized by the city engineer. (Ord.
1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-67: CORRECTIVE WORK:
(A) Abatement Of Unlawfully Created Conditions:
1. Either the city council or the city engineer may order city crews or authorize contractors to enter
private property to immediately abate a hazardous public nuisance.
Whenever the following conditions are created by violation of the chapter, they are thereby
declared to be in the category of hazardous public nuisance:
(a) Where a violation has altered natural drainage patterns and has caused flooding to any
downstream property; or
(b) When a violation results in a condition which creates a drainage alteration such that
downstream property may be flooded when weather conditions change and the owner, lessee
or licensee of the property on which the violation exists cannot be found; or
(c) Whenever a violation results in a hazard, requiring immediate correction for the preservation
of the public health, safety or welfare.
2. Whenever the city expends any funds or takes any action, the city shall bill the landowner, lessee
or licensee for the costs indicated herein. The costs shall become a lien on the property upon the
bill being recorded in the office of the El Dorado County recorder. The following costs shall be
billed:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 446/710
(a) Engineering And Design: Professional and specialized services (private or city).
(b) Construction: Contractor's invoices or city's force account cost.
(c) Administration And Supervision Overhead: Thirty percent (30%) of any city costs incurred in
subsections (A)2(a) and (A)2(b) of this section.
(d) Interest On Unpaid Amounts: Interest shall accrue and be billed at the rate of ten percent
(10%) per annum on all unpaid amounts from the date of billing.
(B) Stop Work Notice:
1. Whenever it comes to the attention of the city engineer that any person is performing work in
violation of the provisions of this chapter or without a permit as required by this chapter, the city
engineer may serve upon such person a written order citing such violations and directing that
person performing the work to stop work immediately.
2. Upon receipt of such stop work notice, the person performing the work shall:
(a) Stop work immediately; and
(b) Within twenty four (24) hours provide the city engineer with a list of remedies which can be
immediately undertaken to bring the work into compliance with this chapter; and
(c) Within twenty four (24) hours after acceptance of such remedies by the city engineer
undertake, at the violator's expense, such action as is necessary to bring the work into
compliance with this chapter.
(d) Upon failure of any person to comply with the stop work notice served pursuant to this section,
the city may perform corrective work either with city crews or by contract. All persons
responsible for the violation shall be liable jointly and severally to the city for the cost of such
corrective work.
(e) If engineering work is required to identify and define the proper course of action, as
determined by the city, such work shall be provided by the violator at no cost to the city.
(C) Notice Of Noncompliance: In those cases where there has been a failure to secure the required
permit or permits, the city engineer acting thirty (30) days after attempting to notify the owner of the
property, by certified mail, of the requirement of permits, shall record a notice of noncompliance with
the county recorder. The notice shall identify the property and set forth the fact that the grading
does not have the required permit or permits and is in violation of city codes and that the owner has
been so notified. This shall be done in addition to any other legal remedy that the city may employ.
When a grading permit has been obtained for the work, the city engineer shall record with the
county recorder and provide to the property owner of record a notice of cancellation certifying that a
permit has been issued and that the notice of noncompliance has been rescinded. This shall be
done at the permittee's expense. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-68: MISDEMEANOR VIOLATION:
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, any person violating any provision of this chapter
shall be guilty of an infraction and punishable pursuant to subsection 1-4-5(B) of this code. Second and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 447/710
subsequent offenses are misdemeanors and shall be punishable as provided in California Penal Code
section 19. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense punishable as set
forth above. (Ord. 1578, 8-28-2001)
8-7-69: NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES:
The remedies provided herein are not exclusive, and are in addition to any other remedy or penalty
provided by law. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-70: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The city engineer or his designee shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-71: RIGHT OF ENTRY:
Whenever necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the city engineer or his designee may
enter the premises at all reasonable times in the manner provided by law to perform any duty imposed
by this chapter. If such entry is refused, the city engineer shall have recourse to every remedy provided
by law to secure entry. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-72: STOP WORK ORDERS:
Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law,
ordinance, rule or regulation, the city engineer may order the work stopped by serving written notice on
any persons engaged in, doing, or causing such work to be done. Any such person shall forthwith stop
such work until authorized by the city engineer to proceed with the work. If there are no persons
present on the premises, the notice may be posted in a conspicuous place. The notice shall state the
nature of the violation. Any person violating a stop work order shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord.
1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-73: LIABILITY:
Neither issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter nor compliance with the provisions
hereof or with any conditions created in a permit issued hereunder shall relieve any person from
responsibility for damage to any person or property or impose any liability against the city for damage
to any person or property. (Ord. 1523, 4-11-1995)
8-7-74: DENIAL OF OTHER PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS:
No building permit, water, sewer, electrical permit, or any other permits or inspections of existing
permits shall be issued by the city to any person for any premises or portion thereof which is in violation
of this chapter and which violation is not corrected or approved for correction by the city engineer. (Ord.
1523, 4-11-1995)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 448/710
8-7-75: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is for
any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the
validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this chapter; and the city council declares that
this chapter and each section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, and phrase
hereof would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that one or more of such section, subsection,
paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause or phrase be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord.
1523, 4-11-1995)
Chapter 8
CONDUCT ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
8-8-1: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this chapter, the words "public property" shall mean any publicly owned property
within the city, except the traveled portion of public streets, and shall include any park, sidewalk, curb,
or any part of any public right of way devoted to any planting. (Ord. 997, 8-11-1970)
8-8-2: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to perform or participate in any of the following acts:
(A) Acts Involving Buildings And Other Property:
1. To wilfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace, or remove any railing, bench, or
any facilities or property and equipment of any public utility or parts or appurtenances thereof,
signs, notices, or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other
boundary markers, wall or rock border, or other structures or equipment, facilities or public
property or appurtenances whatever, either real or personal.
2. Construct or erect any building or structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character, any tent, fly or windbreak, or run or string any rope, cord, or wire into, upon, or across
any public property, except on special permit issued pursuant to a city ordinance, resolution, or
regulation.
3. Urinate or defecate, except in a public restroom.
(B) Acts Involving Trees, Shrubbery, And Plants:
1. Without a city permit, to damage, cut, carve, burn, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure
the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope,
wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person shall dig in or otherwise disturb, or in
any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any park area.
2. Climb any tree, or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences, planted
areas, or upon any other property not designed or customarily used for such purposes, or to sit
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 449/710
on any sidewalks or steps, or to lie or sit on any lawns which are posted with a sign prohibiting
this use on the lawn area.
(C) Litter Regulations:
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit upon any highway, freeway, alley, street, off
street parking lot, whether it be public or privately owned, park, playground, or any public place in
the city, any glass, bottle, nails, tacks, hoops, wire, cans, or any other substance likely to injure
any person, animal, or vehicle.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or dump any garbage, swill, cans, bottles,
papers, ashes, refuse, the carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash, or rubbish, or any noisome,
nauseous or offensive matter in or upon any highway, freeway, alley, street, off street parking lot,
park, playground, or any public place in the city. (Ord. 997, 8-11-1970)
8-8-3: SLEEPING ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep on any public sidewalks, curbs, planters, walls, or to engage
in any loud, boisterous, threatening, abusive, insulting, or indecent language; or to block pedestrian
traffic on the sidewalk or other public walks, ways, or footpaths devoted to pedestrian use; or to engage
in any disorderly conduct or behavior. (Ord. 997, 8-11-1970)
8-8-4: LICENSE TO SELL:
It shall be unlawful to expose or offer for sale any article or thing, or station or place any stand, cart or
vehicle for the transportation, sale, or display of any such article or thing without first obtaining a
license therefor. (Ord. 997, 8-11-1970)
8-8-5: ADVERTISING IN PUBLIC PARK:
While in a public park it shall be unlawful to announce, advertise, or call the public attention in any way
to any article or service for sale or hire. (Ord. 997, 8-11-1970)
8-8-6: POSTING OF SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful to paste, glue, tack, or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement, or
inscription whatever, or to erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public property,
public land or highway or road unless a permit has first been obtained pursuant to an ordinance,
resolution or other regulation of the city. (Ord. 997, 8-11-1970)
8-8-7: PROFANE LANGUAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to utter or use within the hearing of one or more
persons any profane or vulgar language, words, epithets, or expressions having a tendency to incite or
create a breach of the peace. (Ord. 997, 8-11-1970)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 450/710
8-8-8: SLEEPING IN PARKED VEHICLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep in any vehicle parked on the public street, alley, way or
parking area, or any privately owned parking area used for the parking of any customers or any
business enterprise in the city between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M.
on any day. A "vehicle", for the purpose of this section, shall be as defined by section 670 of the
Vehicle Code of the state of California as it now exists. (Ord. 997, 8-11-1970)
8-8-9: OBSTRUCTING ENTRANCES PROHIBITED:
No person shall block, impede or obstruct any public place or any entrance, exit, or approach to any
place of business in or upon any public place in a manner calculated or with the intent to prevent,
delay, hinder, or interfere with the free passage therealong or therethrough of any person who is
entering, occupying, or leaving any such place of business, or who is performing any services or labor,
or who is seeking or obtaining employment, or who is purchasing, selling, using, delivering,
transporting or receiving any goods, wares, merchandise, services, entertainment, accommodations or
articles, or who is attempting or seeking to do any of the foregoing, or to prevent, delay, hinder or
interfere with the free passage therealong or therethrough of any vehicle or conveyance operated by or
in the custody of any such other person or in which any such other person is riding or attempting to
ride. (Ord. 1356)
8-8-10: PENALTY:
Violation of section 8-8-9 of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor with penalties as set forth in section 1-
4-5 of this code. (Ord. 1356)
8-8-11: CITY CEMETERY REGULATIONS:
(A) City cemeteries, specifically Old City cemetery and Uppertown cemetery, shall be closed at dusk
unless special permission has been given by the director of public services of the city to have a
cemetery remain open after dusk for some special reason.
It shall be unlawful for any person to be present on the premises of any city cemetery after the
same has been closed as set forth herein.
(B) No person shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon city cemetery property.
(Ord. 1569, 12-12-2000)
Chapter 9
STREET IMPROVEMENT
8-9-1: PURPOSE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 451/710
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure streets and highways of minimum standard for safe and
convenient vehicular and pedestrian access and travel. As a result of growth, existing streets and
highways have been rendered inadequate. This chapter is intended to define the requirements, policies
and procedures for the construction of street improvements and acquisition of public rights of way in
order to ensure conformity to existing zoning and subdivision legislation by extending basic
requirements where no subdivision is involved. By virtue of this chapter, the cost required for public
improvements will be equitably borne by the abutting property owners. Ultimately the purpose is to
assure the protection of public safety and general welfare. (Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974)
8-9-2: INTENT:
Compliance with the requirements provided herein is not intended to relieve any further and additional
obligations with respect to streets imposed by reason of other regulations of the city or as may be
provided for by agreement with the city. (Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974)
8-9-3: CONSTRUCTION OF CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS AND PAVING
REQUIRED; PERMIT APPLICATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, any person constructing, adding to, or arranging for the
construction of, or addition to any off street parking facilities, or any building in the city of Placerville,
the result of which effects an increase in the density of use of the property or effects an increase of the
traffic generation on the street in question, shall also provide for the construction of curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, and street paving to meet the existing street pavement, in accordance with city of Placerville
standard specifications and design along all public street frontage adjoining the property upon which
such work is to be done, unless curbs, gutters, sidewalks and paving constructed in accordance with
city standards and design therefor already exist.
A permit for such work shall be applied for in accordance with and subject to the provisions of title 8,
chapter 3 of this code, in addition to the special provisions herein provided, or any other regulation of
the city of Placerville governing the issuance of a permit. Said permit shall be issued, or a variance as
provided in section 8-9-4 of this chapter shall be granted, prior to or in conjunction with the issuance of
any building permits or other permits for said property. (Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974)
8-9-4: VARIANCE FROM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
A variance from the application of section 8-9-5 of this chapter in requiring street improvements to be
installed in conjunction with improvements to the abutting property may be granted under the following
circumstances. (Ord. 1134, 11-22-1977)
(A) Where the city engineer finds and determines the area drainage facilities are inadequate and that
the installation of all or a portion of the required public improvements would endanger the public
welfare by reason thereof; or
(B) Where said city engineer determines that it would be in the best interests of the city to cause all or
a portion of the required work to be done on an area project basis rather than on an individual
basis; or (Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 452/710
(C) Where the city manager finds and determines that such requirements, as applied to an individual
property, by reason of exceptional or extraordinary situation or condition of said property, or the
location thereof, or of the use or development of property in the immediate vicinity of said property,
will involve practical difficulties or would cause undue hardship, unnecessary to carry out the
purposes and spirit of this portion of this chapter. (Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974; amd. Ord. 1080, 2-10-
1976)
Such variance shall not be granted nor become effective unless and until an agreement between the
property owner and the city of Placerville is properly executed, agreeing that the property owner will
undertake the construction of the required improvements as required by these regulations within ninety
(90) days after notice to begin construction of said improvements is sent by the city to the property
owner. Notice to begin the construction of said improvements shall not be sent until the city council has
first determined that such improvements are needed. Said agreement shall further provide that in the
event of default in undertaking and completing the required improvements within the time specified, the
city may cause such work to be done and the cost thereof to be assessed as a lien against the
property. Such agreement shall recite that it creates a covenant running with the land and shall be
recorded in order to constitute notice to any prospective buyers or encumbrancers. The city manager is
hereby authorized to execute such an agreement for and on behalf of the city. (Ord. 1134, 11-22-1977)
8-9-5: REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND GRANT OF RIGHT OF WAY EASEMENTS:
Required improvements and grants of right of way easements for all streets, whether public or private,
in the city of Placerville shall be as follows: (Ord. 1134, 11-22-1977)
(A) Curb, gutter and sidewalk requirements shall be the same as contained in title 10, chapter 8 of this
code. (Ord. 1162, 8-8-1978)
(B) The property owner upon whose property the building is to be constructed or located shall make an
offer of dedication to the city of all required easements and rights of way for the installation of
streets, utilities, and public service facilities. The offer of dedication shall be accepted, accepted
subject to improvements, or rejected in the same manner as outlined in section 10-8-32 of this
code. The width of the rights of way shall be the same as are set forth in title 10, chapter 7 of this
code. (Ord. 1607, 1-10-2006)
(C) The width of paving and the standards for paving shall be the same as are required for streets in
title 10, chapter 7 of this code.
(D) Wherever the property to be developed abuts an existing street and by virtue of the provisions of
this chapter, the developer has an obligation for installation of paving, such paving shall tie in to the
paving of the existing right of way, irrespective of the fact that the right of way area adjoining the
curb and gutter may remain unpaved.
(E) Said construction shall comply with the encroachment ordinance, the zoning ordinance, and any
other regulations established by the city council of the city of Placerville. (Ord. 1134, 11-22-1977)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 453/710
8-9-6: IMPROVEMENTS TO EXISTING BUILDINGS:
Except as may be otherwise provided in this chapter or by any other applicable law, additions to any
existing building(s) or the construction of new buildings which are more than two hundred (200) square
feet, or the construction of a new private garage or more than four hundred (400) square feet within a
five (5) year period, shall also provide for the construction of curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street
paving to meet the existing street pavement in accordance with the obligations of property developers
generally, as more specifically set forth in the preceding section of this chapter, unless curbs, gutters,
sidewalks and paving constructed in accordance with the standards therefor as aforesaid already exist.
(Ord. 1174, 10-17-1978)
8-9-7: ISSUANCE OF PERMITS:
Prior to the issuance of any building permit, applicant shall comply with all the provisions of section 8-9-
5 of this chapter. (Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974)
8-9-8: EXCEPTIONS TO CURBS, GUTTERS, SIDEWALKS AND PAVING
REQUIREMENTS:
The construction requirements hereof shall not apply to any of the following circumstances:
(A) The subdividing or resubdividing of land insofar as the same is regulated by the subdivision map
act of the state of California and city of Placerville regulations therefor, excepting parcel maps.
(B) Where the required public improvements are to be installed by proceedings conducted pursuant to
the state of California assessment district acts, where such proceedings have gone beyond the
protest state and a hearing has been held where the governing body has found that there have
been insufficient protests. (Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974)
8-9-9: BUILDING OFFICIAL; DUTIES OF FINAL INSPECTION:
The building official shall deny final approval and acceptance, and shall refuse to allow final public
utility connections, to any building or structure, unless curbs, gutters, sidewalks and paving as may be
required herein, exist or are constructed and accepted by the city. (Ord. 1056, 2-36-1974)
8-9-10: APPEAL TO CITY COUNCIL:
The city council shall have the jurisdiction to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by the
appellant there is error in any order, requirement, permit, or determination made by any city official
within thirty (30) days after notice of the findings of the city engineer and the city manager. An appeal to
the city council may be taken by the owner or person aggrieved by the decision of said officials. Such
appeal shall be taken within the time specified by filing with the city clerk a copy of notice of appeal
specifying the grounds of said appeal and paying the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall not be
refundable. Upon receipt of a notice of appeal, the city clerk shall give written notice of time and place
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 454/710
of hearing for such appeal to appellant and to any other persons requesting such notice who have
deposited with the city clerk a self-addressed, stamped envelope to be used for such purpose. All
appeals shall be heard by the city council within thirty (30) days of the notice of appeal. (Ord. 1174, 10-
17-1978)
8-9-11: CIVIL ACTION:
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall also be deemed a nuisance, civil action to
abate, enjoin or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken by the appropriate
legal officers of the city of Placerville upon complaint of the city engineer. The remedies herein provided
shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedy available to the city in either law or equity.
(Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974)
8-9-12: CITATION OF ORDINANCE:
This chapter may be referred to and cited as the CITY OF PLACERVILLE STREET IMPROVEMENT
ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1056, 3-26-1974)
8-9-13: STREET SYSTEM EXTENSIONS; REIMBURSEMENT:
(A) Persons other than the city may desire to alter and/or extend the city's street facilities for the
purpose of making these facilities available to properties lying beyond existing facilities or the
expansion of the existing facilities to handle additional traffic volumes beneficial to other properties
within the area. Persons desiring to extend or expand street facilities must make application with
the city engineer of the city requesting that these facilities be extended. Plans and specifications
shall be filed with the city engineer setting forth the manner in which these facilities are to be
extended. The street facility may be extended or enlarged by the applicant in the event that the city
engineer approves the application, together with plans and specifications.
(B) In the event that the city engineer determines that properties other than the property being
developed by the person constructing the street facilities benefit from the construction, the city may
enter into an appropriate reimbursement agreement with persons constructing the street facilities.
Said agreement shall provide that the city shall, but without liability therefor, endeavor to collect by
way of encroachment charges, building permits, etc., the reimbursement to such initial developer so
much of the construction costs of said street facilities as may be practically collected from the
property owners on the basis of the extent to which said new street facility shall benefit their
respective properties.
(C) Each reimbursement agreement with said persons shall be authorized by the city council in the
same manner as other contracts. The reimbursement agreement and the rights therein granted
shall be assigned by persons constructing said street facilities in the first instance.
(D) All rights for reimbursement under any reimbursement agreement shall terminate on the tenth
anniversary of the date of the agreement and the city shall thereafter retain any fees charged for
connection to the system.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 455/710
(E) The area to be benefited shall be determined by the city engineer and a map designating the area
to be benefited shall be attached to all reimbursements contracts.
(F) Determination of benefits may be based either on area or front foot charges, whichever is
determined to be most equitable by the city engineer and the appropriate allocation of construction
costs shall be based upon the benefits to be derived from each parcel of property. The
determination of benefit and allocation of cost by the city engineer shall be final and conclusive.
(G) Fees shall be paid as required by section 4-8-1 of this code to defray the costs incidental to the
processing of plans, specifications, and inspection of such work.
(H) All charges to be made pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any development fees or
encroachment fees required by this code.
(I) The developer or applicant shall pay all the incidental costs of constructing an extension or addition
to the city street system as set forth pursuant to this section. The parties within the area that will
benefit from the extension or addition of the street improvements shall pay their proportionate share
of the cost at such time as their application to encroach onto the city street is applied for or as part
of the payment of any required development fees. (Ord. 1426, 9-9-1987)
8-9-14: CITY STREET SYSTEM EXTENSION IMPROVEMENTS; REIMBURSEMENT:
(A) Improvements: The city may desire to alter, expand or extend a city street facility for the purpose of
making these facilities available to properties which lie beyond existing facilities or to expand
existing facilities to handle additional traffic volumes beneficial to other properties within the area.
The city engineer shall prepare or have prepared, plans and specifications for said improvements.
(B) Determination If Area To Benefit: When such street improvements are constructed by the city, the
city engineer shall determine the area and the specific parcels of property which will benefit from
such improvements, and shall prepare a map designating the area to benefit.
(C) Basis For Determination Of Benefits: The determination of benefits may be based either on area or
frontage foot charges, whichever is determined to be more equitable by the city engineer and the
appropriate allocation of construction costs shall be based upon the benefit to be derived by each
parcel of property. The determination of benefit and allocation of cost by the city engineer shall be
final and conclusive.
(D) Improvements Within Reimbursement Area: Except as otherwise provided in this code, any person
constructing, adding to, or arranging for the construction of, or adding to any building within the
reimbursement area, the result of which effects an increase in the density of use of the property or
effects an increase of the traffic generated on the street in question, shall be subject to providing
reimbursement to the city as determined by the city engineer for the reimbursement area. The only
exception to this provision shall be additions to any existing buildings or the construction of new
buildings which are less than two hundred (200) square feet or the construction of a new private
garage which is less than four hundred (400) square feet. In order to be excepted from the
provisions of this chapter, only one addition of less than two hundred (200) square feet and one
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 456/710
new garage of less than four hundred (400) square feet are allowed on an individual property within
a five (5) year period.
(E) Payment Of Reimbursement: Any person required to pay a reimbursement can pay the
reimbursement in full at the time of application for a building permit or enter into an agreement in
writing providing for the payment of said fee. On approval by the city council for such an agreement,
the payment of the fee may be amortized over a period of five (5) years with interest thereon at a
rate of ten percent (10%) per annum payable annually. (Ord. 1425, 9-8-1987)
Chapter 10
RESERVED
(Ord. 1148, 2-28-1978)
Chapter 11
PARK REGULATIONS
8-11-1: PARK REGULATIONS:
(A) City Parks: The terms "city park", "park" and "park facility" shall include the following: Benham/City
Park, Rotary Park, Lions Park, Lumsden Park, Duffey Park, Orchard Hill Park, and Gold Bug Park.
(B) Closing Time: No person shall enter upon, engage in any activity in, or be present in any city park
from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise, except as provided for in subsection (B)1 of
this section or as posted on the park premises.
1. This subsection (B) shall not be applicable to individuals:
(a) Engaged in city business;
(b) Engaged in city authorized programs or activities;
(c) Engaged in an activity at a city park for which a permit has been issued by the recreation and
parks department authorizing use during nondaylight hours.
(C) Smoking: Smoking tobacco or any other substance is unlawful and prohibited in Benham/City Park
and is permitted in other parks and park facilities only in designated areas that have signs posted
for smoking in that specific area, which areas shall contain appropriate receptacles for cigarettes,
ashes and butts.
(D) Commercial Activity:
1. "Commercial activity" means selling, or offering for sale, or vending any goods, wares,
merchandise, service or other thing of value, for immediate or future delivery, or requesting
monetary donations, contributions, pledges, or other things of value for a charitable, religious,
cultural, or other cause. Commercial activity includes the distribution of food or clothing.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 457/710
2. No person shall engage in any commercial activity in any city park without the express written
authorization of the director of community services (director) or his or her designee. The director
may authorize commercial activities within any city park in connection with special programs or
events sponsored or cosponsored by the city, if he or she determines that the commercial activity
complements and enhances the special program or event and does not detract from the use of
the city park for ordinary park purposes. In making his or her determination, the director shall
consider the potential impact on the city park and the surrounding neighborhood.
(E) Alcoholic Beverages:
1. Consumption or possession of alcoholic beverages is permitted in Lions Park and Gold Bug Park
in areas designated by the director, which areas shall be signed in a conspicuous manner.
2. With the exception of Lions Park and Gold Bug Park and as provided for in this subsection,
consumption or possession of any "alcoholic beverage", as defined in section 8-14-1 of this title,
in any park is permitted only upon the issuance of a permit by the director, which permit shall
specify and be valid for a particular date and designated area.
(F) General Conduct:
1. Dogs And Animals:
(a) Any person who enters a park with any animal in that person's charge shall not allow such
animal to stray or run at large. Dogs shall be maintained on a leash and be properly licensed
and vaccinated.
(b) No person shall fail to promptly remove from any park to an appropriate receptacle fecal
matter deposited thereon by any animal in said person's charge.
2. Motor Vehicles: Except as permitted by the director, it is unlawful for any person, other than when
engaged in the performance of duties as a city employee, to drive or park any motor vehicle or
other motorized conveyance, including, but not limited to, motorized scooters and miniature
motorcycles, in or upon any city park, greenbelt, trail or other open space owned by the city,
except for those areas designated for vehicular travel. This section does not apply to scooters
and wheelchairs in proper use by mobility impaired persons.
3. Damaging Park Property: It is unlawful for any person to destroy, damage or deface any property
owned or used by the city as a park. Violation of this subsection may be charged as either an
infraction or a misdemeanor in the discretion of the district attorney.
4. Animal Life:
(a) It is unlawful to hunt, molest, chase, tease, capture, take, harm, or shoot or attempt to hunt,
molest, chase, tease, capture, take, harm, or shoot any vertebrate animal or wildlife in any
park, provided that sport fishing is permitted in Lumsden Park as posted.
(b) Violation of this subsection may be charged as either an infraction or a misdemeanor in the
discretion of the district attorney.
5. Amplified Sound: No person shall use any amplified sound in any city park without a permit
pursuant to section 6-10-2 of this code. This prohibition shall not apply to the use of any radio,
tape recorder, CD player, DVD player, personal recording device, television, or broadcasts from
any vehicle that is being used for personal use at a volume insufficient to cause a public
nuisance.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 458/710
6. Firearms: No person shall possess, discharge or shoot any firearm, bow and arrow, lawn darts,
slingshot, wrist rocket, air gun, spring gun, paintball gun, or any device that shoots or propels a
projectile, fireworks, combustible powered projectile, or any other such devices potentially harmful
to park visitors and park property. It shall be unlawful to possess or fire any firecracker or
fireworks in a city park.
7. Camping: No person shall camp in a city park.
8. Fires: No person shall start or maintain fires in any city park, except for barbecuing food, using
established barbecue facilities or personal portable barbecues within designated picnic areas. No
person shall fail to fully extinguish live coals or embers before leaving the barbecue facilities or
picnic area.
9. Bicycles/Skateboards/Rollerblades/Roller Skates/Scooters: Bicycles may be used along paved
walkways, sidewalks, parking lots, or where signage indicates use is permitted. Anyone riding a
bicycle within any park facility shall not ride it in such a manner that threatens to, or injures
persons, animals, or property. Riding skateboards, rollerblades, roller skates and scooters is
allowed only in areas posted with signage to designate such use. Anyone riding within any park
facility shall not ride in such a manner that threatens to, or injures persons, animals, or property.
10. Interference: No person shall interfere with the use of any park or portion thereof that at the time
is reserved by permit for the use of any other person or group.
11. Harassment/Disturbing The Peace: No person shall annoy or harass, as defined in subsection
6-5-3(B) of this code, any other persons using the park, nor shall anyone commit any act which is
a breach of the public peace.
12. Sports: Unless previously authorized in writing by the city of Placerville director of community
services or his/her designee, no person, while within any park facility, shall conduct any organized
sport tryout, practice, competition or other sporting event associated with a team, league, or
school.
13. Golf: Unless, previously authorized in writing by the city of Placerville director of community
services or his/her designee, no person, while within any park facility, shall swing golf clubs.
14. Rules And Policies: No person shall disobey or violate any of the rules, policies or regulations of
the director of community services governing the use and enjoyment by the public of any park
and recreation facility, or governing the use and enjoyment of any building, structure, equipment,
apparatus or appliances thereon, which rules or regulations at the time are posted in some
conspicuous place in the park and recreation facility, or in or near the building, structure,
equipment, apparatus or appliance to which the rule or regulation applies.
15. Removal From Park/Park Facilities:
(a) Any person who interferes with any city employee in the performance of the employee's
duties, or who by his or her conduct interferes with use of a park or other park facility, shall be
removed from the park by the director or his or her designee or the police. A person who is
removed from a park pursuant to this section shall not return to or reenter the park or park
facility until the time that the park or park facility opens on the next day.
(b) The director of community services or a police officer may exclude any person who, while
present in a park or park facility, violates any applicable ordinance, statute, posted rule or
regulation. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the exclusion of any person
lawfully exercising free speech rights or other rights protected by the state or federal
constitutions unless that person is also committing acts that are not protected that violate a
specific provision of the law that would allow for exclusion.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 459/710
(c) Any exclusion from a park or park facility under the provisions of this section shall be for the
specified time periods following occurrence of the following violations in a park or park facility:
(1) One day: Single infraction of park rules or ordinances;
(2) Thirty (30) days: Arrest or citation for a misdemeanor nonviolent crime (e.g., public
intoxication), or three (3) or more infractions of park rules or ordinances within the previous
year;
(3) Ninety (90) days: Two (2) arrests or citations for misdemeanor nonviolent crimes, or five (5)
or more infractions of park rules or ordinances within the previous year, or arrest for a felony
nonviolent crime (e.g., drug possession);
(4) One year: Three (3) or more arrests or citations for nonviolent crimes, or seven (7) or more
infractions of park rules or ordinances within the previous year, or any arrest for a violent
crime.
(d) Written notice shall be given to a person excluded from any park or park facility under this
section. The notice shall specify the date the exclusion begins and the duration of the
exclusion, shall identify the offending conduct leading to the exclusion, and shall inform the
excluded person of the right to appeal the exclusion. The exclusion notice shall be signed by
the issuing person and shall also state any penalties for failure to comply.
(e) Any exclusion shall begin immediately upon the issuance of the exclusion notice and end
upon the opening of the park on the day following the end of the exclusion.
(f) At any time within the period of exclusion, a person receiving a notice of exclusion may appeal
the exclusion in writing to the director or chief of police for a waiver or modification of the
exclusion for good cause. Upon review by the director, chief of police or designee, the
exclusion shall be upheld if a preponderance of the evidence presented upon the appeal
demonstrates that the excluded person committed the violations. The director, chief of police,
or designee, shall have the authority to modify the terms of the exclusion for good cause. The
decision of the director, chief of police, or designee, shall be final.
(g) The recreation and parks department shall maintain an accurate database of those persons
excluded from parks and park facilities.
(h) No person subject to the exclusion notice shall enter or remain in any park or park facility at
any time during the period indicated in the exclusion notice. Violation of this subsection may be
charged as an infraction or misdemeanor in the discretion of the district attorney.
(G) Special Events/Filming Permits:
1. Any person desiring to use a park or park facility for a special event having fifty (50) or more
participants shall notify the director of such intended use and shall obtain the appropriate special
events permit from the director.
2. Any person desiring to use a park or park facility for the purpose of producing a commercial video
or film shall first obtain a filming permit from the director. This provision is not intended to prohibit
filming or videoing for an individual's personal use.
(H) Violation; Penalty:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 460/710
1. Unless specified otherwise, a violation of any provision of this section shall be punishable as an
infraction. (Ord. 1657, 9-10-2013)
8-11-2: PARKS AND RECREATION FACILITIES DEVELOPMENT FEE:
(A) Intent And Purpose: The continued increase in the development of dwelling units in the city with the
increase in the population of the city has created an urgent need for the planning, acquisition,
improvement and expansion of public parks, playgrounds and recreation facilities to serve the
increasing population of the city and the means of providing additional revenues with which to
finance such public facilities. The city council declares that a park and recreational facilities
development fee is required to be paid for all new residential development.
(B) Definitions:
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or more
persons including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
PERSON: Shall include any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation,
estate, trust, business trust, syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit.
TRAILER SPACE: Each space, area or building in a trailer park or mobilehome park or other place
designed or intended as a place to accommodate any mobilehome, trailer, or van, bus or other
vehicle or mobile structure, when same is being used as living or sleeping quarters for human
beings. (Ord. 1166, 8-8-1978)
(C) Park And Recreational Facilities Development Fees On New Construction: There is hereby
imposed a six hundred dollar ($600.00) fee upon every person who constructs or causes to be
constructed any new dwelling unit or trailer space in the city. The fee imposed by this section shall
be imposed regardless of whether the new dwelling unit is created by new construction or by
modification of existing structures. (Ord. 1460, 7-11-1989)
The fee set forth in this subsection shall be reduced by fifty dollars ($50.00) per dwelling unit,
providing that a major outdoor facility is provided and maintained by the development.
"Major outdoor recreational facility" is defined as: 1) swimming pool, 2) tennis court, 3) park or
greenbelt, 4) combination of the above three (3) items.
The size, quality and design of any "major outdoor recreational facility" to satisfy the requirement for
reduction of fee as set out in this section shall be within the discretion of the city. At the option of the
city, land (or a combination of land and fees) may be dedicated to the city for park purposes in lieu
of the above mentioned fees. Land dedication shall be based on a standard of one acre per four
hundred (400) occupants.
On November 1, 1979, and each November 1 thereafter, the dwelling unit charge shall increase to
equal increases in construction costs as set forth by engineering news record index. The twelve
(12) month average for the previous year shall determine the percentage of increase. (Ord. 1193, 4-
24-1979)
(D) Time Payment: Such fees shall be due and payable upon application to the city for a building
permit. However, there shall be a refund of such fees in the event the building permit is not
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 461/710
approved, or not used, for such construction. In the case of mobilehome developments, this fee will
be payable prior to the city's certification of compliance with zoning regulations.
(E) Restriction On Use Of Funds: All of the sums collected shall be deposited in the park and
recreational facilities fund for park and recreation purposes and shall be used solely for capital
outlay expenditures such as, but not limited to, the following:
1. Purchase of land and interest in land;
2. Development of parks and buildings for use thereon;
3. Acquisition and development of other varieties of open space;
4. Acquisition and development of bicycle trails, riding trails and other types of trails for recreational
use;
5. Acquisition and development of recreation facilities equipment. (Ord. 1166, 8-8-1978)
Chapter 12
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT
8-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever in this chapter, the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall
have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:
CITY: The city of Placerville, a municipal corporation of the state of California.
COMMISSION: The public utilities commission of the state of California.
COUNCIL: The city council of city.
PERSON: Includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.
POLES AND OVERHEAD WIRES AND ASSOCIATED OVERHEAD STRUCTURES: Poles, towers,
supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, cross arms, braces, transformers, insulators,
cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, and appurtenances located
aboveground, upon, along, across, or over the streets, alleys and ways of city, and used or useful in
supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service.
UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT OR DISTRICT: An area in city within which poles and overhead
wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited by an ordinance adopted pursuant to the
provisions of section 8-12-2 of this chapter.
UTILITY: Includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated
service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 462/710
8-12-2: COUNCIL MAY DESIGNATE UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICT BY
ORDINANCE:
The council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity,
health or safety requires the removal of poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures
from the public streets, alleys, or ways, within designated areas of city and the underground installation
of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The clerk
shall notify all affected property owners and utilities by mail of the time and place of such hearings at
least thirty (30) days prior to the date thereof. If, after any such public hearing, the council finds that the
public necessity, health or safety requires such removal and such underground installation within any
such area, the council shall, by ordinance, declare such area an underground utility district. Such
ordinance shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within
which such poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures shall be removed and within
which affected property owner's must be ready to receive underground service. The council shall allow
a reasonable time for such removal, having due regard for the availability of necessary labor, materials
and equipment for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be
occasioned thereby. (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
8-12-3: UNLAWFUL TO MAINTAIN POLES, ETC.:
Whenever the council by ordinance declares an area of city an underground utility district as provided
in section 8-12-2 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to maintain any pole,
overhead wire or associated overhead structure on any public street, alley, or way within the district
after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed. Any person or utility who shall
erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or operate any such pole or overhead wire or
associated overhead structure on any public street, alley, or way within the district, or who shall neglect
to take down and remove any such pole, overhead wire or associated overhead structure within the
time designated in said ordinance, or who shall otherwise fail to comply with the provisions of this
chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of
not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each consecutive fifteen (15) day period during which
the failure to comply with the provisions hereof shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
947, 5-10-1966)
8-12-4: EXCEPTION BY SPECIAL PERMISSION:
The council may, in any ordinance enacted pursuant to section 8-12-2 of this chapter, grant special
permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of emergency or unusual
circumstances, without discrimination as to any person, or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain,
use or operate, poles and overhead wires and associated overhead structures, notwithstanding any
other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
8-12-5: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to the following types of facilities: (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
(A) Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the
city engineer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 463/710
(B) Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting.
(C) Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which
overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when
such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead
structures are not prohibited.
(D) Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric
energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty four thousand (34,000) volts.
(E) Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture
and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an
adjacent building without crossing any public street.
(F) Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing
communication services.
(G) Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal
mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts.
(H) Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in
conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 1053, 2-12-1974)
8-12-6: NOTIFICATION OF AFFECTED PROPERTY OWNERS AND UTILITIES:
Within ten (10) days after passage of an ordinance pursuant to section 8-12-2 of this chapter, the clerk
shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district described in said
ordinance of the adoption thereof. Said clerk shall further notify said property owners of the necessity
that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electrical,
communication or other similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary
facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or
utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or
utilities on file with the commission and to the requirements of state laws and city ordinances.
Notification shall be made by mailing a copy of said ordinance, together with a copy of this chapter, to
the affected utilities and to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized tax roll of
the city. (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
8-12-7: UNDERGROUND CONSTRUCTION:
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within the area affected by any
ordinance enacted pursuant to section 8-12-2 of this chapter, the supplying utility shall furnish that
portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its
applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. Underground construction by the
utility shall be accomplished in accordance with established construction standards and in accordance
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 464/710
with the rules and regulations authorized by the commission, and shall be completed within the time for
removal of overhead facilities specified in the ordinance enacted pursuant to section 8-12-2 of this
chapter. (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
8-12-8: PROPERTY OWNERS' RESPONSIBILITY:
(A) All underground construction and conduits, conductors and associated equipment necessary to
receive utility service between the service facilities referred to in section 8-12-7 of this chapter and
the service facilities in the building or structure being served shall be provided by the person
owning, operating, leasing, or renting said property, subject to applicable rules, regulations and
tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission and to the lawful requirements of
state laws and city ordinances.
(B) In the event the person owning, operating, leasing or renting said property does not comply with the
provision of subsection (A) of this section within the time provided for in the ordinance enacted
pursuant to section 8-12-2 of this chapter, the city engineer shall have the authority to order the
disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying
utility service to said property.
(C) Noncompliance by any person owning, operating, leasing or renting said property with the
provisions of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor under section 8-12-3 of this chapter. Until
such time as an order is issued pursuant to subsection (B) of this section, the supplying utility shall
not be in violation of this chapter or the ordinance enacted pursuant to section 8-12-2 of this chapter
in continuing to maintain overhead facilities necessary to serve such person during the period of
such noncompliance and such reasonable time thereafter as may be necessary to remove the
same. (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
8-12-9: OBLIGATION OF CITY:
The city shall remove its police and fire alarm circuits or any similar municipal equipment at its own
expense from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of
such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the ordinance enacted pursuant to section
8-12-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
8-12-10: FORCE MAJEURE:
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by an ordinance adopted pursuant to section 8-12-
2 of this chapter cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials,
war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, or any other circumstances beyond the
control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a
period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 947, 5-10-1966)
8-12-11: UNDERGROUND DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED:
(A) General Areas:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 465/710
1. That portion of Main Street in the city of Placerville between Sacramento Street and Cedar
Ravine is hereby declared an underground utility district. (Ord. 950, 7-26-1966)
2. That portion of the city of Placerville designated on the map attached to ordinance 1026 as
exhibit A and by reference made a part hereof, is hereby declared an underground utility district.
(Ord. 1026, 6-12-1973, eff. 7-12-1973; amd. Ord. 1053, 2-12-1974)
3. That portion of the city of Placerville designated on the map attached to ordinance 1027 as
exhibit A and by reference made a part hereof, is hereby declared an underground utility district.
(Ord. 1027, 6-12-1973, eff. 7-12-1973; amd. Ord. 1053, 2-12-1974)
4. That portion of the city of Placerville designated on the map attached to ordinance 1104 as
exhibit A and by reference made a part hereof, is hereby declared an underground utility district.
(Ord. 1104, 2-22-1977)
5. That portion of the city of Placerville designated on the map attached to ordinance 1149 as
exhibit A and by reference made a part hereof, is hereby declared an underground utility district.
(Ord. 1149, 3-14-1978)
6. That portion of the city of Placerville designated on the map attached to ordinance 1377 as
exhibit A and by reference made a part hereof, is hereby declared an underground utility district.
(Ord. 1377, 8-27-1985)
(B) Utility District Number 7:
1. That portion of the city of Placerville along Main Street and Forni Road from Spring Street
westerly approximately three thousand five hundred feet (3,500') to the city limits as designated
on the map attached to ordinance 1589 as exhibit A, entitled underground utility district number 7,
and by reference made a part hereof and hereafter as district number 7, is hereby declared an
underground utility district.
2. All of the poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures shall be removed and the
underground installation of wires and facilities within the district shall be installed by March 1,
2004.
3. The utility that undertakes underground installation of its facilities on private property shall use
the underground conversion allocation computed pursuant to decisions of the public utilities
commission of the state of California for the purpose of providing to each premises in district
number 7 a maximum of one hundred feet (100') of individual joint utility service trenching and
conductor, as well as backfill, paving and conduit, if required. All costs for individual utility service
trenching and conductor, as well as backfill, paving and conduit exceeding one hundred feet
(100') shall be borne by the property owner. Each other serving utility will provide service
trenching and conductor in accordance with its tariffs on file with the California public utilities
commission or as required by its franchise agreement with the city. Since the undergrounding of
utilities is in the city portion of the U.S. Highway 50 operational improvement project, the city of
Placerville will provide an electrical contractor to install the conduit and termination box located
on, under or within any structure on the premises served within district number 7. The city will
assist in the funding of the conversion of the electrical service panel to accept underground
service, up to the amount of one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) per property providing
that the property owner participation in completing their conversion work is at the same time the
utility companies are doing their work, otherwise the contribution is forfeited. All additional costs
shall be borne by the property owner. The underground conversion allocation participation on
private property is limited to those properties upon which a residence, commercial establishment
or other structure that currently receive electrical power exists as of the adoption of the ordinance
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 466/710
codified herein.
The city of Placerville building department will issue a building permit and provide the required
inspection without cost to the property owner. Each property owner in district number 7 shall be
responsible for the maintenance of the installed conduit, termination box, and service panel.
4. Any person or utility who shall erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ, or
operate any such pole or overhead wire or associated overhead structure on any public street,
alley or way, within district number 7, or who shall neglect to take down and remove any such
pole, overhead wire or associated overhead structure within district number 7 shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). Each consecutive fifteen (15) day period during which the failure to
comply with the provisions hereof occurs, shall constitute a separate offense.
5. This subsection shall not apply to the following types of facilities:
(a) Wire (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of district number 7 from which
overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of such
portion, when such wires originate in an area from which poles and overhead wires and
associated overhead structures are not prohibited;
(b) Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other
fixtures and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same
building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;
(c) Radio antennas, their associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for
furnishing communication services;
(d) Service terminals in pedestals aboveground, used to distribute electric or communication
service in underground systems.
6. Within ten (10) days after the adoption of the ordinance codified herein, the city clerk of the city of
Placerville shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the
underground utility district herein described of the adoption of the ordinance codified herein. The
city clerk shall further notify said property owners of the necessity that if they, or any person
occupying such property, desire to continue to receive electrical, communication or other similar
or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their
premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new
location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on
file with the public utilities commission of the state of California, and to the requirements of state
laws and city ordinances.
Notification shall be made by mailing a copy of the ordinance codified herein, together with a
copy of this chapter to the affected utilities and to affected property owners as shown on the last
equalized tax roll of the county of El Dorado.
7. The obligations pertaining to underground construction, the obligations of the property owners,
and the obligations of the city of Placerville, are set forth in sections 8-12-7, 8-12-8, and 8-12-9,
respectively, of this chapter.
8. All new buildings in district number 7 shall after the adoption of the ordinance codified herein
have the wiring placed underground to the nearest existing utility pole. (Ord. 1589, 10-8-2002)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 467/710
Chapter 13
WOODLAND AND FOREST CONSERVATION
8-13-1: PURPOSE:
(A) The city finds that urban forestlands constitute an important physical, aesthetic, recreational and
economic asset to the city, and for these reasons the city seeks to preserve and enhance this asset.
(B) The city finds that the regulation of tree removal and destruction (using canopy retention standards)
will aid in the beautification of the city, encourage sound development, raise property values, and
promote the health, safety, prosperity and general welfare of the residents and property owners
consistent with the right of an individual to develop private property in a manner which will not be
prejudicial to the public interest.
(C) The city council also finds that the management of the trees within the city is in accordance with the
goals and policies of the general plan. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
8-13-2: DEFINITIONS:
APPROVING BODY: The approving body for an application for a subdivision shall be the city council.
The planning commission shall, after review, make a recommendation to the city council.
CITY INSPECTOR: A city inspector employed by the city to administer the provisions of this chapter or
any other person designated by the development services director. The city inspector may be assisted
by a tree specialist.
DISCRETIONARY PROJECT: A project where the city council or planning commission has, within
limits, the power of free decision or latitude to approve or deny a project such as a subdivision.
SIGNIFICANT FOREST ALTERATION: The removal or destruction of more than ten (10) "trees" as
defined herein per calendar year per parcel.
SUBDIVIDABLE PARCEL: Any lot or portion of a lot that can be further subdivided or partitioned into
five (5) or more lots under the city's zoning or subdivision regulations (as determined by an analysis of
city staff).
TREE CANOPY: The cross sectional area of a tree measured on a horizontal plane twenty feet (20')
above the natural ground level.
TREE SPECIALIST: Any person recognized by a professional horticultural or arborcultural forestry
organization as having scientific knowledge in the cultivation of trees and shrubs including tree surgery,
and the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of tree disease and control of pests.
TREES: For the purpose of determining canopy any living woody perennial plant having a trunk
circumference of twenty four inches (24") (approximately 71/2 inches in diameter) measured twenty four
inches (24") above the ground or any tree twenty feet (20') high or higher. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994; amd.
Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 468/710
8-13-3: MINIMUM CANOPY RETENTION STANDARDS:
(A) Residential Subdividable Parcels:
1. This section shall apply to any residential subdividable parcel within the city for which approval
for a discretionary project is requested and for which the following condition applies: Parcels
having canopy cover by trees of at least ten percent (10%) as determined from baseline aerial
photography on file with the planning department, a site survey or any other method acceptable
to the approving body.
2. The following table shall be used to determine the minimum amounts of woodland canopy that
must be retained during development on wooded lands. Canopy cover may be determined using
any method acceptable to the approving body. Canopy removal beyond the minimum canopy
retention standards shall be discouraged.
Existing Baseline
Canopy Cover
Percentage Of Canopy
To Be Retained
80- 100 percent 0.60 x Existing baseline canopy cover
60- 79 percent 0.70 x Existing baseline canopy cover
40- 59 percent 0.80 x Existing baseline canopy cover
20- 39 percent 0.85 x Existing baseline canopy cover
19 percent or less 0.90 x Existing baseline canopy cover
Example: For 50 percent existing baseline canopy, the minimum allowable canopy after
development would be 0.80 x 50% = 40.0% canopy.
3. Retention standards shall be applied to retain stands of trees and undisturbed woodlands in
priority over individual significant trees which will be incorporated into the development. Dead,
insect infested, or diseased trees shall be included as part of the baseline canopy cover
determination. "Significant forest alteration" defined herein shall also require a woodland
alteration permit and plan.
(B) Significant Threshold: The minimum canopy retention standards shall be used as the threshold for
significance under the California environmental quality act. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
8-13-4: WOODLAND ALTERATION PERMIT AND PLAN:
(A) Woodland Alteration Permit: Except as provided for herein, no person or corporation shall destroy
or significantly alter any forest or woodland through tree damage or removal, clearing, grading,
tilling, burning, application of chemicals, alteration of drainage pattern, or any other means unless
they possess a valid woodland alteration permit. No person or corporation shall be granted a permit
for subdivision and/or grading on wooded or forested land unless they possess a valid woodland
alteration permit.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 469/710
Issuance of a woodland alteration permit is contingent upon the following requirements:
1. A woodland alteration plan for the subject property including any access easements must be
approved by the approving body.
2. All other requirements pursuant to the California environmental quality act (CEQA), and other
applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations must be fulfilled.
3. The city council, if it desires, may establish a fee for the permit. If a fee is to be established, it will
be set by resolution. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
4. All applications shall be submitted to the development services department on a form provided by
that department. The form will contain a list of all the information to be submitted with the
application. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(B) Woodland Alteration Plan: The purpose of the woodland alteration plan (WAP) is to establish
specific methods to conserve existing and potential woodland resources and to replace impacted
woodland resources during construction or development. The WAP shall be prepared by a qualified
tree specialist and the charges of preparing the WAP shall be borne by the applicant.
The WAP shall provide that a project meets the minimum canopy retention standards of the
provision through any, or a combination, of the following methods or other methods:
1. Minimizing the extent of the development and locating it to avoid impacts on existing woodlands.
2. Clustering development on a portion of the project area to retain continuous stands of trees in the
nondeveloped portion.
3. Compliance with the tree preservation guidelines adopted by resolution of the city council may be
required.
4. If deemed necessary, a fire management plan shall be submitted concurrently with a woodland
alteration permit.
5. If the removal of trees exceeds the minimum canopy retention standard then the woodland
alteration permit shall demonstrate how the replacement trees will be maintained, and by whom,
to meet the minimum canopy retention standard.
6. If the canopy is removed beyond the minimum canopy retention standard, the decision making
body may, at its discretion, require the replacement of trees to a level greater than the minimum
stated herein, if it is deemed to further enhance the project or to reduce environmental impacts.
7. Replanting with native species to meet the minimum canopy retention standards. Alternative
species may be used to exceed minimum canopy retention standards. The future canopy shall be
determined by species, size and estimated canopy after fifteen (15) years of growth. (Ord. 1509,
5-24-1994)
8-13-5: COMPLIANCE:
Unless hereinafter specifically exempted from the provisions of this chapter, no person shall destroy or
significantly alter forest lands on or upon any "subdividable parcel" as defined herein unless the
woodland alteration permit requirements are met. No final subdivision map shall be filed unless the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 470/710
requirements of the woodland alteration permit are met, unless adequate security is placed with the city
to ensure that said requirements can be accomplished by the city at its discretion. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-
1994)
8-13-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The following trees are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
(A) Those trees which comprise a nursery, garden center, tree farm or orchard, or previously used as a
fruit orchard.
(B) The first ten (10) trees removed from any one parcel, which is limited to ten (10) trees within any
one calendar year.
(C) Trees removed or trimmed by a public utility in the normal course of its business to protect existing
or construct new public utility lines and facilities.
(D) The removal of hazardous, dangerous, dead or diseased trees whose condition poses a threat to
person or property, provided that the person making application for removal of the tree has provided
a report from a tree specialist that the tree is indeed hazardous, dangerous, dead or diseased.
However, if there is any extreme emergency condition where a tree may fall and cause property
damage or bodily injury, the tree inspector may waive the requirement for a report and order the
removal of the tree. No fee will be charged when emergency conditions exist. It is the intent of this
chapter to encourage property owners to remove hazardous or dangerous trees.
(E) Trees removed for commercial purposes on parcels three (3) acres or larger when the property
owner has filed a harvest plan with the California state department of forestry and satisfied all other
requirements of said department. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
8-13-7: WOODLAND ALTERATION PERMIT ISSUANCE:
Prior to issuing a permit for "significant forest alteration" defined herein, the city inspector shall make
the determination that the woodland alteration plan is in compliance with the appropriate canopy
retention standard and any other conditions of permit issuance. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
8-13-8: CONDITIONS:
In granting a permit for tree destruction or removal, the city inspector or governing body may attach
reasonable conditions thereto as are required to ensure compliance with the intent and purpose of this
chapter. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, the replacement of trees, security
therefor and erosion controls. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
8-13-9: SECURITY:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 471/710
Security will be required when more than ten (10) trees on the property are to be removed pursuant to
the tree removal permit in order to guarantee compliance with any conditions of the woodland alteration
permit. Security shall be posted with the city at the rate of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per acre
with a minimum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Emergency removal of tree(s) will not require
security. Any monies collected under this section shall be used for the reforestation of bonded property
and/or in a manner that further the goals of this chapter. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
8-13-10: RELEASE OF SECURITY:
When the tree removal and reforestation has been completed for two (2) years, or as specified in the
permit, the city inspector will authorize the release of the security to the permittee. Unacceptable tree
growth or condition, as well as actual tree death, shall be grounds for security forfeiture. (Ord. 1509, 5-
24-1994)
8-13-11: APPEALS:
(A) Any decision made by the city inspector may be appealed by: 1) the applicant, 2) by any affected
resident or, 3) any affected property owner in the city, to the planning commission. A person
desiring to appeal such decision shall file a notice of appeal in writing with the secretary of the
planning commission within ten (10) days after the date of the decision being appealed, stating
briefly the grounds of appeal and bearing the signature of the appellant.
(B) Appeals of the decision of the planning commission on the issuance or denial of a tree destruction
or removal permit may be made to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk in
the manner provided in subsection (A) of this section within ten (10) days of the decision of the
planning commission.
(C) Appeals shall be accompanied by an appeal fee established by resolution of the city council. (Ord.
1509, 5-24-1994)
8-13-12: VIOLATION:
(A) Any person who without a permit destroys, significantly alters or damages forest lands, not
otherwise exempt, on a "subdividable parcel", as defined herein, which is located on private
property shall be liable to the city for the cost of repair and replacement.
Repair or replacement cost shall be defined as follows:
1. The replacement value of a tree removed up to twelve inches (12") in trunk diameter shall be
based upon the current retail price of a comparable tree up to twelve inches (12") of trunk caliper
measured at four and one-half feet (4.5') from the top of the container soil level or the existing soil
grade at the site of the damaged tree.
2. For trees larger than twelve inches (12") in trunk caliper, the replacement value shall be
determined on the basis of the number of square inches the tree trunk cross section measured at
four and one-half feet (4.5') above the grade in accordance with the formula prepared by the
International Society of Arbor Culture.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 472/710
3. If the city cannot make a monetary determination of the repair or replacement cost utilizing the
formula prepared by the International Society of Arbor Culture, the city shall either require:
(a) Monetary reimbursement in a sum equal to the current market value of two (2) forty eight inch
(48") size box specimen trees for each tree damaged or destroyed. All monies collected are to
go toward the replacement of damaged or destroyed trees.
(b) Replanting of two (2) forty eight inch (48") size box specimen trees for each tree damaged or
destroyed.
Unless otherwise agreed to by the city, the specimens used to replace or calculate replacement
value shall be the same species as the damaged or destroyed tree.
4. Replacement value shall in addition include labor and materials for removing the damaged or
destroyed tree and replanting of replacement trees. The party responsible shall also guarantee
that all plants replaced shall live for at least two (2) years or they will be replaced. Replacement
trees shall also be guaranteed for two (2) years from the date of replacement.
5. The party responsible for the damage of the tree shall be required to post a bond or deposit cash
equal to the replacement value of the tree guaranteeing its repair or replacement. The
responsible party shall post the bond or deposit the cash immediately upon notification of the city
to do so.
6. All repairs or replacements performed pursuant to this chapter shall occur within sixty (60) days
of the report of damage to the tree. Repair or replacement shall be performed by city personnel or
an approved landscape tree person or contractor.
7. The remedies set forth in this section shall not be exclusive but may be imposed in addition to
any other remedies or penalties set forth in this chapter.
(B) In cases of the intentional tree removal without a permit a reforestation plan shall be filed with the
city and all of the requirements thereof shall be met at least two (2) years prior to the issuance of a
woodland alteration permit. The preparation of a woodland alteration plan may proceed during the
site plan or subdivision map review process. The reforestation plan must be approved as adequate
by the planning commission. If the removal of trees results in canopy levels below the existing base
line as provided in subsection 8-13-3(A) of this chapter, the standard for reforestation shall be set at
one hundred percent (100%) of previously existing base line levels.
In addition a notice shall be recorded against the property notifying potential buyers that trees were
removed from the property in violation of this chapter and list conditions or potential conditions
related to the violation. Once the violations are corrected the notice shall be removed from the
property. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
8-13-13: CRIMINAL PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, either personally or through an agent or
representative, is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided in California Penal
Code section 19 for each tree, plant or species removed in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1578, 8-28-
2001)
8-13-14: VARIANCES:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 473/710
Variances from the provisions of this chapter shall be processed in accordance with the criteria and
procedures specified in sections 10-3-5 and 10-3-6 of this code. (Ord. 1509, 5-24-1994)
Chapter 14
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
8-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE: Any alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing
alcohol, spirits, wine or beer and which contains more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by
volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with
other substances. (Ord. 1375, 8-13-1985)
8-14-2: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES:
No person, whether in any vehicle or not, shall possess or consume any alcoholic beverage in or upon
any public street, alley, sidewalk, parkway, off street parking area or park except as provided in
subsection 8-11-1(E) of this title. (Ord. 1375, 8-13-1985; amd. Ord. 1657, 9-10-2013)
8-14-3: EXCEPTIONS:
(A) The consumption and/or possession of alcoholic beverages as defined herein may be permitted at
special events where the sponsor has obtained a temporary license for the sale of alcoholic
beverages from the department of alcoholic beverage control or by permit of the city council or its
designee. For purposes of this section, the city council does hereby designate the following persons
to act as its agent: city administrator, chief of police and director of parks and recreation. (Ord.
1375, 8-13-1985)
8-14-4: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof
is punishable as set forth in section 1-4-5 of this code. (Ord. 1357, 6-26-1984)
Chapter 15
TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE
8-15-1: PURPOSE:
The city council finds and declares that the purpose of this chapter is as follows:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 474/710
(A) The general plan of the city requires that the city be provided, in a time frame related to its
development, with an adequate level of traffic and circulation infrastructure.
(B) New development, and the expansion of existing development, within the city imposes a burden on
the existing traffic and circulation infrastructure by adding additional traffic and by creating a need
for new traffic and circulation infrastructure. Such burdens may vary by the type of land use.
(C) Analysis of the land use expected at buildout of the city pursuant to the general plan makes it
possible to estimate the number of trips generated by different types of land uses, to analyze the
traffic and circulation infrastructure or facilities necessary to support those trips, and to determine
which land uses will utilize such infrastructure. It is therefore possible to construct a fee, based on
trip generation, which equitably spreads the burden of traffic and circulation infrastructure or
facilities to those who will create the need for them and utilize them. It is the intent of this chapter to
create such a fee, spreading costs of traffic and circulation infrastructure to those who create the
need for such infrastructure, without generating any surplus to the general fund. It is the further
purpose of this chapter to implement the general plan by assuring that adequate public facilities are
financed and provided to serve the city.
(D) The fee established by this chapter has been calculated in the manner set forth in the study so as
to pay for those facilities listed in the traffic mitigation fee capital improvement program.
(E) The fee established by this chapter is in addition to any other fees or charges required by law as a
condition of development.
(F) The fee established by this chapter is to be collected for public improvements and facilities for
which an account has been established and funds appropriated.
(G) The failure to impose the conditions and regulations of this chapter relating to payment of the fee
on building permits would jeopardize residents of the community, in that it would permit construction
to proceed without adequate infrastructure or means of financing said infrastructure.
(H) The requirement of this chapter to pay the fee is necessary in order to assure compliance with the
applicable zoning ordinance and general plan requirements for the infrastructure funded by this
chapter.
(I) For a period of greater than ten (10) days prior to adoption of this chapter, data has been available
to the public and to developers and their representatives indicating the cost or estimated cost of all
the infrastructure to be funded, the revenue sources anticipated and the means of spreading these
costs.
(J) The city council has considered the effect of the fee imposed by this chapter with respect to the
housing needs of the city as a whole and of the region, particularly as required by the housing
element of the general plan, and the city council finds that this chapter does not unduly adversely
affect the city's ability to provide for such needs.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 475/710
(K) The establishment of the fee is for the purpose of obtaining funds for capital projects, necessary to
maintain service required by the general plan within developing and existing portions of the city
which land use designations have already been granted. (Ord. 1461, 7-11-1989)
8-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words are defined for purposes of this chapter as follows:
BUILDING PERMIT: The permit issued or required by the city for the construction of any structure
pursuant to and as defined by the building code.
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROJECTS: That list of proposed traffic and circulation facilities identified in
the city of Placerville traffic impact mitigation fee study (Fehr and Peers, April 24, 1998).
DEPARTMENT: The department of public works.
DIRECTOR: The director of the department.
FACILITIES: Those public traffic and circulation facilities or infrastructure shown and included on the
capital improvement program.
FEE OR TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE: The fee established by this chapter. The fee shall be collected
prior to the approval of any building permit. The fee shall be used solely to finance the facilities.
IMPROVEMENT PLAN: A site plan of property proposed for development showing all required
improvements that must be approved by the city prior to the issuance of a building permit for the
property.
STUDY: The study entitled "City Of Placerville Traffic Impact Fee Study" (Fehr and Peers, April 24,
1998). The study is on file in the offices of the director and the city clerk.
TRAFFIC MITIGATION FUND: That special interest bearing fund established pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 1461, 7-11-1989; amd. Ord. 1556, 2-23-1999)
8-15-3: ESTABLISHMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF TRAFFIC MITIGATION FUND:
The finance director is hereby directed to establish a special interest bearing fund entitled the traffic
mitigation fund. All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the traffic mitigation
fund and expended solely to finance the facilities. (Ord. 1461, 7-11-1989)
8-15-4: PAYMENT OF TRAFFIC MITIGATION FEE:
Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the fee imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be paid at
or prior to the issuance of any building permit. Calculation of the fee shall be determined in accordance
with the type of development and the extent of development. Descriptions of land use categories in this
chapter, except as otherwise noted, are utilized in the same manner as in the general plan. (Ord. 1461,
7-11-1989)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 476/710
8-15-5: TRAFFIC IMPACT MITIGATION FEE:
The interim traffic impact mitigation fee shall be as follows:
Single-family residential $14,256.00 per dwelling unit
Multi-family residential 10,586.00 per dwelling unit
Manufactured home (in park) 9,598.00 per dwelling unit
Minor commercial 7.76 per square foot
Major commercial 5.66 per square foot
Gas station 12,650.00 per fuel position
Industrial 1.86 per square foot
For land uses not listed above, the proposed fees will be seven hundred fifty three dollars ($753.00)
per trip for residential type land uses, and three hundred thirty eight dollars ($338.00) per trip for
commercial or industrial land uses.
The above fees shall remain in effect until the comprehensive permanent traffic impact fee program is
adopted. (Ord. 1615, 11-28-2006; amd. Res. 7542, 9-11-2007; Res. 7584, 1-22-2008; Res. 7627, 7-8-
2008; Res. 7648, 10-14-2008)
8-15-6: EXISTING DEVELOPMENT:
No fee shall be charged for already existing development or for projects which rebuild or remodel
without increasing trips generated, except as provided in this section.
(A) Where the development or project changes to a different land use, it shall be charged the
appropriate fee as provided by section 8-15-5 of this chapter, less any amount previously paid
pursuant to this chapter.
(B) Where the development or project expands or remodels the same land use, it shall be charged the
appropriate fee as provided by section 8-15-5 of this chapter; provided, however, that the fee shall
be calculated only as to that portion of the development or project which is expanded or remodeled.
Where the fee is calculated based upon the number of dwelling units, no fee shall be charged
unless an additional dwelling unit is added. (Ord. 1461, 7-11-1989)
8-15-7: FEE ADJUSTMENTS:
(A) A developer of any project subject to the fee established by this chapter may apply to the director
for a reduction or adjustment to the fee based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or
nexus between the impacts of the project and either the amount of the fee or the facilities to be
financed by the fee. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the director not later than
twenty (20) calendar days after notification of the amount of the fee. The application shall state in
detail the factual basis for the claim of reduction or adjustment and the amount of the proposed
reduction or adjustment. The director shall consider the application and render his decision in
writing not later than forty five (45) calendar days after the filing of the fee adjustment request. Any
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 477/710
person aggrieved by the decision of the director may, within twenty (20) calendar days thereafter,
appeal the decision in writing to the city council by filing an appeal with the city clerk. The city
council shall consider such appeals within forty five (45) calendar days after filing. The decision of
the city council shall be final. No building permit shall be issued for the project until the final decision
pursuant to this section has been made. No application for a project shall be considered final or
complete for purposes of the permit streamlining act1, or any other purpose, until a final decision
pursuant to this section has been made.
(B) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (A) of this section, a project proponent or applicant
may pay the fee under protest and receive a building permit. Provided, however, that the application
for reduction or adjustment shall thereafter be filed within ten (10) calendar days or any objection
shall be deemed waived. If a reduction or adjustment is received after payment pursuant to this
subsection is made, a refund to the applicant shall be made of that amount by which the fee is
reduced or adjusted.
(C) The project proponent or applicant applying for a reduction or adjustment shall have the burden of
proof, by a preponderance of the evidence, that a reasonable relationship or nexus is lacking
between the fee, or the facilities to be financed by the fee, and the particular project.
(D) In the event of any reduction or adjustment in the fee granted pursuant to this section, any later
change in the use, zoning or land use designation for the property involved shall subject the then
owner to payment of the then applicable fee for such new uses, zoning or land use designation,
whether or not a building permit is required. (Ord. 1461, 7-11-1989)
8-15-8: INFLATIONARY ADJUSTMENTS:
The fee established by this chapter shall automatically be adjusted on January 1 of each calendar year
by a percentage equal to the inflation rate for the prior year for construction costs as determined by the
director on December 1 of each calendar year. The director's determination shall be based upon the
"Engineering News Record", construction cost index for the calendar year as of December 1. (Ord.
1461, 7-11-1989)
8-15-9: ADOPTION IN COMPLIANCE WITH CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN:
When the monies in the traffic mitigation fund are disbursed for use, the fees shall be used to finance
the facilities. To the extent sufficient fees are available, all facilities financed by the fees shall be
constructed or acquired in accordance with the priorities established in the capital improvement
program. (Ord. 1461, 7-11-1989)
8-15-10: PROJECT PER UNIT COSTS:
If a developer has constructed all or a portion of a project listed on the capital improvement program or
participated in an assessment district or any other kind of financing mechanism the result of which has
caused the construction of one or more projects on the traffic mitigation fee, capital improvement
program, development within the project area shall be exempt from the traffic mitigation fee only to the
extent that the equivalent project per unit cost equals or exceeds the traffic mitigation fee. If the project
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 478/710
per unit cost is less than the traffic mitigation fee, then the traffic mitigation fee will be reduced by the
amount of the project per unit cost. The project per unit cost shall be calculated and certified by the
director. (Ord. 1461, 7-11-1989)
Chapter 16
MONUMENTS
8-16-1: DRUID MONUMENT:
No person shall enter upon, stand, sit or lie upon, or in any way occupy the Druid monument, or any
portion thereof, or any structure appurtenant thereto. (Ord. 1519, 2-28-1995)
8-16-2: BELL TOWER MONUMENT:
No person shall enter upon, stand, site or lie upon, or in any way occupy the Bell Tower monument, or
any portion thereof, or any structure appurtenant thereto, without having first obtained a permit from the
chief of police of the city. (Ord. 1519, 2-28-1995)
8-16-3: PURPOSE:
The city council recognizes that the primary use of the Bell Tower monument and the Druid monument
is as historic monuments, the preservation of which is necessary so that they may be continuously
enjoyed by all citizens. The council has determined that constant pedestrian traffic in and around these
monuments interferes with their use as public monuments and that excessive wear and tear will
threaten their longevity. The council also finds that heavy pedestrian traffic going to and from these
monuments poses a threat to public safety and impedes the orderly flow of vehicular traffic. Thus, the
council find it necessary to regulate the use of these monuments in order to adequately protect these
monuments, to protect public safety and facilitate the efficient flow of vehicular traffic in the area. (Ord.
1519, 2-28-1995)
8-16-4: PERMIT; CONTENT OF APPLICATION:
An application for a permit for the Bell Tower monument shall be filed with the chief of police of the city
and shall state the following:
(A) The name and address of the applicant;
(B) The name and address of the person, group or organization conducting the activity;
(C) The nature of the proposed use or activity;
(D) The date and hours for which the permit is desired; and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 479/710
(E) An estimate of attendance. (Ord. 1519, 2-28-1995)
8-16-5: PERMIT; STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE:
The chief of police shall issue a permit hereunder when he finds:
(A) The proposed activity or use of the Bell Tower monument will not result in damage or excessive
wear and tear to the Bell Tower monument;
(B) The proposed use or activity will not present a threat to the public safety of pedestrians in or around
the Bell Tower monument;
(C) The proposed use or activity will not unreasonably interfere with the efficient flow of vehicular traffic
in and around the Bell Tower monument;
(D) The proposed use or activity will not entail unusual or burdensome expense or security operation
by the city; and
(E) The Bell Tower monument has not been previously reserved for other use. (Ord. 1519, 2-28-1995)
8-16-6: PENALTIES:
Violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction; punishment of which shall be prescribed by
subdivision (b) of section 36900 of the Government Code; provided, however, the fines mentioned
therein shall be minimum rather than maximum fines. (Ord. 1519, 2-28-1995)
8-16-7: SEVERABILITY:
If any portion of this chapter is found to be unconstitutional, it shall not affect the operability of the
remaining portion thereof. (Ord. 1519, 2-28-1995)
Chapter 17
PROHIBITION OF ROUNDABOUTS
8-17-1: ROUNDABOUTS PROHIBITED:
The city is prohibited from constructing or utilizing, and is prohibited from requiring any public or private
person or entity to construct or utilize the traffic features commonly known as "roundabouts", "traffic
circles" or any similar traffic feature on or with respect to any public street or roadway anywhere within
city limits. In no event shall the city's standard or other street specifications or improvement
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 480/710
requirements include any requirement for the construction and/or utilization of any roundabouts, traffic
circles, and/or any similar feature. In no event shall the city carry out or approve a project to construct
any roundabouts, traffic circles, and/or any similar features as a condition to the approval of any project
or the issuance of any permit or permission unless such project is approved by the popular vote. (Voter
Initiative 11-4-2014)
Title 9
TRAFFIC
Chapter 1
TRAFFIC DEFINITIONS
9-1-1: TERMS DEFINED:
When used in this title, the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them,
unless the content makes such meaning repugnant thereto:
CURB: The lateral boundaries of that portion of a street designated or intended for use of vehicles,
whether marked by curbing construction, or by stone, cement, concrete or other material, or not so
marked.
HOLIDAY: Any legally declared state or federal holiday.
LOADING ZONE: An area, space or section of the curb set aside for the exclusive use and purpose of
loading and unloading of persons, supplies and merchandise.
NO PARKING ZONE: An area, space or section of the curb by or adjacent to which no vehicle, whether
occupied or not, attended or unattended, shall stop, stand or park.
OPERATOR: Every individual who shall operate a vehicle as the owner thereof or as the agent,
employee or permittee of the owner.
PARK: The stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, attended or unattended, on any
street.
PARKING METER: Any device which, when the recording dial thereof is set in motion by the deposit of
any coin, shall register the time during which any vehicle is parked adjacent to the parking meter.
PARKING METER ZONE: An area or space upon any street, designated by lines or other markings,
and of sufficient size to permit the parking of only one vehicle.
STREET: Any public street, avenue, road, boulevard, highway or other public place, located in the city,
and established for the use of vehicles.
TRAFFIC COMMITTEE: A committee to consist of the city administrator, the chief of police, and the city
engineer.
U-TURN: The making of any turn while traveling in any direction so as to proceed in the opposite
direction.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 481/710
VEHICLE: Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported upon a
street or highway, except a device which is operated upon rails or tracks. (Ord. 646, 7-2-1934; amd.
Ord. 703, 6-17-1946; Ord. 977, 5-28-1968; Ord. 1080, 2-10-1976; Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
Chapter 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
9-2-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
Every person operating a vehicle on any street of the city shall operate the same in a careful and
prudent manner and at a rate of speed not greater than is reasonable and proper, having regard to the
traffic and use of the street, and no person shall operate a vehicle on any street at a rate of speed so
as to endanger the life or limb of any person or the safety of any property. Speed restrictions shall be
as follows: (Ord. 586, 6-21-1920)
No person shall drive a vehicle at a rate of speed in excess of twenty five (25) miles per hour, provided
that in the event the territory contiguous to the street being traveled is closely built up, the speed shall
not exceed twenty five (25) miles per hour. (Ord. 586, 6-21-1920; amd. 1962 Code)
In the business district the speed limit shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Ord. 907, 5-28-1964)
Upon approaching a railway crossing, or approaching or traversing a street intersection, the speed limit
shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour. (Ord. 586, 6-21-1920)
The following speed limits shall be established on the following streets in the city:
Street
From/To
Speed Limit
(mph)
Bee Street Coloma Street to Canal Street 30
Benham Street Pacific Street to Big Cut Road 25
Broadway Mosquito Road to a point 800 feet west of Smith Flat Road
25
800 feet west of Smith Flat Road to a point 800 feet east of
Smith Flat Road
35
800 feet east of Smith Flat Road to the easterly city limits 40
Canal Street Westerly city limits to Highway 50 30
Carson Road Broadway to Schnell School Road 30
Cedar Ravine
Street
Main Street to southerly city limits 30
Chapel Street Pacific Street to Chamberlain Street 15
Cold Springs
Road
Placerville Drive to westerly
city limits
35
Combellack
Road
Coloma Street to Middletown Road 30
Fair Lane Placerville Drive to Ray Lawyer Drive 35
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 482/710
Forni Road Lo Hi Way easterly to city limits 35
Grandview
Street
Clay Street to Simon Drive 35
Green Valley
Road
Placerville Drive to westerly city limits 30
Main Street Forni Road to Broadway 25
Mallard Lane Green Valley Road to city limits 30
Morrene Drive Hocking Street to Kenneth Court 25
Mosquito Road Broadway to Dimity Lane 30
Dimity Lane to northerly city limits 35
Oak Terrace Northridge Drive to a point 450 feet east of Edgewood
Drive
25
Coloma Street to a point 450 feet east of Edgewood Drive 15
Pacific Street Sacramento Street to Cedar Ravine Street 30
Placerville Drive
West connection with Highway 50 to east connection with
Highway 50
35
Ray Lawyer
Drive
Placerville Drive to Fair Lane 35
Schnell School
Road
Broadway to Carson Road 30
Smith Flat Road
Broadway to city limits 25
Spring Street Coloma Street to Bedford Avenue 30
Tunnel Street Spring Street to its northerly terminus 30
Turner Street Main Street to Corker Street 30
Washington
Street
Spanish Ravine to Corker Street 25
Corker Street to Cedar Ravine Street 30
Wiltse Road Broadway to Lumsden Park entrance 25
(Ord. 1475, 2-26-1991; amd. Ord. 1482, 8-27-1991; Ord. 1489, 3-10-1992; Ord. 1493, 7-14-1992; Ord.
1548, 5-12-1998; Ord. 1550, 10-13-1998; Ord. 1563, 1-11-2000; Ord. 1588, 10-8-2002)
The speed limits herein set forth shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are
erected upon the streets and shall not thereafter be revised except upon the basis of an engineering
and traffic survey. (Ord. 1116, 4-26-1977)
9-2-2: RIGHT TURNS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1548, 5-12-1998)
9-2-3: LEFT TURNS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 483/710
(Rep. by Ord. 1548, 5-12-1998)
9-2-4: U-TURNS:
It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to make a U-turn within the city at any of the following
intersections:
Bedford Avenue and Main Street.
Sacramento Street and Main Street.
(Ord. 586, 2-21-1920; amd. Ord. 1548, 5-12-1998)
9-2-5: WARNING DEVICES; RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person operating any vehicle to use thereon, while traversing any street, any
instrument for the purpose of giving a warning which shall produce a sound of an unusually loud,
annoying or distressing character, or such that will tend to frighten pedestrians or animals. (Ord. 586, 2-
21-1920)
9-2-6: MUFFLER:
(Rep. by Ord. 1548, 5-12-1998)
9-2-7: LEAVING VEHICLE WITH MOTOR RUNNING:
All vehicles shall be parked with the front facing the curb, except when loading or unloading and shall
not be parked with the engine left running. (Ord. 586, 2-21-1920)
9-2-8: VEHICLE REPAIRS PROHIBITED ON STREETS:
No repairing of vehicles or racing of engines shall be allowed on the streets of the city. (Ord. 586, 2-21-
1920)
9-2-9: EXCESSIVE ACCELERATION PROHIBITED:
No person shall operate a vehicle on a street or alley in the city in such a manner as to facilitate its
speed by means of leaving rear wheel frictional tire rubber marks, caused by rapid acceleration. (Ord.
818, 10-16-1958)
9-2-10: RESTRICTED TRAFFIC AREAS; TRUCKS PROHIBITED:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 484/710
(Rep. by Ord. 1546, 10-14-1997)
9-2-11: REGULATION OF TRAFFIC AT FIRES:
(Rep. by Ord. 1548, 5-12-1998)
9-2-12: LOUISIANA SCHNELL SCHOOL STREET RESTRICTED:
(Rep. by Ord. 1546, 10-14-1997)
9-2-13: TRUCK ROUTES:
(A) Whenever any ordinance of this city designates any street or portion thereof as a street the use of
which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons, the city
director of public works is hereby authorized to post such street or streets by appropriate signs as
"truck routes" for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3)
tons.
(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission or a public agency.
2. Any vehicle owned or operated by a public utility or public agency while necessarily in use in the
construction, installation or repair of any public utility facilities.
(C) When any such truck traffic route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs,
the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of three (3) tons shall drive on
such route or routes and none other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of
any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons coming from a truck route having
ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of
making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure
located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual
and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such
restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained.
(D) In accordance with this section, and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following
streets or portions of streets are hereby declared to be truck traffic routes for the movement of
vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of three (3) tons:
Bedford Avenue from U.S. 50 to Main Street.
Broadway from Mosquito Road to the east city limits.
Carson Road from Broadway to the northeast city limits.
Cedar Ravine Street from Main Street to the southeast city limits.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 485/710
Cold Springs Road from the northeast city limits to Placerville Drive.
Main Street from U.S. 50 to Washington Street.
Mosquito Road from Main Street to the northeast city limits.
Pacific Street from Cedar Ravine to State Route 49 (Sacramento Street).
Placerville Drive.
Spring Street from U.S. 50 to Main Street.
(Ord. 1000, 4-13-1971)
9-2-14: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES; USING CERTAIN STREETS:
(A) Whenever any ordinance of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a
street the use of which is prohibited by any commercial vehicle, the city director of public works
shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected by such ordinance.
(B) The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
1. Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission or a public agency.
2. Any vehicle owned or operated by the public utility or public agency while necessarily in use in
the construction, installation or repair of any public utility facilities.
(C) The provisions of this section shall not prohibit commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted
street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from such restricted streets when necessary
for the purpose of making pick ups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any
building or structure located on such restricted streets, or for the purpose of delivering materials to
be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or
structure upon such restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained. (Ord.
1000, 4-13-1971)
(D) In accordance with this section and when signs are erected giving notice thereof, the following
streets and portions of streets are hereby declared to be streets the use of which is prohibited by
any commercial vehicle with a gross weight of six thousand (6,000) pounds or more:
Street From/To
Bedford Avenue Spring Street to Pleasant Street
Coloma Street Spring Street to High Street
Coolwater Creek Road Cold Springs Road to Mallard Lane
Dimity Lane Carson Road to Mosquito Road
Mallard Lane Coolwater Creek Road to Green Valley Road
Smithflat Road Broadway to the easterly city limits
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 486/710
Spring Street Coloma Street to Bedford Avenue
(Ord. 1546, 10-14-1997)
9-2-15: TRANSPORTATION OF EXPLOSIVES:
(A) Whenever any ordinance of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a
street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle shall drive on such route or routes and none
other, except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle carrying
explosives from having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when
necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of explosives.
(B) The route for transportation of explosives shall be as follows:
Broadway from Schnell School Road to Pointview Drive.
(Ord. 1000, 4-13-1971)
Chapter 3
STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
9-3-1: PARKING NEAR INTERSECTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle upon any portion of any street within five feet (5')
of the nearest property line of any street intersection, in front of the vehicle if it is parked parallel to the
curb, or to the left of the vehicle if it is parked at an angle to the curb; or within five feet (5') of the
nearest property line of any street intersection behind the vehicle if it is parked parallel to the curb.
(Ord. 615, 6-7-1926)
9-3-2: PARKING IN DESIGNATED SPACES ONLY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle on any portion of the paved streets of the city,
except along the curb, or next to the sidewalk, of streets which are marked off and designated by white
lines parallel and perpendicular to the curb, and which spaces so marked off are hereby designated as
parking spaces. (Ord. 624, 6-4-1928)
9-3-3: PARKING ZONES DESIGNATED:
The director of community services and/or city engineer shall establish, allot, and indicate by suitable
lines or other means of indication, in any block in any street, any or all of the types of zones hereafter
set forth; provided, however, that no zone pertaining to parking may be established on a state highway
without first having received the necessary legal consent from the California state department of
transportation. If a parking zone request is determined to be unwarranted, notification will be given to
the requestor who then has the option to have the issue brought before the city council, via a written
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 487/710
request to the city clerk's office, requesting that the issue be agendized for council consideration. The
types of zones are as follows:
(A) No parking zones are areas wherein no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle. Such areas shall
be signed "no parking" and curbs adjacent to such zones shall be colored red, and the color shall
indicate the areas to be no parking zones; or, in the event that there is no curb in an area
established as a no parking zone, the area shall be marked with a sign indicating "no parking". It
shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such zone.
(B) Loading zones are areas wherein no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except for the
loading or unloading of passengers, and the curbs adjacent to such zones shall be colored white
and the color shall indicate the areas to be passenger loading zones; provided, that it shall be
unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such zone for any purpose except for
the loading or unloading of passengers or to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such zone for the
specified purpose, for a longer continuous period of time than ten (10) minutes.
(C) Commercial loading zones in the city shall be designated by having the curb adjacent to such zone
painted yellow. Between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. Monday
through Saturday, except holidays, use of a yellow zone by commercial vehicles, having commercial
vehicle license plates, shall be limited to the loading and unloading of freight, goods, wares or
merchandise only for a period not to exceed twenty (20) minutes. For all other days and times,
parking shall be permitted in a yellow zone subject to standard parking limitations for the applicable
street. Any vehicle parked contrary to the limitations established above shall be subject to tow and
fine. Vehicles displaying disabled person license plates, handicap placards issued by the
department of motor vehicles or a city of Placerville temporary commercial loading zone permit may
park in loading zones for a period of twenty (20) minutes during periods that loading zone standards
are in effect as specified above. The loading or unloading of disabled persons in such zones shall
be accomplished only by utilizing a curbside or right hand door or by a door so located as to provide
access at the rearmost portion of the vehicle.
(D) Limited time parking zones are areas wherein no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in
excess of the period of time indicated by suitable signs or markings; the council may also establish
limited time parking zones, and shall fix and designate the periods of time in excess of which
parking in the zones shall be illegal, and shall mark these zones by signs. It shall be unlawful for
any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such zone for a longer continuous period of time
than that indicated by the adjacent signs or markings. The term "continuous period of time" as used
in this section shall include moving a vehicle from parking space to parking space for the sole
purpose of parking a vehicle in such zone for longer than the time indicated by the adjacent signs or
markings, or for the purpose of erasing, obliterating, or otherwise removing or concealing a chalk
mark placed on a vehicle by a police department employee or a parking enforcement agent
designated by the city council for the purposes of determining overtime parking.
(E) No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in excess of the period of time indicated by suitable
signs located on Main Street.
(F) Two (2) hour limited time parking zones are hereby established on the following streets between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on nonholiday weekdays:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 488/710
Bee
Street
Northerly side from Coloma Street to a point lying 80 feet east of Molly Lane.
South side from a point lying 80 feet east of Molly Lane to a point lying 265 feet west
of Coloma Street.
South side from a point lying 180 feet west of Coloma Street to a point lying 50 feet
west of Coloma Street.
(G) Two (2) hour limited time parking zones are hereby established on the following streets between
the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M., daily, holidays excepted:
Main
Street
From the eastern terminus of Forni Road easterly to Cedar Ravine Street.
North side of Main Street from a point 300 feet east of Locust Street to a point 375 feet
east of Locust Street.
North side of Main Street between Cedar Ravine Street and Locust Street, excluding
that portion adjacent to the businesses located at 617 and 619 Main Street.
(Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-3-4: NIGHTTIME PARKING RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle of any kind whatsoever
between the hours of three o'clock (3:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. on any of the streets or
portions of streets hereinafter designated:
Bedford Avenue from Main Street to Coleman Street.
Canal Street.
Center Street.
Coloma Street from Main Street to Mill Street.
Main Street from Canal Street to Washington Street.
Sacramento Street from Main Street to Chamberlain Street.
Spring Street. (Ord. 695, 7-16-1945)
9-3-5: TOW AWAY ZONES:
It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on the south side of Main Street from the east side of
Reservoir Street to a point opposite the west side of Bedford Street and on the north side of Main
Street from Bedford Street to the west side of the premises located at 533 Main Street. Any vehicle
parking in the restricted areas shall be towed away. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be parked on
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 489/710
the north side of Reservoir Street from the intersection of Quartz Alley to the intersection of Main
Street. Any vehicle parking in the restricted area shall be towed away. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-3-6: TAXICAB ZONES:
The council is hereby authorized to establish by resolution a taxicab zone or zones on any street in the
city and shall cause a sign or other designation to be placed adjacent to the parking zone or space
indicating that the space is reserved for taxicabs. It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle
other than a taxicab in any parking space which is designated as a taxicab zone.
The police department or parking enforcement officer shall issue citations in the usual manner and form
for any violations of any of the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-3-7: STOP SIGNS DESIGNATED:
The director of community services and/or city engineer shall have the authority to establish points at
intersections of any streets at which the drivers of all vehicles shall be required to come to a complete
and full stop. Stop signs shall be erected at a point at which the driver shall bring his vehicle to a stop.
If a stop request is determined to be unwarranted, notification will be given to the requestor who then
has the option to have the issue brought before council, via a written request to the city clerk's office,
requesting that the issue be agendized for council consideration.
The city council hereby authorizes the installation of stop signs at the following locations:
Airport Road At the intersection of Airport Road and Broadway.
Bedford Avenue
On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Bedford Avenue and Main Street.
On all 4 approaches to the intersection of Bedford Avenue and Pleasant
Street.
On all 4 approaches to the intersection of Bedford Avenue at Poverty Hill
Drive and Quartz Mountain Drive.
Benham Court At Fiske Street.
Broadway On the approaches of Broadway at Point View Drive.
On the easterly approach of Broadway at its intersection with Wiltse Road.
On all 4 approaches to the intersection of Broadway and Mosquito
Road/Main Street.
On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Broadway and Schnell School
Road.
Carson Road On the southbound approach of Carson Road at its intersection with School
and Rosier Streets.
Cedar Ravine On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Cedar Ravine and Country Club
Drive.
On all 4 approaches to the intersection of Cedar Ravine, Wall Street and
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 490/710
Darlington Avenue.
Chapel Street At its intersection with Chamberlain Street.
At Pacific Street.
Cold Springs
Road
On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Cold Springs Road and Pierroz
Road.
Conrad Court On the westerly leg of Conrad Court at Conrad Street.
Conrad Street On the southerly leg of Conrad Street at Conrad Court.
Cougar Lane At Canal Street.
Debbie Lane On Debbie Lane and A & A Road at their intersection with Green Valley
Road.
Fiske Street At Benham Street.
Forni Road On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Forni Road and Briw Road.
On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Forni Road and Ray Lawyer Drive.
Gold Street At its intersection with Marshall Way.
Grandview
Street
Grandview Street and Lincoln Street at their intersection with Clay Street.
Green Valley
Road
On all 3 approaches to Green Valley Road and Mallard Lane.
Hazzard Street At both of its intersections with Washington Street.
Hocking Street On the northerly approach of Hocking Street at its intersection with
Immigrant Ravine Road.
Immigrant
Ravine Road
On the westerly approach of Immigrant Ravine Road at its intersection with
Hocking Street.
Jeffrey Lane At its intersection with Country Club Drive.
Locust Avenue On both approaches of Locust Avenue to the westerly leg of Elm Avenue.
Main Street On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Main Street and Cedar Ravine
Street.
On all approaches to the intersection of Main Street and Broadway.
Pacific Street On the eastbound intersection of Pacific Street and Cedar Ravine.
Pardi Way On the westerly and southerly approaches to the intersection of Pardi Way
and La Vista Drive.
Pierroz Road On the intersection of Pierroz Road and Placerville Drive.
Ray Lawyer
Drive
On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Ray Lawyer Drive and Fair Lane.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 491/710
Schnell School
Road
At its intersection with Carson Road.
Sean Drive At its intersection with Country Club Drive.
Smith Flat Road
At the intersection of Smith Flat Road and Broadway.
At the intersection of Smith Flat Road and Jaquier Road.
Spanish Ravine At its intersection with Main Street.
Stage Coach
Alley
On all approaches to the intersection of Stage Coach Alley and Center
Street.
Turner Street At Corker Street.
Washington
Street
On all 3 approaches to the intersection of Washington Street and Rowland
Street.
Wiltse Road On the northerly approach of Wiltse Road at its intersection with Lane Drive.
Wood Street At its intersection with High Street.
(Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-3-8: RESTRICTED PARKING:
There shall be no parking at the following locations on the streets listed below except as otherwise
noted:
Acacia Way
On the east side from 2903 Acacia Way to a point 125 feet south of the southerly
intersection of Bennett Drive.
On the east side from Bee Street to a point 125 feet south of the southerly
intersection of Bennett Drive.
On the west side.
Anderson
Way
On both sides of the northerly loop.
On the east side from Franklin Court to a point 300 feet north of Franklin Court.
On the north side of the southerly loop.
Arizona Way
On the east side from the Clay Street intersection northerly to the end of the
road.
Barrett Drive
On the cul-de-sac at the westerly terminus.
Bedford
Avenue
On both sides from Highway 50 to Coleman Street.
On both sides from Pleasant Street to a point 100 feet south of Pleasant Street.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 492/710
On either side from Pleasant Street north to the city limits.
On the east side from a point 270 feet north of Coleman Street to a point 330 feet
north of Coleman Street.
On the east side of Bedford Avenue from a point 290 feet south of Pleasant
Street to a point 320 feet south of Pleasant Street.
On the west side from Coleman Street to Pleasant Street.
Bee Street On the north side from Canal Street, easterly to a point lying 35 feet east of
Acacia Way.
On the south side from a point lying 80 feet west of Simas Way to a point lying 25
feet east of Simas Way.
On the south side from Canal Street, easterly 138 feet.
On the south side from Coloma Street, westerly 50 feet.
Benham
Court
On the east side from Fiske Street to the southerly terminus of Benham Court.
Bennett
Drive
On the north side from a point 200 feet east of the southerly terminus with Acacia
Way to a point 265 feet east of the southerly terminus with Acacia Way.
Briw Road On the east side from the intersection of Forni Road to a point 300 feet to the
south.
On the west side from the intersection of Forni Road to a point 100 feet to the
south.
Broadway On the north side adjacent to the business at 1361 Broadway.
On the north side adjacent to the business at 1287 Broadway.
On the north side adjacent to the businesses at 1257 through 1263 Broadway.
On the north side from Schnell School Road to a point 200 feet westerly, and to a
point 720 feet east of Schnell School Road.
On the roadway portion from Mosquito Road to a point 320 feet easterly. There
shall be a 1 hour parking zone established in the easement portion on the north
side of Broadway from the prolongation of the curb line within the location
described herein.
On the south side from Carson Road to a point 675 feet westerly.
On the south side from Wiltse Road to a point 150 feet easterly.
On the south side from a point 210 feet west of Wiltse Road to a point 250 feet
west of Wiltse Road.
On the south side from Airport Road to a point 250 feet west of Airport Road.
Broadway
Court
On the north side from Broadway to its westerly terminus.
Canal Street On both sides from Cougar Lane, southeasterly to Bee Street.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 493/710
On both sides from Simas Way, southeasterly to U.S. Highway 50.
On the northerly side from Bee Street, southeasterly to Simas Way.
Cedar
Ravine
Street
On the west side within 15 feet of residential driveways between 3154 and 3178
Cedar Ravine Street.
There shall be no parking on the west side of Cedar Ravine Street from a point
525 feet north of Darlington Avenue to a point 585 feet north of Darlington
Avenue.
Chamberlain
Street
On the north side from Chapel Street to a point 40 feet west of Chapel Street.
On the north side from Lillian Court to the westerly terminus of Chamberlain
Street.
On the north side from Sacramento Street to Chapel Street.
On the south side from a point 200 feet west of Sacramento Street to a point 360
feet west of Sacramento Street.
On the south side from Sacramento Street to a point 50 feet west of Sacramento
Street.
Chapel
Street
On the east side from Chamberlain Street to Carey Alley.
On the east side from Pacific Street to a point 50 feet south of Pacific Street.
Clark Street
On the east side from Pacific Street to Adams Way.
On the west side from Clark Court to the southerly terminus of Clark Street.
On the west side from Clark Court to a point 80 feet south of Pacific Street.
Clay Street On the west side at the Highway 50 overcrossing.
Coleman
Street
On the north side from Benson Street to Clay Street.
On the south side from Bedford Avenue to Lincoln Street.
On the south side from Clay Street to Lincoln Street.
Coloma
Street
On the east side between Spring Street and Conrad Street.
On the west side for a distance of 100 feet in each direction from the crest of the
hill between Spring Street and High Street.
Conrad
Court
On the cul-de-sac located at the end of Conrad Court.
On the south side from Conrad Street to a point 75 feet east.
Cottage
Street
On the north side from Conrad Street to a point 25 feet east of Conrad Street.
On the south side from a point 470 feet west of Garden Street to a point 720 feet
west of Garden Street.
Cougar
Lane
On the east side from Canal Street to its northerly terminus.
On the west side from Canal Street to a point 50 feet north of Canal Street.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 494/710
On the west side from its northerly terminus to a point 60 feet south.
There shall be a parking by permit only zone established on Cougar Lane on the
west side beginning at a point 50 feet north of Canal Street and terminating 60
feet south of its northerly terminus.
Country
Club Drive
On both sides from the easterly city limits to a point 250 feet westerly.
On the east side adjacent to the residences located between 1788 and 1814
Country Club Drive.
On the south side from Pheasant Run Drive to a point 100 feet east of Pheasant
Run Drive.
Crescent
Street
On the south side from the intersection of Lewis Street to a point 100 feet east.
Fair Lane On both sides from Placerville Drive to a point 1,600 feet.
Fairview
Court
On the east side from Canal Street to a point 50 feet south of Canal Street.
On the west side from Canal Street to a point 100 feet south of Canal Street.
Fiske Street
On the south side from Benham Court to a point 75 feet west of Benham Court.
Forni Road On the south side from the westerly city limits to a point 400 feet east.
Fowler Way
On the west side from Marshall Way to its northwesterly terminus.
Gold Street On the north side in front of the properties at 1055, 1061 and 1071 Gold Street.
Goldner
Street
On both sides from Clark Street to a point 150 feet west of Clark Street.
On the west side from Pacific Street to a point 150 feet south of Pacific Street.
Grandview
Street
On the north side between Clay Street and Simon Drive.
Hazzard
Street
On both sides from Corina Street to Washington Street.
Hocking
Street
On the east side from Morrene Drive to Mosquito Road.
On the east side from Morrene Drive to the northerly terminus of Hocking Street.
Jeffrey Lane
On the cul-de-sac at the westerly terminus of Jeffrey Lane.
Locust
Street
On the east and west sides from the Main Street intersection northerly to the
north side of the Locust Street Bridge over Hangtown Creek.
On the west side from the southerly end of the Highway 50 bridge abutment to
the Main Street intersection.
Main Street There shall be limited parking zones (green zones) established at the following
locations:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 495/710
Adjacent to the business at 88 Main Street (30 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 103 Main Street (30 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 138 Main Street (20 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 250 Main Street (20 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 339 Main Street just west of the crosswalk (20
minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 348 Main Street (20 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 359 Main Street just east of the red zone/fire
hydrant (20 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 413 Main Street (20 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 525 Main Street (12 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 533 Main Street (12 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 537 Main Street (12 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 542 Main Street (12 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business at 585 Main Street (12 minute green zone).
Adjacent to the business between 120 and 132 Main Street (2 hour parking
signage designation).
Adjacent to the businesses at 617 and 619 Main Street (20 minute green
zone).
Adjacent to the businesses at 360 - 364 Main Street just east of the crosswalk
(20 minute green zone).
On both sides of the driveway at 532 Main Street (12 minute green zone).
On the Center Street side from the northeasterly corner of the business at 339
Main Street to a point midway between the northwesterly and northeasterly
corner of the business located at 359 Main Street (20 minute green zone).
Marshall
Way
On either side of Marshall Way.
Molly Lane On the east side from Bee Street northerly to a point lying 100 feet northeasterly
of Weaver Way.
On the west side from Bee Street northerly 600 feet.
Morrene
Drive
On either side from a point 525 feet north of Hocking Street to a point 575 feet
north of Hocking Street.
On the west side from a point 250 feet north of Hocking Street to the intersection
with Hocking Street.
Mosquito
Road
On the east side from the intersection of the El Dorado Trail to a point 200 feet
north.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 496/710
Moulton
Drive
On the west side from Canal Street to a point 60 feet north of Canal Street.
Myrtle
Avenue
On the easterly side from Canal Street, southerly 250 feet.
On the westerly side from Canal Street, southerly to Olivene Court.
Norman
Street
On both sides along its entire length with the exception of the north side of its
northerly most loop.
Old Canal
Street
On the west side from Main Street to its northerly terminus.
There shall be a limited parking zone on Old Canal Street, east side. 5 spaces as
marked shall be permit parking and the remaining spaces shall be 2 hour
parking.
Old Spring
Street
There shall be no parking or standing of vehicles on the west side of Old Spring
Street between Main Street and Hangtown Creek. This restriction on parking
shall take effect as soon as either signs or markings giving adequate notice have
been placed in the restricted area.
Pacific
Street
On the north side between Cedar Ravine Road to a point 100 feet west of Cedar
Ravine Road.
On the north side between Meridian and Goldner Streets.
On the north side from Benham Street to a point 100 feet west of Sacramento
Street.
On the south side from a point 110 feet east of Benham Street to a point 180 feet
east of Benham Street.
On the south side from Cedar Ravine Road to a point 150 feet west of Cedar
Ravine Road.
On the south side from Sacramento Street to Chapel Street.
There shall be a limited parking zone (2 hour) on Pacific Street from Main Street
to Sacramento Street Monday through Sunday 8:00 A.M. to 7:00 P.M.
Placerville
Drive
On the east side from Ray Lawyer Drive to a point 850 feet northerly.
On the east side from Ray Lawyer Drive to a point 850 feet southerly.
On the north side in front of 583 Placerville Drive.
On the north side in front of 611 Placerville Drive.
On the south side adjacent to the business at 386 Placerville Drive.
On the west side from 55 Placerville Drive to 99 Placerville Drive.
There shall be a 4 hour parking zone established on the access road adjacent to
the Placerville Drive entrance to the El Dorado County Fairgrounds.
Pleasant
Street
On both sides from Bedford Avenue to its easterly terminus.
Point View On the north side adjacent to the residence at 1889 Point View Drive.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 497/710
Drive On the south side from Cardinel Drive to a point 150 feet west of Cardinel Drive.
Quartz Alley
From Main Street to Reservoir Street.
Ray Lawyer
Drive
On the north side from Placerville Drive to Fair Lane.
On the south side from a point 1,750 feet east of the access road into the
Cosumnes River College campus to Fair Lane.
On the south side from Placerville Drive to the access road into Venture Village
Shopping Center.
There shall be a limited parking zone (12 minute green zone) established on the
south side of Ray Lawyer Drive at the following location:
From the westerly end of the bridge abutment to a point 25 feet westerly.
Ridgecrest
Court
On the east side from Woodridge Court to a point 100 feet south of Woodridge
Court.
Sacramento
Street
On the east side from a point 120 feet north of Pacific Street to a point 150 feet
south of Pacific Street.
Schnell
School
Road
On the west side from the northwest intersection of the Highway 50 westbound
on ramp extending 75 feet north.
Sheridan
Street
On the west side from Thompson Way to Main Street.
Simon Drive
On the north side from the westerly end of the driveway of the welfare office to
the most westerly end of the cul-de-sac on Simon Drive.
On the south side.
Spanish
Ravine
Road
On the north side from a point 47 feet east of Washington Street to a point 350
feet east of Washington Street.
On the north side from Main Street to Washington Street.
On the north side from Washington Street to a point 27 feet east of Washington
Street.
On the south side from Washington Street to a point 350 feet east of Washington
Street.
Spear Street
On the east side from Moulton Drive to its northerly terminus.
Spring
Street
From 500 feet north of Highway 50 to a point 800 feet north of Highway 50.
On either side from Bedford Avenue to the intersection of Garden Street.
On the north side from Elstner Street to a point 40 feet east of Elstner Street.
Stout Court Along the northerly terminus adjacent to the Highway 50 right of way fence.
On the east side from Broadway to a point 115 feet north of Broadway.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 498/710
On the west side from a point 115 feet north of Broadway to a point 175 feet
north of Broadway.
Thompson
Way
On the north side from a point 350 feet west of Sheridan Street to a point 750
feet west of Sheridan Street.
Tunnel
Street
On both sides from Manor Drive to a point 1,050 feet northerly.
Turner
Street
From Sherman Street to Corker Street with the exception of the following
locations:
The east side from Corker Street to a point 240 feet northerly.
The west side from Corker Street to a point 185 feet northerly.
Washington
Street
There shall be no parking on Washington Street.
Willow
Street
On the west side of the northerly loop of Willow Street from Anderson Way to a
point 25 feet north of Anderson Way.
Woodridge
Court
On the east side from Cold Springs Road to its northerly terminus.
(Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-3-9: REGULATION OF TRAFFIC ON STATE HIGHWAYS:
Any provision of this code which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state
highways in any way for which the approval of the department of transportation, state of California, is
required by state law, shall cease to be operative six (6) months after receipt by the council of written
notice of withdrawal of approval of the state department.
Whenever this code delegates authority to a city officer or traffic committee, or authorizes action by the
council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by state law requires the prior
approval of the state department of transportation, no such officer or traffic committee shall exercise
such authority nor shall such action by the council be effective with respect to any state highway
without the prior approval in writing of the state department of transportation when and to the extent
required by the Vehicle Code.
The council may, by resolution, establish on said state highways, any of the parking zones described in
this chapter, subject to the approval of the state department of transportation as prescribed above.
(Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-3-10: BLUE CURB PARKING SPACES:
(A) Use Of Blue Curb Spaces: Persons using "blue curb" parking spaces shall comply with the
following:
1. No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a disabled persons parking zone (blue curb) unless
said vehicle bears a special license or displays a special placard issued under the provisions of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 499/710
section 9105 or 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code.
2. Blue curb parking spaces shall be operative twenty four (24) hours a day, Sunday and holidays
included.
3. Parking zones for the physically handicapped are subject to any temporary parking prohibitions
established by the city.
(B) On Street Parking: The chief of police shall designate special "blue curb" parking spaces for the
purpose of providing on street parking for the exclusive use by physically handicapped persons.
(C) Off Street/Publicly Owned Facilities: The chief of police shall designate parking stalls or spaces in
publicly owned, leased or controlled off street parking facilities for exclusive use by physically
handicapped persons.
(D) Off Street/Privately Financed Facilities: The city hereby declares that there are privately owned and
operated parking facilities which may reserve parking stalls for exclusive use by physically
handicapped persons. The city police department is authorized to enforce this provision.
(E) Identification:
1. On Street Blue Curb Spaces: Blue curb spaces shall be indicated by blue paint on the curb edge
of the paved portion of the street. For further identification, the international symbol of access,
may be painted on the blue curb in white followed by the word "ONLY". In addition a sign not less
than seventeen inches by twenty two inches (17" x 22") with lettering not less than one inch (1")
in height shall be posted stating:
Vehicles not displaying handicapped license plates or placards will be subject to a fine and/or
tow away. Vehicles will be towed away at the owner's expense, and may be reclaimed by
telephoning 530-642-5280.
2. Off Street/Publicly Owned Facilities: Designation of "blue curb" parking stalls in publicly financed
off street parking facilities shall be made by position immediately adjacent to, and visible from
same, a sign consisting of the international symbol of access. In addition a sign not less than
seventeen inches by twenty two inches (17" x 22") in size must be posted either at the entrance
to the parking facility or immediately adjacent to and visible from the reserved stall(s), which
states with lettering not less than one inch (1") in height: "Vehicles not displaying handicapped
license plates or placards will be subject to a fine and/or tow away. Vehicles will be towed away at
the owner's expense, and may be reclaimed by telephoning 530-642-5280". All signs shall be
posted at a height of eighty inches (80") from the ground.
3. Off Street/Privately Financed Facilities: Designation of "blue curb" parking stalls in privately
financed off street parking facilities shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible
from same a sign consisting of the international symbol of access. In addition, a sign not less
than seventeen inches by twenty two inches (17" x 22") in size with lettering not less than one
inch (1") in height which clearly states: "Vehicles not displaying handicapped license plates or
placards will be towed away at owner's expense. Towed vehicles may be reclaimed by
telephoning 530-642-5280". This sign shall be posted at the entrance to the parking facility or
immediately adjacent to, and visible from the reserved stall(s).
Note: The person in lawful possession of the parking facility may then and only after first
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 500/710
contacting the local police cause the removal of a violator's automobile from the stall to the
nearest public garage.
A sign must be posted at the entry to all off street parking facilities to the effect that the facility is
subject to all public traffic regulations and control.
All signs shall be posted at a height of eighty inches (80") from the ground. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-
2017)
9-3-11: RESTRICTED PARKING OF INANIMATE OBJECTS:
(A) Reserved.
(B) Any duly authorized police officer is hereby authorized to remove or cause to be removed any
inanimate object other than a motorized vehicle which is parked on the streets or in the parking lots
of the city.
(C) After having been removed from the street or parking lot, the inanimate object shall be stored by
the city at the city of Placerville corporation yard. As soon as the owner of the inanimate object has
been discovered, notice shall be given to the owner that the inanimate object has been stored at the
corporation yard of the city and the owner shall be entitled to retake possession of the inanimate
object at any time during normal working hours.
(D) The person owning the inanimate object shall pay a storage charge to the city of twenty dollars
($20.00) for each day the inanimate object has been stored by the city, which said sum shall be
payable within thirty (30) days after the owner has retaken possession of the inanimate object. (Ord.
1688, 2-28-2017)
9-3-12: RESTRICTED OFF STREET PARKING:
(A) Handicapped Parking: It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any vehicle in a stall or
space designated for physically handicapped persons, if, immediately adjacent to and visible from
such stall or space, there is posted a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant
in white on a blue background, unless the vehicle displays either one of the distinguishing license
plates or a placard issued pursuant to sections 22511.55 and 22511.59 or to disabled veterans, as
specified in section 5007 of the California Vehicle Code.
City owned off street parking facilities subject to this section are:
Center Street Lot
Center Street Parking Structure
Fox Lot
Ivy House
Milton Lot
Mooney Lot
Old City Hall Lot
Placerville Station I
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 501/710
Placerville Station II
Tetrault Lot
(B) Limited Parking Spaces: There shall be four (4) limited parking spaces (2 hour green zone)
established at the northerly terminus of Old Canal Street. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-3-13: LOADING AND UNLOADING ZONES:
(A) Ten Minute White Zones: There shall be loading/unloading zones (10 minute white zone)
established at the following locations:
Ray
Lawyer
Drive
On the south side beginning at a point 185 feet east of the Armory Drive intersection
and terminating 209 feet east of the Armory Drive intersection.
On the south side beginning at a point 440 feet east of the Armory Drive intersection
and terminating 460 feet east of the Armory Drive intersection.
Spanish
Ravine
Road
On the north side from a point 27 feet east of Washington Street to a point 47 feet
east of Washington Street.
(B) Twenty Minute Yellow Zones: Commercial vehicle loading/unloading zones (20 minute yellow
zones) shall be established at the following intersections:
1. On the north side of Main Street beginning at a point two hundred twenty feet (220') east of the
Locust Street intersection and terminating two hundred sixty feet (260') east of the Locust Street
intersection.
2. Adjacent to the business at 312 Main Street.
3. On the Center Street side from roughly the midpoint between the northeasterly and northwesterly
corners of the businesses located at 359 Main Street to the westerly rear side of the business
located at 379 Main Street.
4. Adjacent to the businesses at 400 - 430 Main Street.
5. Adjacent to the business at 447 Main Street.
6. Adjacent to the businesses at 482 and 484 Main Street.
7. On the west side of Pacific Street (State Route 49) beginning at a point eighty feet (80') south of
the Main Street intersection and terminating one hundred seventy feet (170') south of the Main
Street intersection.
8. Adjacent to the south side of the business located at 3025 Sacramento Street.
9. On the east side of the Conrad Court cul-de-sac, from a point forty feet (40') south of the north
driveway, extending forty feet (40') to the south. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 502/710
9-3-14: RESIDENTS ONLY PARKING ZONES:
Only residents displaying a city issued residential parking permit will be allowed to park between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. and four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on nonholiday weekdays on the following
streets:
Acacia
Way
East side between the southerly and northerly terminus of Bennett Drive.
East side from the southerly intersection of Bennett Drive to a point 125 feet south.
Bee
Street
On the northerly side from a point lying 35 feet east of Acacia Way to a point lying 80
feet east of Molly Lane.
On the south side from a point lying 25 feet east of Simas Way to a point lying 80 feet
east of Molly Lane.
On the south side from a point lying 265 feet west of Coloma Street to a point lying
180 feet west of Coloma Street.
On the southeast side from a point lying 138 feet east of Canal Street to a point lying
80 feet west of Simas Way.
Bennett
Drive
Both sides between its southerly and northerly terminus with Acacia Way.
Canal
Street
On the southerly side from a point lying 85 feet west of Myrtle Avenue to a point lying
190 feet east of Myrtle Avenue.
Fairview
Drive
On the easterly side from a point lying 50 feet southwesterly of Canal Street,
southerly to the terminus of the street.
On the westerly side from a point lying 100 feet southwesterly of Canal Street,
southerly to the terminus of the street.
Lynne
Court
On both sides from Fairview Drive to its southerly terminus.
Molly
Lane
On the easterly side from a point lying 100 feet northerly of Weaver Way, northerly
300 feet to a point lying 400 feet northerly of Weaver Way.
Myrtle
Avenue
On both sides from a point lying 175 feet southerly of Olivene Court, southeasterly
550 feet to Myrtle Court.
On the westerly side from Olivene Court, southerly 175 feet.
Simas
Way
On both sides from Canal Street to Bee Street.
(Res. 5438, 11-12-1991; amd. Ord. 1535, 7- 9-1996; Ord. 1544, 9-9-1997; Ord. 1587, 9-24-2002; Ord.
1613, 9-26-2006)
Chapter 4
MUNICIPAL PARKING LOTS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 503/710
9-4-1: REGULATION AND CONTROL OF PARKING LOTS:
The council may, by resolution, declare the necessity for the use of parking meters on any parking lot
within the city that is municipally owned or controlled; may fix and determine traffic patterns for the
movement of traffic on municipally owned or controlled parking lots and govern the ingress and egress
thereto and therefrom, and adopt other resolutions for the regulation of lots, and when the council
regularly passes and adopts any resolution for any purpose, the same shall control the use of the area
affected thereby. (Ord. 739, 6-18-1951)
9-4-2: PARKING LOTS; PARKING RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person on any public parking lot which is municipally owned or controlled:
(A) To park or place any vehicle on any portion of the lot in such a manner as to interfere with or restrict
the freedom of traffic movement between the areas indicated for parking or to interfere with the free
ingress or egress to and from said lot.
(B) To park any vehicle with a trailer or any other thing attached thereto which extends into the areas
commonly used for traffic movement.
(C) To park or place any vehicle or thing on any portion of the property which has been marked in red
or by pavement stripes or words or signs to indicate that no parking is permitted.
(D) To park any vehicle or thing in any manner except entirely within the area indicated for vehicular
parking by parallel lines painted upon the paved surface or in any manner so that any portion of the
vehicle or thing extends over or across any line painted on the paved portion of the property.
(E) To move any vehicle on any lot at any speed exceeding ten (10) miles per hour or at any speed
greater than that posted at the entrance to any lot.
(F) To fail to place the name and address of the driver, the name and address of the registered owner
and the registration number of any vehicle that has collided with any other vehicle or thing on the
parking lot on the vehicle or thing collided with if the same be unattended, or to give such
information to the person in charge of the other vehicle or thing if the same be attended.
(G) To permit any vehicle to be parked overtime or beyond any period of time declared by the council to
be the maximum time for parking on such lot, whether in the same space or different spaces in the
same parking lot. Any vehicle parked in violation of this section, and having been cited for that
violation, is guilty of a separate and additional violation for each complete time period equal to the
maximum time for parking in such lot. The fine for a violation of this section shall be as set forth in
section 9-5-3 of this title.
(H) To leave any vehicle or thing in any parking stall at any time between the hours of three o'clock
(3:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 504/710
(I) To park or place any truck exceeding one ton rated capacity upon any portion of any such parking
lot.
(J) To drink any alcoholic beverage on the parking lot at any time of day or night.
(K) To ride or operate any skateboard, bicycle, roller skates, go-cart or any similar device not a
registered and licensed motor vehicle in, or upon, any parking lot except when in conjunction with a
sponsored and supervised activity sanctioned by the city.
(L) To move any vehicle in a direction contrary to a specified direction of travel as indicated by any
traffic control device, arrow or other sign.
(M) To erase, obliterate or otherwise remove or conceal a chalk mark placed on a vehicle by a police
department employee or a parking enforcement agent designated by the city council for the
purposes of determining overtime parking. Conviction of a violation of this subsection is punishable
by a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a
first violation; a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00) for a second violation of this subsection within one year; and a fine of not less
than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each
additional violation of this subsection within one year. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-4-3: ISSUANCE OF CITATION FOR VIOLATION:
The police department or any agency or entity and its employees designated by the city council are
hereby empowered to issue citations in the usual form and manner for any violations of any provisions
of this chapter or chapter 3 of this title. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-4-4: PARKING DISTRICT 1:
Parking district 1 is hereby declared to be from, and to be bounded as described in exhibit on file in the
office of the clerk and by reference made a part hereof. The property proposed to be acquired for public
parking purposes is described as follows:
Parcel 1. A parcel of land consisting of Lots 24 to 34 in Block 33, and the southwest portion of Lot 23,
Block 33, having a frontage of 15.76 feet on Center Street and 7.3 feet on Hangtown Creek.
Parcel 2. A parcel of land consisting of Lot 14, Block 41; the east 12.25 feet of Lot 6, Block 41,
excepting the southeast 3 feet thereof; and the portion of Lot 1 Block 41 lying northwest of the
northwest line of the lands now or formerly of Otto K. Weichold.
No public ways are proposed to be acquired for ingress to or egress from said parking places.
The improvements proposed to be made or constructed on the parking places are: grading and the
construction thereon of pavement, curbs, drains, lights, fences, rails, meters, and any buildings or
structures necessary for the proper operation thereof; and the making of all acquisitions and the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 505/710
construction of all improvements and the performance of work auxiliary thereto necessary to complete
same as off street parking facilities. (Ord. 761, 5-24-1954)
9-4-5: PUBLIC PARKING FACILITIES:
It is declared and agreed that the lands hereinafter described, already owned by the city and located
within the boundaries of parking district 1 therein, which lands are either now being used for the
purpose of public off street parking or are not needed by the city for any other purpose and are
available for such use, shall be held, used and treated in all respects the same as the parking places to
be acquired with the proceeds of bonds to be issued for the further acquisition and improvement of
public parking facilities pursuant to proceedings initiated by the filing with the clerk of a certified copy of
resolution 1639, entitled "a resolution requesting and determining that proceedings be taken for the
further acquisition and improvement of public parking facilities and for the issuance of bonds therefor",
adopted July 9, 1968, by the council functioning with the powers, jurisdiction and authority granted to,
and the duties imposed upon, a parking place commission under the parking district law of 1951.
Without limiting the generality of the first paragraph hereof, the net revenues to be derived from the
operation of off street parking facilities on such lands shall be allocated and pledged, as a lien thereon
subject and subordinate only to any allocation, pledge, claim or lien thereon of the city of Placerville
municipal improvement bonds, parking district 1, series 54-1, or any bonds issued upon the refunding
thereof in accordance with the resolution providing for the issuance of such series 54-1 bonds, to the
payment of the principal and interest of the bonds to be issued pursuant to the proceedings referred to
in the first paragraph hereof, and the establishment and maintenance of any reserve funds, sinking
funds or other funds designed for securing or paying such bonds and the interest thereon, as provided
in the said resolution.
No compensation shall be paid to the city for such lands.
The lands hereinabove referred to are described as follows:
(A) The Coloma Street lots: All that certain property situated in the city of Placerville, county of El
Dorado, state of California, more particularly described as follows:
A parcel of land consisting of Lot 14, Block 41; the east 12.25 feet of Lot 6, Block 41, excepting
the southeast 82 feet thereof, and the portion of Lot 13, Block 41, lying northwest of the northwest
line of the lands now or formerly of Otto K. Weichold, et ux.
(B) The Center Street lots: All that certain property situated in the city of Placerville, county of El
Dorado, state of California, more particularly described as follows:
Beginning at the northeast corner of that certain 0.838 acre tract of land as shown on that certain
record of survey entitled "Portions of Block 38, Center Street and Hangtown Creek, City of
Placerville, California" recorded in the office of the Recorder of El Dorado County in Book 2, of
Surveys, Page 46, said point being on the southwesterly line of Lot 22, Block 38, as said Lot and
Block are shown on the Official Map and Survey of the City of Placerville, said northeast corner
being located the following (2) bearings and distances from a cross cut on a sidewalk marking the
southwest corner of said Block 38; (1) N. 58°52'10" E. 388.98 feet and (2) N. 27°11'02" W. 60.00
feet, thence from said point of beginning, southeasterly along the southwesterly line, as extended,
of said Lot 22 129.86 feet to the southeast corner of the property herein described, thence along the
newly established northerly property line of Block 39, of the City of Placerville, the following courses
and bearings S. 66°37'47" W., 59.35 feet S. 63°49'01" W., 38.24 feet S. 61°28'31" W. 130.48 feet S.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 506/710
64°11'36" W., 102.01 feet to the southwest corner of the property herein described, thence N.
24°28'47" W. 93.50 feet, thence N. 56°43'19" E. 53.90 feet, thence N. 32°28" W. 22.77 feet to the
southeasterly right-of-way line of the Southern Pacific Company, thence northeasterly along the
southeasterly right-of-way line to a point on the northerly extension of the southwesterly line of said
Lot 22; thence along the southwesterly line of said Lot 22, as extended, southeasterly to the point of
beginning.
(Ord. 980, 7-9-1968)
(C) The old city hall lots: All that certain property situated in the city of Placerville, county of El Dorado,
state of California, more particularly described as follows: (Ord. 980, 7-9-1968; amd. Ord. 1612, 7-
11-2006)
Lot 7, Block 38, Book 59, Page 504, and a portion of the Lot is used for parking and another
portion for City Hall building (building occupies the southern 85 feet of Lot).
Portion of Lot 8, Block 38, Book 428, Page 412 (all parking).
Lot 6, Block 38, a portion of Lot is used for parking, other portion is used for City Hall building
(building occupies the southern 85 feet of Lot). The following book and pages refer to this Lot: Book
556, Page 285, Book 556, Page 282, Book 488, Page 120 and Book 488, Page 122, all in Official
Records of El Dorado County.
(D) The Fox lots: All that certain property situated in the city of Placerville, county of El Dorado, state of
California, more particularly described as follows:
Lots 8, 9 and 10, Block 41, Map of the City of Placerville, California.
(Ord. 980, 7-9-1968)
(E) The Nichols Lot: All of that portion of lot 23, block 38, of the city of Placerville, county of El Dorado,
state of California, more particularly described as follows:
Commencing at the S.E. corner of Lot 23, Block 38, in the City of Placerville, as much lot existed
prior to the recent vacation of Center Street, thence along the north line of Center Street recently
vacated S. 73°41' W. a distance of 25.33 feet to the S.W. corner of the herein described parcel as
such parcel existed prior to the recent vacation of Center Street; thence N. 29°35' W. a distance of
39.56 feet, thence N. 57°04'50" E., a distance of 25.12 feet, to a 3/4 inch capped iron pipe; thence
S. 29°00' E. a distance of 46.85 feet more or less to the point of beginning.
(F) The Milton Lot: Legal description on file in the office of the city clerk.
(G) The Tetrault Lot: Legal description on file in the office of the city clerk.
(H) The Gillette Lot: Legal description on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1297, 3-9-1982)
(I) The Town Hall Lot: Legal description on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1297, 3-9-1982; amd.
Ord. 1612, 7-11-2006)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 507/710
(J) The Mooney Lot: All that real property located within the city as shown on that certain parcel map as
being "parcel A" on file in the office of the county recorder of the county of El Dorado, state of
California, in book 7 of parcel maps at page 31. (Ord. 1317, 4-12-1983)
(K) The Public Safety Building Lot: Legal description on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 1527, 7-
25-1995)
(L) The Mosquito Road Park And Bus Facility at 2964 Mosquito Road: (Legal description on file in the
office of the city clerk.) This facility is not included in parking district 1 as defined herein, but is
included in the inventory of public parking facilities for the purposes of maintenance and
enforcement. (Ord. 1579, 9-25-2001)
9-4-6: GENERAL AND HOURLY PARKING RESTRICTIONS; MUNICIPAL LOTS:
(A) Standard Limitations:
1. Unless otherwise specified below, vehicles may be parked in a municipal parking lot for a period
not to exceed two (2) hours, or in excess of that, provided payment has been made for said
excess time. Municipal parking lots between the eastern terminus of Main Street at Broadway and
the western terminus of Main Street shall be considered a limited time parking zone for the
purposes of subsection 9-3-3(D) of this title.
2. No vehicle or object may be stored in any parking stall at any time between the hours of three
o'clock (3:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day. However, overnight permits may be
approved and issued by the city administration department.
3. Unless specified otherwise, all parking limitations shall be in effect seven (7) days per week,
Monday through Sunday eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. except holidays.
(B) Permit Parking Spaces:
1. Permit parking shall be eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. seven (7) days per
week.
(C) Special Parking Limitations; Municipal Lots: The following restrictions shall be applicable to the
municipal lots listed below and except as provided herein, shall be effective seven (7) days a week,
eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.:
1. Lots:
Center Street Parking Structure: Two (2) hour free parking permitted on the first and second
levels. Additional time over two (2) hours may be purchased at one of the pay stations. The third
level shall be reserved for leased/permit parking only. A limited amount of leased parking shall
also be available on the second floor.
Ivy House Lot: No vehicle or person shall be allowed on the Ivy House Lot between the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., except by a permit issued through the police
department for a special event or commercial activity.
Mooney Lot, Milton Lot, Tetrault Lot, Fox Lot, Ivy House Lot, Old City Hall Lot, Nichols Lot: Two
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 508/710
(2) hour free parking shall be permitted in each of these lots. Additional time over two (2) hours
may be purchased and shall be evidenced by the appropriately displayed parking receipt on the
dashboard of a vehicle.
Municipal lot located at the corner of Coloma and Conrad Streets: Eight (8) hour parking limit.
Public Safety Building Lot: No parking shall be allowed in the Public Safety Building Lot except for
persons conducting business at the public safety building.
Town Hall Lot: There shall be designated two (2) parking spaces in which parking shall be limited
to twelve (12) minutes and which will be reserved for the public conducting business with the
community services department. Additional spaces as necessary shall be reserved for employees
of the community services department. All remaining spaces shall be limited to two (2) hour free
parking.
2. Rates And Fees: Hourly rates for overtime parking in excess of two (2) hours shall be by
resolution of the city council. Fees for leased/permit parking shall also be set by resolution of the
city council. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-4-7: MONTHLY PARKING REQUIREMENT:
(A) Monthly parking fees for eight (8) hour parking on lots owned or operated by the city shall be
established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1297, 3-9-1982)
(B) Parking permits shall be issued by the city to those persons renting a parking space on a specific
interval as established by agreement between the city and the permit holder. (Ord. 1537, 10-22-
1996)
9-4-8: PARKING RESTRICTIONS; SIGNAGE:
Signs shall be posted at the entrances of all municipal parking lots setting forth applicable restrictions.
(Ord. 1537, 10-22-1996)
Chapter 5
PARKING METER ZONES
9-5-1: UNLAWFUL PARKING IN PARKING ZONES:
It shall be unlawful and a violation of the provisions of this title for any person to permit any vehicle
registered in the name of, or operated by the person, to be parked overtime or beyond the period of
legal parking time established for any parking zone as described in section 9-3-3 of this title. (Ord.
1160, 7-11-1978)
9-5-2: DUTY OF POLICE OFFICERS; REPORTS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 509/710
It shall be the duty of the city assigned parking enforcement officer to enforce parking provisions within
the parking district defined in section 9-4-4 of this title between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M.
and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. seven (7) days per week.
It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city, acting in accordance with and pursuant to
instructions issued by the chief of police, outside of the enforcement performed by the parking
enforcement officer, to report:
(A) The state license number of the vehicle violating any parking regulation of the city.
(B) The time of day during which the vehicle is parking in violation of any of the parking provisions of
the city.
(C) The duration of the time in excess of the legal parking time during which the vehicle is parking in
violation of any of the parking provisions of the city.
(D) Any other facts, a knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the
circumstances attending the violation. Each police officer shall also attach to the vehicle a notice to
the owner or operator thereof that the vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this
code and the notice shall instruct the owner or operator to report at the office of the judge of the
justice court in regard to the violation. (Ord. 1688, 2-28-2017)
9-5-3: FINES:
(A) Fines for violations of any of the sections of this chapter and chapters 3 and 4 of this title, unless
otherwise stated therein, shall be set by a master parking fine resolution of the city council
establishing the fines for any such violations. Said master parking fine resolution may be amended
from time to time at the discretion of the city council.
(B) Multiple violations by the same vehicle within any twenty four (24) hour period of the same section
shall cause the fine to be doubled for such subsequent violations.
(C) The failure of the owner or operator to make the payment of the fines hereinabove specified within
thirty (30) days shall render the owner or operator subject to an additional penalty in the amount of
twenty three dollars ($23.00).
(D) Nonpayment of the fines and penalty amounts shall result in a lien being placed against the
registration of the vehicle with the state of California department of motor vehicles.
(E) The city manager and/or chief of police shall have the authority to issue one day exemptions for
overtime parking for individuals parking within the city. (Ord. 1596, 1-13-2004)
9-5-4: MARKING OF SPACES ON PAVEMENT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 510/710
The city shall have lines or markings and numbers painted or placed upon the curb and/or upon the
pavement adjacent to each parking space for the purpose of designating the parking space for
purchasing additional time, and each vehicle shall park within the lines or markings so established. It
shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter to park any vehicle across any line or marking or to
park the vehicle in such position that the same shall not be entirely within the area so designated by
the lines or markings. Any vehicle parked in any parking space shall be parked with the foremost part
of such vehicle nearest to such meter, curb, bumper stop or other concrete or fiber abutment. (Ord.
1688, 2-28-2017)
Chapter 6
REMOVAL OF VEHICLES
9-6-1: REMOVAL OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES:
Any duly authorized police officer, or any regularly employed and salaried employee who is engaged in
directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations (herein referred to as parking code
enforcement aide), is hereby authorized to remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle from any street
or off street parking lot, when the vehicle is left parked, standing or abandoned in an unusual position
which obstructs the normal movement of traffic thereon, or when the vehicle has been parked or left
standing for seventy two (72) or more consecutive hours, or when a vehicle is illegally parked in a zone
that has been posted for the purpose of the necessary cleaning, repairing or construction of streets or
off street parking lots, or for the installation of utilities, or when the street or off street parking lot or any
portion thereof is authorized by local authorities for a purpose other than normal flow of traffic; or for the
movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size; and the parking of a vehicle would
prohibit or interfere with the use or movement and signs, giving notice that the vehicle may be
removed, are erected or placed at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the removal by local authorities
pursuant to this chapter, or as may be further authorized by the Vehicle Code of the state. (Ord. 1515,
1-10-1995)
9-6-2: REMOVAL OF STOLEN VEHICLES FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY:
Any duly authorized police officer may also remove a vehicle from private property when the vehicle is
found on private property and a report has previously been made that the vehicle has been stolen or a
complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon issued charging that the vehicle has been embezzled.
(Ord. 836, 4-4-1960)
9-6-3: NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
Whenever a police officer, or any regularly employed and salaried employee, who is engaged in
directing or enforcing parking laws and regulations (herein referred to as parking code enforcement
aide), causes the removal of a vehicle from a street or off street parking lot, as herein authorized, and
the police officer or parking code enforcement aide knows, or is able to ascertain from the department
of motor vehicles, the name and address of the owner thereof, the police officer or parking code
enforcement aide shall immediately give, or cause to be given, notice in writing to the owner of the fact
of the removal, the grounds thereof, and of the place to which the vehicle has been removed. A copy of
the notice shall be given to the operator of the garage wherein the vehicle is stored. When the police
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 511/710
officer or parking code enforcement aide removing a vehicle from a street or off street parking lot does
not know and is not able to ascertain the name of the owner, or for any other reason is unable to give
the notice to the owner, as herein provided, and in the event the vehicle is not returned to the owner
within a period of seventy two (72) hours, then and in that event the police officer or parking code
enforcement aide shall immediately send, or cause to be sent, written report of the removal, by mail, to
the department of motor vehicles in Sacramento, and shall file a copy of the notice with the operator of
the garage in which the vehicle may be stored. The report shall include a complete description of the
vehicle, the date, time, the place from which removed, the grounds for the removal, and the name of
the garage where the vehicle is stored. (Ord. 1515, 1-10-1995)
9-6-4: GARAGE OPERATOR'S LIEN:
Whenever any vehicle has been removed to a garage under the provisions of this chapter and the
operator of the garage has received the notice from the arresting officer, as provided herein, the
operator shall have a lien, dependent upon possession, for his compensation for towage and for caring
for and keeping safe the vehicle for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days. (Ord. 836, 4-4-1960)
Chapter 7
ONE-WAY STREETS
9-7-1: ONE-WAY STREETS DESIGNATED:
The following streets and alleys shall be designated as one-way streets and it shall be unlawful for
traffic to travel in any direction on the streets other than the direction herein specified:
Street Direction
Anderson Way loop beginning at the easterly most intersection and continuing north
and west to the point of origin.
Bedford Avenue, from Spring Street (State Route 50) to Pleasant Street Northerly
Carey Alley between Sacramento Street and Charles Street Westerly
Center Street, from Coloma Street to Main Street Easterly
Crismon Street (emergency vehicles only) Northerly
Franklin Street from easterly end of Anderson Street to westerly end of Anderson
Street
Westerly
Gilmore Street to Big Cut Road Easterly
Marshal Way south from Cedar Ravine to Gold Street Easterly
Myrtle Avenue in a northerly direction, from Wentworth Court to Myrtle Court Northerly
Norman Street in a northerly direction from 250 feet southwesterly of its intersection
with Lincoln Alley to its northerly terminus with Lincoln Street
Northerly
Quartz Alley, from Main Street to Reservoir Street Southerly
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 512/710
Rector Street, from Main Street to Chamberlain Street Southerly
Reservoir Street Easterly
Sheridan from Thompson Way to Main Street Northerly
Washington Street, uphill from its most northerly intersection with Hazzard Street to
Sherman Street
Southerly
(Ord. 692, 2-7-1944; amd. Ord. 732, 5-15-1950; Ord. 801, 4-15-1958; Ord. 884, 1-17-1963; Ord. 908,
5-28-1964; Ord. 933, 1966; Ord. 2257, 8-9-1977; Ord. 2400, 7-11-1978; Ord. 1221, 4-8-1980; Res.
4698, 2-10-1987; Res. 4963, 8-23-1988; Res. 5040, 4-11-1989; Res. 5175, 4-10-1990; Res. 5703, 9-
14-1993)
Chapter 8
BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
9-8-1: BICYCLES:
9-8-1-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or use a bicycle propelled wholly or in part by muscular
power upon any of the streets or alleys of the city without first obtaining a license which shall be issued
by the fire department of the city. (Ord. 1019, 12-12-1972; amd. Ord. 1052, 2-12-1974)
9-8-1-2: APPLICATION; TERM OF LICENSE:
The fire department is hereby authorized and directed to issue, upon written application, bicycle
licenses which shall be permanent. The licenses, when issued, shall entitle the licensee to operate the
bicycle for which the license has been issued upon all the streets and alleys, exclusive of the sidewalks
thereof, in the city. (Ord. 1019, 12-12-1972; amd. Ord. 1052, 2-12-1974)
9-8-1-3: LICENSE SEALS; REGISTRATION CARDS:
The fire department shall have an aluminum seal placed on the frame of the bicycle at the time the
license is issued. (Ord. 1019, 12-12-1972; amd. Ord. 1052, 2-12-1974)
9-8-1-4: BICYCLE DEALERS; REPORTS:
All persons engaged in the business of buying secondhand bicycles are hereby required to make daily
reports to the fire department, giving the name and address of the person from whom each bicycle is
purchased, the description of each bicycle purchased, the frame number thereof, and the number of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 513/710
the aluminum seal found thereon. All persons engaged in the business of selling new or secondhand
bicycles are hereby required to make a daily report to the fire department giving a list of all sales made
by the persons, which list shall include the name and address of each person to whom a bicycle has
been sold, together with a description and the frame number thereof. (Ord. 1019, 12-12-1972; amd.
Ord. 1052, 2-12-1974)
9-8-1-5: SALE OR TRANSFER; REPORT:
It shall be the duty of every person who sells or transfers the ownership of any bicycle to report the sale
or transfer by returning to the fire department the registration card issued to the person as licensee
thereof, together with the name and address of the person to whom the bicycle was sold or transferred,
and the report shall be made within five (5) days of the date of the sale or transfer. It shall be the duty
of the purchaser or transferee of the bicycle to apply for a transfer of registration therefor within five (5)
days following the sale or transfer. (Ord. 1019, 12-12-1972; amd. Ord. 1052, 2-12-1974)
9-8-1-6: DESTROYING SERIAL NUMBER OR LICENSE SEAL PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter the
number of any bicycle frame licensed pursuant to this chapter. It shall also be unlawful for any person
to remove, destroy, mutilate, or alter any seal or registration card, during the time in which the seal or
registration card is operative; provided, however, that nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the fire
department from stamping numbers on the frames of bicycles on which no serial number can be found,
or on which the serial number is illegible or insufficient for identification purposes. (Ord. 1019, 12-12-
1972; amd. Ord. 1052, 2-12-1974)
9-8-1-7: RIDING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any sidewalk in the city. (Ord. 1019, 12-12-1972)
9-8-1-8: RIDING ON PEDESTRIAN OVERPASS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle, roller skates, or any other type of wheeled
vehicle on any pedestrian overpass crossing the freeway in the city. (Ord. 1019, 12-12-1972)
9-8-1-9: LIGHTING EQUIPMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle on any of the streets of the city between the hours of
one-half (1/2) hour after sunset and one-half (1/2) hour prior to sunrise unless the bicycle is equipped
with a headlight that can be seen for a distance of at least three hundred feet (300') and with a taillight
reflector that can be seen for a distance of at least two hundred feet (200'). (Ord. 1019, 12-12-1972)
9-8-1-10: VIOLATION; IMPOUNDMENT OF BICYCLE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 514/710
Any person violating any of the provisions of sections 9-8-1-1 through 9-8-1-9 of this chapter shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and in addition to any penalty imposed, the police department may
impound and retain possession of any bicycle operated in violation of any of the provisions of this
section 9-8-1 until the license provided for herein is obtained or any fine imposed is fully paid. (Ord.
1019, 12-12-1972)
9-8-1-11: BICYCLE LANES ESTABLISHED:
It is hereby resolved that bicycle lanes be established and are hereby established on:
(A) Both sides of Ray Lawyer Drive from Placerville Drive to Fair Lane. (Ord. 2401, 7-11-1978)
(B) North side of Ray Lawyer Drive from Placerville Drive to Fair Lane.
Be it further resolved that the bicycle lanes hereby established shall be constructed in compliance with
the provisions pertaining to bikeways in section 890 et seq., of the Streets and Highways Code. (Res.
2754, 7-22-1980)
9-8-2: SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLER SKATES ON PUBLIC WAYS:
9-8-2-1: RESTRICTIONS WHILE RIDING ROLLER SKATES AND SKATEBOARDS:
It shall be unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding upon a skateboard, coaster, or similar
device, to go upon any public street within the city limits in violation of the following restrictions:
(A) Such use shall not occur between sunset and sunrise.
(B) Persons upon roller skates or riding upon a skateboard, coaster, or similar device, shall ride as near
to the right side of the roadway as practicable.
(C) No person upon roller skates or riding upon a skateboard, coaster, or similar device, shall attach
the same or himself to any other vehicle.
(D) Persons upon roller skates or riding upon a skateboard, coaster, or similar device, shall yield the
right of way to all motor vehicles and pedestrians.
(E) No person shall be on roller skates or ride upon a skateboard, coaster, or similar device, when
approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in a street where the view of such person is
obstructed within such distance as to create a hazard from an approaching motor vehicle.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 515/710
(F) No person shall be on roller skates or shall ride upon a skateboard, coaster, or similar device, on
any street or sidewalk in a business district. The term "business district" shall have the meaning
given to it by section 235 of the California Vehicle Code.
(G) Except as herein provided, any person upon roller skates or riding a skateboard, coaster, or similar
device, shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle under the California
Vehicle Code, except those provisions which, by their very nature, can have no application. (Ord.
1518, 2-14-1995)
9-8-2-2: OTHER RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to ride or propel any skateboard, scooter, roller skate or rollerblade within or upon
the following areas:
(A) Any privately owned property without the consent of the owner, provided the private property owner
posts a sign that prohibits the conduct and references this section. The posting of a sign is not
required for this section to apply to single-family residential property.
(B) Any public property if the property owner posts a sign that prohibits the conduct and references this
section. (Ord. 1591, 1-14-2003)
9-8-2-3: PENALTY:
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of sections 9-8-2-1 and 9-8-2-
2 of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and may be punishable by a fine not to exceed
fifty dollars ($50.00). In addition, at the time of citation, any peace officer shall have the discretion to
impound the skateboard, scooter, roller skates or rollerblades as evidence pending the adjudication of
the infraction, and, at the time of impoundment, shall issue the owner or operator thereof a receipt for
all impounded property. (Ord. 1591, 1-14-2003)
Chapter 9
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
9-9-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
(A) In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state
of California under section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled
or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the council of the city hereby makes the
following findings:
1. The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or
parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is hereby found to create a
condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to
invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to
the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 516/710
to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore the presence of an abandoned, wrecked,
dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof, on private or public property not including
highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is hereby declared to constitute a public
nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(B) As used in this chapter:
HIGHWAY: A way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes "street".
PUBLIC PROPERTY: The term "public property" does not include "highway".
VEHICLE: A device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a
highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or
tracks. (Ord. 986, 11-26-1968)
9-9-2: EXCEPTIONS:
This chapter shall not apply to:
(A) A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it
is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or
(B) A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in
connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or
when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or
commercial enterprise; or
(C) A vehicle or part thereof which is located behind a solid fence six feet (6') in height or which is not
plainly visible from a highway.
Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under
provisions of law other than chapter 10 (commencing with section 22650) of division II of the Vehicle
Code and this chapter. (Ord. 986, 11-26-1968)
9-9-3: OTHER RELIEF:
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles
within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and
ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or any other legal entity or agency
having jurisdiction. (Ord. 986, 11-26-1968)
9-9-4: ENFORCEMENT:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 517/710
Except as otherwise provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced
by the police department. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his deputies may enter
upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the
identity of a vehicle (and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof) declared to be a
nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 986, 11-26-1968)
9-9-5: ENTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
When the council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person, such person shall be
authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a
vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.
If the local agency determines that commercial channels of disposition are not available or are
inadequate, it may dispose of the vehicles by removal to any suitable site. The local agency may make
final disposition of such vehicles or parts thereof or may transfer such vehicles or parts to another,
provided such disposal is only for scrap. (Ord. 986, 11-26-1968)
9-9-6: COSTS:
The council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs
under this chapter. (Ord. 986, 11-26-1968)
9-9-7: HEARING, NOTICE:
The police department shall notify the owner of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative
vehicle and the owner of the land on which such vehicle is located of its intent to have the vehicle
removed pursuant to this chapter. Said notice shall be mailed at least twenty (20) days before the date
set for removal of the vehicle. The notice shall inform the owner of the city's intent to remove the
vehicle pursuant to this chapter and the date of said removal. The notice shall further inform the owner
that the owner may request a public hearing on the question of abandonment and removal of the
vehicle. Said request shall be transmitted to the police department, in writing, at least five (5) days
before the date set for removal. A public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and
removal of the vehicle or part thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, if
such hearing is requested by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which the vehicle is
located. At such hearing, if same is requested, the matter of and the assessment of administrative
costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or part thereof against the property on which it is located
will also be considered and determined. Notice of hearing shall be mailed at least ten (10) days before
the hearing by certified mail, with a five (5) day return requested, to the owner of the land as shown on
the last equalized county assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record unless
the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If
any of the foregoing notices are returned undelivered by the United States post office, the hearing shall
be continued to a date not less than ten (10) days from the date of the return. (Ord. 1465, 4-24-1990)
9-9-8: NOTICE OF HEARING:
Notice of hearing shall also be given to the California highway patrol identifying the vehicle or part
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 518/710
thereof proposed for removal, such notice to be mailed at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing.
(Ord. 986, 11-26-1968)
9-9-9: HEARING, PROCEDURE:
(A) All hearings, if requested, under this chapter, shall be held before the city council which shall hear
all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the
condition of the vehicle or part thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the private
property or public property. The hearing body shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence.
The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or
present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing and deny responsibility for the
presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.
(B) The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate
under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal
of the vehicle or part thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the
public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned,
wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order it removed from the
property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the
administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land
on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall include a
description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of
the vehicle, if available at the site.
(C) If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the
landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the city council shall not
assess costs of administration or cost of removal of the vehicle against the property on which the
vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect the cost from the landowner.
(D) If an interested party makes a written presentation to the city council, but does not appear, he shall
be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 1465, 4-24-1990)
9-9-10: REMOVAL:
The vehicle or part thereof declared to be a public nuisance shall be removed on the date set for
removal by the police department as contained in the notice to the owner of the vehicle and/or the
owner of the land on which the vehicle is located. In the event a public hearing is requested by the
owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located, the vehicle will be
removed five (5) days after the decision of the city council authorizing removal. The vehicle or parts
thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or auto dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has
been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 1465, 4-24-1990)
9-9-11: NOTICE OF REMOVAL:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 519/710
Within five (5) days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the
department of motor vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there
shall be transmitted to the department of motor vehicles any evidence of registration available,
including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 1465, 4-24-1990)
9-9-12: COSTS ASSESSED:
If the administrative costs, and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of
land pursuant to section 9-9-9 of this chapter, are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the
order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to section 38773.5 of the
Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall
have the same priority as other city taxes. (Ord. 1465, 4-24-1990)
Title 10
ZONING
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, Res 8479 - PROHIBITING
NONMEDICAL MARIJUANA . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 1
GENERAL
10-1-0: ENTITLEMENT EXTENSIONS:
Any references in this title indicating a time period affecting entitlements under sections 10-3-6,
"Conditional Use Permit And Variance Procedure", and 10-4-9, "Site Plan Review", of this title, that had
been approved, that had not expired on April 1, 2015, and that will expire before January 1, 2016, shall
extend the expiration time set forth for a period of twenty four (24) months retroactive to April 1, 2015,
for all current and valid entitlements and permits existing as of the effective date. Further, this section
will expire without further council action twenty four (24) months from the adoption of this section. (Ord.
1669, 3-24-2015)
10-1-1: NAME:
This title shall be known and may be cited as the PLACERVILLE ZONING ORDINANCE. It shall be
referred to hereinafter as "this title", and the term shall include any subsequent amendment thereof.
(Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-1-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This title is enacted pursuant to article XI, section II of the constitution of the state of California and to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 520/710
the provisions of chapter 4, title 7 (section 65000 and subsequent sections), chapter 10, title 3
(sections 26027 and 26028) and of chapter 2, title 5 (section 50495) of the California Government
Code. This title establishes certain regulations on land and structures in order to protect and promote
the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and ensure the orderly development of the city. The
purpose of this title, among other further and more specific purposes, is to preserve and enhance the
quality of the human environment, to promote the most desirable use of land, to conserve property
values, to strengthen the economic base of the city, and to safeguard the public from future undue
expenditures, all of which are in accordance with, and in implementation of, the general plan of the city.
(Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-1-3: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
For the purpose of this title certain grammatical forms used herein are construed as follows, unless the
context of a particular provision clearly requires a different construction:
(A) The present tense includes the past and future, and the future includes the present.
(B) The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
(C) The singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes the singular.
(D) The general includes the particular, but the particular controls the general.
(E) "Shall" denotes a mandatory provision, and "may" a permissive provision. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-1-4: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words and phrases, when used in this title, are defined as follows unless the context of a
particular provision clearly requires a different definition:
ACCESSORY: Customarily incidental, related and subordinate to the principal legal use of the parcel
and located on the same parcel.
ANIMAL SHELTER OR CLINIC: Place where four (4) or more household pets, livestock, poultry or
other animals of more than four (4) months of age are kept, boarded, trained or cared for.
ANTIQUE STORE: An exclusively indoor retail establishment whose primary products that are sold or
exchanged derive their value from the fact that the products belong to, or were made in, a former
period, as compared to a present or contemporary good or product.
ARCADE: Any establishment where the principal use is for the operation of electronic, mechanical or
video games.
AUTOMOTIVE SERVICE STATION: Retail place of business engaged primarily in the sale of motor
fuels but also in supplying goods and services generally required in the operation and maintenance of
automotive vehicles and the fulfilling of motorist needs. These may include sale of petroleum products;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 521/710
sale and servicing of tires, batteries, automotive accessories and replacement items; washing and
lubrication services; the performance of minor automotive maintenance and repair; and the supplying
of other incidental customer services and products. Major automotive repairs, painting and body and
fender work are excluded except where such uses are otherwise permitted.
BUILDING: Roofed structure designed or used for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons,
animals, vehicles or material of any kind.
BUILDING COVERAGE: Total of ground floor areas of all buildings, including accessory buildings,
occupying a parcel, expressed as a percentage of the area of such parcel.
BUILDING HEIGHT: As defined in the California building code.
CHURCH: Any structure, property, or any part thereof, used primarily for religious worship or related
religious activities.
CITY: The city of Placerville, state of California.
COLLECTION FACILITY: A center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of
recyclable materials from the public. A collection facility includes the following:
Large Collection Facility: A facility which may occupy an area of more than five hundred (500)
square feet and may include permanent structures.
Processing Facility: A building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of
recyclable materials including preparation of material for efficient shipment, bricketing,
compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, sorting, shredding, cleaning and remanufacturing.
Reverse Vending Machine: An automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more
types of empty beverage containers; including, but not limited to, aluminum, glass, plastic bottles
and issues a cash refund or redeemable credit slip. A reverse vending machine may sort and
process containers mechanically provided the entire process is enclosed within the machine.
Small Collection Facility: A facility which occupies an area of not more than five hundred (500)
square feet which may include a mobile unit, bulk reverse vending machine or a grouping of
reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty (50) square feet. Kiosk type units which may
include permanent structures or unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable
materials. A collection facility does not use power driven processing equipment.
COMMISSION: The planning commission of the city of Placerville.
COMMUNITY CARE FACILITY: Any facility, place or building which is maintained and operated to
provide nonmedical residential care, daycare or house finding agency services for children, adults, or
children and adults, including, but not limited to, the developmentally disabled, physically handicapped,
mentally disordered, or incompetent persons.
A community care facility may provide incidental medical services. Community care facilities are
broken down into four (4) subcategories as follows:
Daycare Center: A facility which provides nonmedical care to persons in need of personal
services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 522/710
protection of the individual on less than a twenty four (24) hour basis.
House Finding Agency: An individual or organization engaged in finding homes or other places
for placement of persons of any age for temporary or permanent care or adoption.
Residential Care Facility: A facility licensed by the State of California where care, services or
treatment is provided to persons living in a community residential setting.
Residential Service Facility: A residential facility (e.g., transitional and supportive housing)
other than a residential care facility where the operator receives compensation for the provision
of personal services, in addition to housing, including, but not limited to, protection, supervision,
assistance, guidance, training, therapy or other nonmedical care.
CONDOMINIUM: A development consisting of an undivided interest in common for a portion of a parcel
coupled with a separate interest in space in a residential or commercial building on the parcel.
CONSIGNMENT STORE: An exclusively indoor retail establishment whose primary service is to
receive a new or used retail product from a second party who entrusts the establishment to reimburse
the second party, or trustee, upon the sale of the consigned retail product.
COUNCIL: The City Council of the City of Placerville.
DAYCARE FACILITY: Any child daycare facility other than a family daycare home including infant
centers, preschools and extended daycare facilities.
DAYS: Calendar days, except when last day falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday in which case
the following day is included.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre.
DIRECTOR: The City of Placerville Development Services Director.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by two (2) or more
persons or households living independently of each other in separate units. Includes apartments,
townhouses or similar buildings.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building designed exclusively for occupancy by, or occupied
by, one household or family for residential purposes. This classification includes factory built, modular
housing units constructed in compliance with the City's adopted Building Code and
mobilehomes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: A dwelling unit in a row of at least two (2) such units in which each unit
has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is
separated from any other unit by one or more common walls.
DWELLING UNIT: Building or self-contained portion thereof, designed, or used as living quarters for
not more than one family; a manufactured home on a permanent foundation system; rental unit, such
as in a motel, hotel or rooming house, containing cooking or housekeeping facilities; exclusive of
mobilehomes.
DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY (ADU): An attached or detached residential dwelling unit which
provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons. It shall include a kitchen as
defined herein, as well as permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 523/710
the same parcel where the primary residence is situated.
DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED: A dwelling unit joined to one or more other dwellings by common
vertical walls (e.g., duplex, triplex, townhouse, residential condominium, etc.).
DWELLING UNIT, ATTACHED ACCESSORY: An ADU that occupies part of the floor area of the
existing residence, including an ADU attached to the existing residence by one or more common walls.
DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED: A dwelling unit that is not attached to any other dwelling by any
physical means.
DWELLING UNIT, DETACHED ACCESSORY: A new or existing structure that is located on the
property such that the unit does not share any walls with the primary residence.
ELECTRONIC, MECHANICAL OR VIDEO GAMES: Any machine, apparatus, contrivance, appliance or
device which may be operated or played upon the placing or depositing therein of any coin, check,
token, slug, ball or any other article or device, or by paying therefor either in advance of or after use,
involving in its use either skill or chance, including, but not limited to, tape machine, pinball machine,
bowling game machine, shuffleboard machine, marble game machine, horseracing machine, basketball
game machine, baseball game machine, football game machine, electronic video games or any other
similar machine or device.
EMERGENCY SHELTER: Housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is
limited to occupancy of six (6) months or less by a homeless person.
EMPLOYEE HOUSING, LARGE: Housing for employees consisting of no more than thirty six (36) beds
in a group quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household, in
accordance with section 17000 et seq., of the California Health and Safety Code.
EMPLOYEE HOUSING, SMALL: Housing for employees consisting of six (6) or fewer persons in a
single-family home, in accordance with section 17000 et seq., of the California Health and Safety
Code.
FAMILY: One or more persons occupying the premises and living as a single housekeeping unit as
distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, club, fraternity, sorority house, lodging house, rooming
house or boarding house. A family shall be deemed to include necessary servants.
FAMILY DAYCARE HOME: A home which regularly provides care, protection and supervision of twelve
(12) or fewer children for periods of less than twenty four (24) hours per day while the parents or
guardians are away and includes the following:
(A) Small family daycare home: A home which provides family daycare to six (6) or fewer children
including children who reside at home.
(B) Medium family daycare home: A home which provides family daycare to seven (7) to twelve (12)
children inclusive including children who reside at home.
(C) Large family daycare home: A home which provides family daycare to greater than twelve (12)
children including children who reside at home.
FAST FOOD RESTAURANT: Any retail establishment intended to provide primarily short order food
service for on site dining and/or food takeout, including self-service restaurants, except cafeterias
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 524/710
where food is consumed on the premises; drive-in restaurants; and formula restaurants required by
contractual or other agreements to offer standardized menus, ingredients and fast food preparation.
FLOOR AREA: Total gross area of all floors with a ceiling height of seven feet (7') or more of all
buildings occupying a parcel, measured horizontally from the exterior faces of exterior walls of
foundations, inclusive of enclosed or roofed porches or terraces, and exclusive of inner courts open
vertically to the sky, and basements unless designed or used for the primary use of the building.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The gross floor area of all buildings on a lot divided by the lot area.
FORMULA BUSINESS: Any business with a proposed or existing exterior design (appearance, colors,
signage) that is essentially identical to five (5) or more other business sites using the same or similar
name or identity.
GROUND LEVEL: Average elevation of the finished ground levels contiguous to the centers of the
exterior walls or foundations of a building; when the front wall of a building is parallel to and not more
than five feet (5') from the street right-of-way, the ground level shall be the elevation of the crown of the
street at a point opposite the center of such front wall.
GUESTHOUSE: Detached building designed or used as sleeping quarters without cooking or
housekeeping facilities, accessory to a one-family dwelling and exclusive of a mobilehome.
HEALTH FACILITY: Any facility providing or designed to provide services for the acute, convalescent
and chronically ill and impaired, including, but not limited to, public health centers, community mental
health centers, facilities for the mentally retarded, nonprofit community care facilities that provide care
habilitation, rehabilitation or treatment to mentally impaired persons, and related facilities, such as
laboratories, outpatient departments, extended care, nurses, home and training facilities, office and
central service facilities operated in connection with hospitals, diagnostic or treatment centers,
extended care facilities, nursing homes, and rehabilitation facilities. Except for facilities for the mentally
retarded, "health facility" does not include any institution furnishing primarily domiciliary (residential)
care.
HOME OCCUPATIONS: An occupation carried on within a dwelling by the residents thereof, which use
is incidental and accessory to the residential use of the dwelling, provided that the residential character
of the dwelling is maintained and the home occupation is conducted in such a manner as to not give an
outward appearance nor outwardly manifest any character of a business or home occupation, nor
infringe upon the right of neighboring residents to enjoy the peaceful occupancy of their homes. A
home occupation does not: a) occupy more than ten percent (10%) of the area of the residence, b)
change the use or occupancy of an accessory building, c) involve on site retail sales of merchandise,
and d) does not generate more than four (4) vehicle trips per day (a "vehicle trip" is defined as 1 round
trip to and from the site).
HOTEL OR MOTEL: Building or group of buildings containing six (6) or more rental units with or without
meals provided for the guests.
JUNKYARD: Storage of waste or salvaged metal or material, unused vehicles, dismantling or
demolition of machinery or vehicles, covering more than two hundred fifty (250) square feet of land and
not within a completely enclosed building.
KITCHEN: A room or portion thereof containing permanent facilities designed and used for food
preparation, cooking, eating and dish washing. A kitchen shall include all of the following: a sink with
hot and cold running water; a range or stove-top and an oven; at a minimum, an apartment-sized
refrigerator of more than five (5) cubic feet capacity; and built-in dish and utensil storage spaces. In
addition to the aforementioned improvements, a kitchen may also include any of the following:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 525/710
microwave, convection oven, hot plate or automatic dish washer.
LIVING AREA: The interior habitable area of a dwelling unit including basements and attics, but does
not include a garage or any accessory structure.
MOBILEHOME: See subsection 10-4-15(D) of this title.
MOBILEHOME PARK: See subsection 10-4-15(D) of this title.
OFF SITE OUTDOOR ADVERTISING DEVICES: A structure of any kind or character erected or
maintained for off site outdoor advertising purposes upon which any poster, bill, painting, statuary or
advertising of any kind whatsoever may be placed.
OFFICE: Place where business is transacted or services are offered without the handling of goods or
products.
OWNER: Person having title to real property, singly or jointly, in fee simple, life estate, or under a term
of ten (10) years or more.
PARCEL: All contiguous land held by one owner and not traversed by a public street.
PARCEL AREA: Land within the boundaries of a parcel measured horizontally, exclusive of: vehicular
rights-of-way or easements not for the exclusive use of the parcel on which it is located; access strip to
the parcel in excess of five percent (5%) of the total parcel area; all land normally under water for all or
part of the year.
PARCEL, CORNER: A parcel located at the intersection of two (2) streets having an angle of not more
than one hundred twenty degrees (120°).
PARCEL FRONTAGE: The width of the lot measured at the front yard setback line.
PARCEL WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot
depth at a point midway between front and rear lot lines. In the case of a lot with a long narrow
appendage abutting the street, the horizontal distance shall be measured at a point midway between
the rear lot line and the beginning of the main body of the lot.
PASSAGEWAY: A pathway that is unobstructed, clear to the sky, and extends from a street to one
entrance of an accessory dwelling unit.
PAWNSHOP: An exclusively indoor retail use in which any person, firm or corporation, other than
banks, trust companies or bond brokers who may otherwise be regulated by law and authorized to deal
in commercial papers, shares of stock, bonds and other certificates of value, who keeps a loan or pawn
office or engages in or carries on the business of receiving jewelry, precious stones, valuables,
firearms, clothing or personal property, or any other article or articles in pledge for loans or as security
or in pawn for the repayment of monies, and exacts an interest or any other charge for such loans.
PERSON: Individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association or similar entity.
PLACE OF ENTERTAINMENT: Facility for theater, dance, sports or other amusements.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS: A plot of ground upon which two (2) or more sites for camping or
recreational vehicles are located, established or maintained for occupancy by camping units of the
general public as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes for a period
of no longer than thirty (30) days per calendar year per use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 526/710
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL: Reusable material including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic and
paper which are intended for reuse or remanufacture for the purpose of using the altered form.
Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials.
ROOMING OR BOARDING HOUSE: Building containing not more than five (5) rental units designed or
used for the lodging of three (3) or more persons with or without meals provided.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A parabolic or dish shaped antenna of either solid or mesh construction
intended for the purpose of receiving communications from an orbiting satellite transceiver or any other
fixed land base transceiver.
SCHOOL: Any institution of learning for minors, whether private or public, offering a regular course of
instruction required by the California Education Code. This definition shall include a nursery school,
kindergarten, elementary school, middle school, or junior high school, senior high school or any special
institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institute of higher education,
including a community or junior college, college, or university.
SINGLE HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: The functional equivalent of a traditional family, whose members are
a nontransient interactive group of persons jointly occupying a single dwelling unit, including the joint
use of common areas in sharing household activities and responsibilities such as meals, chores and
expenses.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY FACILITY: A residential building including six (6) or more single room
occupancy units, meeting the development standards within section 10-4-8 of this title, along with the
general regulations within the allowed zones. A single room occupancy facility does not include
community care facilities, residential care facilities, residential service facilities, rooming or boarding
houses, hotels and motels, bed and breakfast establishments.
SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY (SRO) UNIT: A residential living space which is a component of an SRO
facility, as defined, and meeting the development standards within section 10-4-8 of this title.
STORY: Part of a building between the level of any floor and the level of the floor next above or the
ceiling above in the case of the uppermost floor. A basement or cellar with a ceiling height of seven feet
(7') or more shall be considered a story if the vertical distance from ground level to ceiling exceeds the
vertical distance from ground level to floor below; a mezzanine with a ceiling height of seven feet (7') or
more shall be considered a story if its floor area exceeds one-third (1/3) of the floor area immediately
below it.
STORY, HALF: Uppermost story with a floor area not exceeding two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area
immediately below it; an attic with a ceiling height of seven feet (7') or more shall be considered a half
story if its floor area exceeds one-third (1/3) of the floor area immediately below it.
STREET: Any land permanently designed or used for the passage of vehicles, not for the exclusive
access to one parcel, whether in public or private ownership. The right-of-way lines of such streets are
those established by recorded subdivision maps, precise street plans, deeds or other instruments
creating them. The right-of-way lines of streets created by use without instruments follow the limits of
such use and its accessory drainageways.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, requiring placement on or in the ground directly or by
means of another structure.
SUPPORTIVE HOUSING: Housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by a target
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 527/710
population, and that is linked to on site or off site services that assist the supportive housing resident in
retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and,
when possible, work in the community.
TARGET POPULATION: Persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental
illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for
services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (division 4.5
[commencing with section 4500] of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other
populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out
of the foster care system, individuals existing from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless
people.
TRANSITIONAL HOUSING: Buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under
program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to
another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six
(6) months from the beginning of the assistance.
TRANSMISSION LINE: Power line of fifty thousand (50,000) volts potential or over; sewer or water line
of twelve inches (12") inside diameter or over; gas pipe of six inches (6") inside diameter or over; toll
telephone line.
USE: Purpose for which a parcel or structure is occupied, maintained, designed or intended.
USED MERCHANDISE STORE: An exclusively indoor retail establishment which primarily sells or
resells common contemporary household, clothing, consumer products, appliances and similar
products. Such uses include, but are not limited to, "thrift" stores, "Salvation Army" stores, "Goodwill"
stores, "secondhand" stores, and "charity" stores. This definition includes used merchandise stores that
are operated for profit as well as nonprofit, charitable or religious organizations.
YARD: Open space unoccupied from the ground level vertically to the sky on a parcel within the
following areas:
Front Yard: Area between any contiguous street right-of-way and a line drawn parallel thereto at
such distance therefrom as specified in this title for any zone, and extending between side parcel
lines.
Rear Yard: Area between the rear parcel line and a line drawn parallel thereto at such distance
therefrom as specified in this title for any zone and extending between side parcel lines.
Side Yard: Area between each side parcel line and a line drawn parallel thereto at such distance
therefrom as specified in this zoning ordinance for any zone. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord.
1538, 2-11-1997; Ord. 1548B, 6-23-1998; Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002; Ord. 1597, 2-24-2004; Ord.
1598, 6-22-2004; Ord. 1627, 9-9-2008; Ord. 1636, 4-27-2010; Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011; Ord. 1650,
7-10-2012; Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013; Ord. 1664, 9-23-2014; Ord. 1666, 9-23-2014; Ord. 1667, 10-
28-2014; Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016; Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
10-1-5: SEPARABILITY:
(A) Should any part or provision of this zoning title be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to
be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of this zoning ordinance as a
whole or any part thereof other than the part or provisions so declared invalid or unconstitutional.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 528/710
(B) Should the applicability of any provision of this zoning title to any parcel of land or structure be
declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the
applicability of such provisions to other parcels or structures. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-1-6: REPEALS:
All ordinances of this City, or parts or amendments thereof, in conflict with this zoning title, to the extent
of such conflict and no further, are hereby repealed. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-1-7: AMENDMENTS:
(A) Amendments to this title may be initiated by one of the following procedures:
1. Resolution of intention or minute order of the City Council.
2. Resolution of intention of the Planning Commission.
3. Petition of an owner of property affected by amendment. Such petition shall be filed with the
commission on a form furnished by said commission accompanied by a fee set by resolution of
the City Council, no part of which may be refunded.
(B) Within forty (40) days after the application for amendment is deemed complete and the completion
of the necessary environmental documents as set forth in the California Environmental Quality Act
of 1970 as amended, the commission shall consider the proposed amendment, set a time and
place for a public hearing thereon within thirty (30) days thereafter, and cause notice of such
hearing to be published one time in a regular issue of a newspaper of general circulation in the City
at least ten (10) days before the date of hearing. The notice shall state the purpose of the
amendment, or the location of the property affected and the change of zoning classification sought,
and the time and place of the hearing. If the hearing is continued by the commission, and the time
and place announced publicly at the time of adjournment of the hearing, no further notice is
required.
(C) The commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment at a regular or special
meeting of the commission. Following the hearing, the commission shall cause a report on the
proposed amendment to be filed with the Council. Failure of the commission to report within forty
(40) days after the hearing shall be deemed to be a favorable recommendation of the proposed
amendment.
(D) Upon receipt of the commission's report, or upon expiration of such forty (40) days, the Council
within thirty (30) days thereafter shall hold a hearing on the proposed amendment in accordance
with the same procedure specified for the commission. Following this hearing the Council may
adopt or reject the amendment or any part thereof as set forth in the report of the commission. Any
major modifications made by the Council to the proposed amendment not set forth in the original
resolution or petition, or in the commission's report, shall require additional review and report by the
Planning Commission. The City Council may continue action for forty (40) days pending report from
the Planning Commission. If the Planning Commission fails to report within forty (40) days, the City
Council may proceed without Planning Commission report.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 529/710
(E) No petition shall be reconsidered and no new petition shall be considered for any zoning title
amendment previously acted upon by the commission within a year after the date of such action
unless the commission establishes that there has been a substantial change in the circumstances
under consideration in the original proceedings. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
Chapter 2
APPLICABILITY
10-2-1: TERRITORY:
This title shall apply to all incorporated land within the boundaries of the city. This title shall apply to all
land annexed to the city after the effective date of this title. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-2-2: PUBLIC AGENCIES:
Except as otherwise specified hereinafter, this title shall apply to all agencies of the United States, and
any state, county, city and public district insofar as such chapter does not conflict with any valid law of
the United States or the state of California. All the required fees are waived for these agencies. (Ord.
1474, 1-8-1991)
10-2-3: CONFLICTS:
This title shall not be construed to reduce, annul or otherwise interfere with private easements,
covenants or agreements; provided, however, that the provisions of this title shall govern whenever this
title is more restrictive. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-2-4: ZONE BOUNDARIES:
(A) All of the incorporated territory of the city is divided into areas known as "zones" designated in
section 10-5-1 of this title within which separate uniform regulations are imposed. The boundaries of
these zones are shown and described on a map entitled "Zoning, City Of Placerville" and made a
part of this title by reference. A copy of this map, showing all the current amendments thereof, shall
be kept and may be consulted in the office of the development services department. (Ord. 1474, 1-
8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(B) Zone boundaries shown on this map shall be further determined as follows:
1. The boundary of a zone abutting the city limits shall be such limits.
2. Where a zone boundary is shown as approximately following a property line, a section line, or the
line of a legal subdivision of a section, or where such boundary is located not farther than fifteen
feet (15') from such lines, the zone boundary shall coincide with such lines.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 530/710
3. Unless otherwise shown, the boundary of a zone abutting a street, waterway, railroad, or similar
right of way, shall be the centerline of such right of way, and the side boundaries shall extend to
the centerline normally to such right of way.
4. In all other cases, the location of a zone boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale
appearing on the map and of the surveys, records, and other documents necessary to clarify the
description of land and boundaries shown on the map.
5. Zone boundaries shall extend vertically upward and downward from the ground.
6. Where a zone boundary divides a parcel under one ownership in existence prior to the effective
date of this zone boundary and when not less than one-half (1/2) the area of such parcel lies in
the less restricted zone, the regulations for the less restricted zone shall apply to the remainder of
such parcel up to a distance of not more than thirty feet (30').
7. In case uncertainty exists on the location of a zone boundary, the commission, on request or on
its own initiative, shall determine the exact location of such a boundary. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-2-5: NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES AND LOTS:
(A) The intent and purpose of this section is to declare uses, structures, and lots legally existing on the
effective date of this title as nonconforming uses, structures, and lots and to encourage those that
are incompatible to be brought into conformity within a reasonable period of time.
(B) Nonconforming uses, structures and lots shall be defined as follows:
1. Compatible Uses: Structures and lots are those which are generally not detrimental to the zone in
which they are located:
(a) Residential uses and structures located in residential zones which do not comply with the
current requirements for the residential zone in which they are located, but did comply at the
time of their construction.
(b) Residential uses and structures located in other than residential zones.
(c) Commercial and general commercial uses and structures located in other zones which have
been determined by the planning commission to be compatible.
(d) Nonconforming structures or premises which have historic significance that have been so
designated by the city council.
(e) Nonconforming parcels or lots which were created prior to the adoption of this title in a legal
manner.
2. Incompatible Nonconforming Uses: Structures and lots that are not defined as compatible in
subsection (B)1 of this section.
(C) Nonconforming uses, structures and premises are subject to the following termination provisions
and such nonconforming uses, structures and premises so terminated shall not be reestablished:
1. Incompatible nonconforming uses in structures or on premises which have been discontinued for
any reason for a period of six (6) months.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 531/710
2. Changing any nonconforming use or increasing the area of such nonconforming use except as
provided in this section.
3. The removal or destruction of a nonconforming use or structure.
4. The damage or destruction of a structure or use to the extent exceeding fifty percent (50%) of its
current replacement costs.
(D) Modification may be made to compatible nonconforming uses, structures and premises if they
comply with current provisions of this chapter or meet the following requirements:
1. Residential uses and structures in residential zones may be remodeled or rehabilitated, provided
the use or structure is not enlarged.
2. Residential structures in residential zones may be added to or enlarged if the structure is
nonconforming only because of noncompliance with the required height, yard and parking
requirements; provided such new additions or enlargements comply with all requirements for new
structures and off street parking is provided in accordance with the requirements for new
residential structures.
3. Multi-family residential uses, structures or premises designated in subsection (B)1(b) of this
section may be added to or enlarged provided a conditional use permit is obtained as required by
sections 10-3-3 through 10-3-7 of this title and a site plan review, if required, by section 10-4-9 of
this title. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
4. Single-family residential uses, structures, or premises designated in subsection (B)1 of this
section may be reconstructed, added to or enlarged provided that the other provisions of this title
are met. (Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
5. Commercial and general commercial uses, structures or premises designated in subsection
(B)1(c) of this section may be modified or additions added (up to 10 percent of the current use
area or not more than 400 square feet) providing a conditional use permit is obtained as required
by sections 10-3-3 through 10-3-7 of this title.
6. Parcels and lots as designated in subsection (B)1(e) of this section may be developed or existing
uses or structures expanded providing all other requirements of this title are met.
(E) A residential use nonconforming because of density may be reestablished with a conditional use
permit as provided in sections 10-3-3 thorough 10-3-7 of this title and site plan review if required by
section 10-4-9 of this title; provided, that the total floor area is not expanded and all other provisions
of this title are met. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION
10-3-1: PLANNING COMMISSION:
The commission shall:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 532/710
(A) Supervise the administration of this zoning title.
(B) Adopt rules and procedures necessary or convenient for the filing of use permits, variances, site
plans and petitions.
(C) Act upon all applications for use permits, variances and site plans.
(D) Make recommendations to the council upon amendments to zone changes or to changes to the
provisions of this chapter.
(E) By resolution, minute order request or on its own initiative, adopt rules implementing the general
zoning regulations of this zoning ordinance by:
1. Setting forth additional specific uses allowed by right and by use permit which are in the opinion
of the commission similar or accessory to those listed in this zoning ordinance and conform to the
purposes of the zone regulations.
2. Setting forth additional specific uses for which parking space is required which are in the opinion
of the commission similar or accessory to those listed in this zoning ordinance.
3. Setting forth standards of odor, gas, fumes, dust, smoke, noise, vibrations, glare, heat, electrical
interference, radioactivity or waste allowable beyond the confines of property.
(F) Make recommendation to the city council on applications for subdivision maps. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-
1991)
(G) Applications being processed concurrently with an application requiring city council action shall be
scheduled for public hearing before the planning commission for its recommendation and the city
council for final action. (Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-3-2: DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DEPARTMENT:
The development services department shall assist in the administration of this title by: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-
1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(A) Processing and investigating all applications for use permit variances and site plans.
(B) Reviewing applications for building permits and other licenses referred to it to determine their
compliance with this title.
(C) All other administrative permits whose purpose and procedures are set forth herein. (Ord. 1474, 1-
8-1991)
10-3-3: CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 533/710
Certain uses may be permitted in zones in which they are not otherwise outright permitted by this
chapter, where such uses are deemed essential or desirable to the public convenience or welfare, and
are in harmony with the various elements or objectives of the comprehensive general plan, and are not
detrimental to surrounding property. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-3-4: USES PERMITTED IN ANY ZONE:
The following uses may be permitted in any zone upon the granting of a conditional use permit:
Airports or aircraft landing fields (FAA approved).
Churches or other places used exclusively for religious worship.
City, county, state and federal enterprises, including buildings, facilities and uses of departments or
institutions thereof which are necessary or advantageous to the general welfare of the community.
Communication equipment buildings.
Educational institutions including elementary and secondary schools and colleges.
Health facilities and community care facilities.
Institutions of a philanthropic nature (charitable nonprofit organizations).
Large family daycare homes.
Libraries and museums.
Mortuaries, cemeteries and expansion of existing cemeteries.
Natural resources development together with the necessary buildings, apparatus or appurtenances
incident thereto.
Public parks, playgrounds, golf courses, community buildings and country clubs.
Public utility or public service buildings, structures and uses.
Radio, microwave, television and telephone transmitters and broadcasting stations, including amateur
and professional.
Real estate tract offices and accessory signs.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for seven (7) or more residents.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents when such a
facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or less from an existing community care
facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing such facilities.
Tandem parking spaces as specified in subsection 10-4-4(C)10 of this title. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd.
Ord. 1548B, 6-23-1998)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 534/710
10-3-5: VARIANCES:
(A) The commission may grant a variance to authorize a specific exception to any regulation of this title
in accordance with the procedure specified in section 10-3-6 of this chapter.
(B) The commission may grant variances from the terms of the zoning regulations contained in this title
only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape,
topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this title deprives such property of
privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification.
Any variance granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby
authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon
other properties in the vicinity and zone in which such property is situated.
A variance shall not be granted for a parcel of property which authorizes a use or activity which is
not otherwise expressly authorized by the zone regulations governing the parcel of property or for
purposes of granting density greater than that permitted in the zone. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to conditional use permits. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-3-6: CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT AND VARIANCE PROCEDURE:
The granting of conditional use permits and variances shall be in accordance with the following
procedure: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(A) Application for a conditional use permit or variance shall be filed with the development services
department on a form furnished by said department, accompanied by a site plan and fee set by
resolution of the city council, no part of which may be refunded. When the applicant is not the owner
of the property, the written authorization of the owner shall accompany the application. The
application shall not be accepted for filing by said department unless it conforms to the filing
requirements established by the commission. The requirement that the applicant for a conditional
use permit or variance be the owner of the property or written authorization be obtained from the
owner shall not apply to public utilities or other agencies with powers of eminent domain.
(B) The development services department shall set the hearing date and shall give notice of application
and hearing by mailing notices to all property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the exterior
boundaries of the subject property, using the ownerships, names and addresses from the last
adopted tax roll. The notice shall state the name of the applicant, the location of the property, the
use or exception applied for, and the time and place of the hearing. The failure of any property
owner to receive the notice shall not invalidate the proceedings. If the hearing is continued by the
commission, and the time and place announced publicly at the time of adjournment of the hearing,
no further notice is required. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(C) Within forty (40) days after the application is deemed complete, the planning commission shall hold
a public hearing on the application at a regular or special meeting of the commission. Failure of the
commission to make a decision on an application within thirty (30) days after the hearing shall
constitute a denial of the application, and the secretary of the commission shall certify such denial.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 535/710
(D) The commission may require such terms and conditions to the granting of a conditional use permit
or variance as the commission may deem necessary. Noncompliance with these terms or conditions
shall be a cause of revocation of such permit or variance. Revisions to the terms or conditions of a
granted permit or variance shall require a new permit or variance.
(E) All conditional use permits and variances granted by the commission shall expire and become null
and void eighteen (18) months after the date of granting such permit, unless the authorized use is
carried on, or a building permit has been obtained for the structure requiring the use permit or
variance, prior to the date of expiration.
(F) The conditional use permit and variance shall run with the land, i.e., shall apply to the parcel
specified in the conditional use permit or variance, regardless of any change of ownership, but may
not be transferred to another parcel.
(G) The conditional use permit and variance shall become effective and be issued eleven (11) days
after the commission granted the permit unless an appeal has been filed, in which case the
conditional use permit and variance shall not be issued until the granting of the permit is affirmed on
appeal.
(H) No application shall be reconsidered and no new application shall be considered by the
commission for a conditional use permit or variance previously acted upon by the commission within
one year after the date of such action, unless the commission establishes that there has been a
substantial change in the circumstances under consideration since the original proceedings. (Ord.
1474, 1-8-1991)
(I) A conditional use permit or variance being processed concurrently with an application requiring city
council action shall be scheduled for public hearing before the planning commission for its
recommendation and the city council for final action. (Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-3-7: APPEALS:
The decision of the commission on a conditional use permit or variance may be appealed to the council
by the applicant or by any person directly and adversely affected by the decision, in accordance with
the following procedure:
(A) The appeal shall be filed with the city clerk on a form furnished by said clerk, accompanied by a fee
established by the city council by resolution, no part of which may be refunded. Such appeal must
be filed within ten (10) days after the date of the decision of the commission. Such decision
becomes final if an appeal is not filed within the time herein specified. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Within ten (10) days after the date of filing of the appeal, the city clerk shall transmit the record on
appeal to the development services department.
(C) The city clerk and council shall follow the procedure to be followed by the development services
department and commission in subsection (B) of this section for use permits and variances. (Ord.
1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 536/710
(D) Within forty (40) days after the filing of an appeal with the city clerk, the council shall hold a public
hearing on the appeal at a regular or special meeting of the council. The council may affirm or
reverse the decision of the commission and may substitute its decision for that of the commission,
based on the record of appeal and the evidence received at the hearing on appeal. The decision of
the council on such appeal shall be final. Failure of the council to reach a decision on such appeal
within sixty (60) days after the filing of the appeal shall affirm the decision of the commission. (Ord.
1474, 1-8-1991)
10-3-8: ENFORCEMENT:
(A) The development services department and other law enforcement agencies of the city shall enforce
the provisions of this title.
(B) No building permit shall be issued by the development services department for construction,
demolition, alteration, addition to, or moving of a structure unless such work would comply with the
provisions of this title, or a use permit or a variance was issued by the commission. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-
1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(C) A permit or license issued by a municipal or other public agency for a use or structure in violation of
a provision of this title, except as provided by this chapter, shall not constitute authorization for such
a violation or establish vested rights. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-3-9: ABATEMENT:
The construction, alterations, addition to, moving of a structure, or the use of land or structure, in
violation of the provisions of this title is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance. The city attorney,
upon order of the council, shall immediately commence action for the abatement, removal, restraining
and enjoinment of such violation in the manner prescribed by law. The remedies provided in this title
are cumulative and shall not exclude other remedies for a violation of this title as provided by other
laws or ordinances. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-3-10: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title is subject to section 1-4-5 of this code. (Ord.
1474, 1-8-1991)
10-3-11: MINOR DEVIATIONS:
(A) When Acceptable: When it is in the public interest, the development services director, or the duly
appointed representative, may consider and render decisions on the following minor deviations
involving slight modifications to the provisions of this title: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-
25-2013)
1. The reduction of the lot area or the minimum size of the dwelling unit requirements by not more
than ten percent (10%) of that required in the zone for not more than one lot or dwelling unit in a
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 537/710
development.
2. The modification of the end stalls of automobile parking space turning radius not less than twenty
two feet (22') and reduction in size dimension up to twenty percent (20%) of a loading berth.
3. The modification of the height of a fence, wall and hedge regulations up to twenty percent (20%).
4. The modification of the height requirement of uncovered patios, terraces, swimming pools,
stairways, or other landings, encroaching into required yard setbacks.
5. The modification of maximum building coverage not greater than five percent (5%) over the
permitted coverage.
6. The modification of minimum dwelling unit area not greater than five percent (5%) of the required
area.
7. The modification of rear and side yard setbacks not to exceed ten percent (10%).
8. Front yard modifications may also be granted when the irregular shape of a lot prohibits the
required front and rear yards. In such cases, the front and rear yards shall be an average
setback.
9. The modification of parcel width and/or parcel frontage by not more than ten percent (10%) of
that required in the zone for not more than one lot within a parcel map. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Conditions: In granting a minor deviation, all the conditions set forth in subsection 10-3-5(B) of this
chapter shall be made by the development services director, or the designee, and conditions may
be imposed. A decision shall be made in writing within twenty (20) days after the filing of the
application. One copy shall be mailed to the applicant.
(C) Development Services Director Consideration Discretionary: The development services director, or
the duly appointed representative, may consider and determine any matter within the scope of this
section or refer such matter to the commission for its determination.
(D) Application And Fee: Application for a permit shall be filed with the development services
department on a form furnished by said department, accompanied by a site plan and a fee
established by the city council by resolution, no part of which may be refunded. When the applicant
is not the owner of the property, the written authorization of the owner shall accompany the
application. The application shall not be accepted for filing by said department unless it conforms to
the filing requirements established by the commission.
(E) Notification Of Adjacent Property Owners: The development services director or an authorized
representative shall contact adjacent property owners and shall advise of the applicant's request. A
five (5) day period shall be provided for response from adjacent property owners.
(F) Appeals From Determinations: If the applicant or adjacent property owner is dissatisfied with the
decision, the decision may be appealed to the commission within ten (10) days after the decision is
rendered. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the secretary of the commission.
Upon the receipt of such appeal, the secretary of the commission will establish the date, time and
place to hear such appeal. The commission, upon receipt of the development services director's
action, may require said minor deviation to be presented at a public hearing before the commission.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 538/710
No permits shall be issued until the planning commission concurs with the staff's action. The
decision of the planning commission is appealable to the city council within ten (10) days of the
commission's decision. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-3-12: REQUESTS FOR REASONABLE ACCOMMODATIONS:
(A) Purpose: It is the policy of the city to provide reasonable accommodation for disabled persons
seeking fair access to housing in the application of its zoning laws. The purpose of this section is to
provide a process for making a request for reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 1548B, 6-23-1998)
(B) Request Application:
1. Any person who requires reasonable accommodation, because of a disability, in the application
of a zoning law which may be acting as a barrier to fair housing opportunities may do so on a
form to be provided by the development services director. (Ord. 1548B, 6-23-1998; amd. Ord.
1654, 6-25-2013)
2. If the project for which the request is being made also requires some other planning permit or
approval, then the applicant shall file the request together with the application for such permit or
approval.
(C) Request Information: The applicant shall provide the following information:
1. Applicant's name, address and telephone number;
2. Address of the property for which the request is being made;
3. The current actual use of the property;
4. The zoning code provision, regulation or policy from which accommodation is being requested;
5. The factual basis for the need for the accommodation including a description of the person's
disability and a physical description of the property.
(D) Notice Of Request For Accommodation: Written notice that a request for reasonable
accommodation shall be given as follows:
1. In the event that there is no approval sought other than the request for reasonable
accommodation, the notice shall be mailed to the owners of record of all properties which are
immediately adjacent to the property which is the subject of the request.
2. In the event that the request is being made in conjunction with some other process, the notice
shall be transmitted along with the notice of the other proceeding.
(E) Grounds For Accommodation: In making a determination regarding the reasonableness of a
requested accommodation the following factors shall be considered:
1. Special needs created by the disability;
2. Potential benefit that can be accomplished by the requested modification;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 539/710
3. Potential impact on surrounding uses;
4. Physical attributes of the property and structures;
5. Alternative accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit;
6. In the case of a determination involving a single-family dwelling, whether the household would be
considered a single housekeeping unit if it were not using special services that are required
because of the disabilities of the residents.
(F) Notice Of Proposed Decision:
1. Notice of the proposed decision shall be made in the same manner as set forth in subsection (D)
of this section.
2. Within ten (10) days of the date the notice is mailed, any person may make a request for
director's hearing upon a proposed decision.
3. If no request for hearing is received the proposed decision shall become a final director's
decision.
(G) Director's Hearing: The director shall conduct a hearing on the request for reasonable
accommodation at which all reasonable evidence and credible testimony shall be considered.
(H) Notice Of Director's Decision:
1. Within thirty (30) days after the hearing, the director shall issue a decision granting the request,
including any reasonable conditions, or denying the request.
2. The notice of decision shall contain the director's factual findings, conclusions and reasons for
the decision.
3. The notice of decision shall be made in the same manner as set forth in subsection (D) of this
section.
(I) Appeal To Planning Commission:
1. Within thirty (30) days after the notice of director's decision, any person may appeal in writing to
the planning commission.
2. All appeals shall contain a statement of the grounds for the appeal. (Ord. 1548B, 6-23-1998)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, Res 8479 - PROHIBITING
NONMEDICAL MARIJUANA . Go to new ordinance.
Chapter 4
GENERAL REGULATIONS
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 540/710
10-4-1: APPLICABILITY:
Provisions of this chapter shall apply in all zones wherever the specified conditions exist. When these
provisions conflict with the zone regulations, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. (Failure to
comply with these general regulations is unlawful.) (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-4-2: PARCEL AREA:
No structure or part thereof shall be erected on a parcel unless in compliance with the following
provisions:
(A) Provisions of this chapter imposed on minimum parcel area shall not apply to a parcel of record or a
parcel divided and conveyed by valid deed or written contract of sale executed before the effective
date of this title.
(B) No parcel shall be reduced in area so as to be smaller than required by this title, nor shall it be
divided to create parcels smaller than required by this title. If already less in dimension or area, it
shall not be further reduced or divided unless otherwise authorized by this title.
(C) The parcel shall have the minimum area required by the zone regulations for the particular zone. In
addition to compliance with the minimum parcel area, any parcel on which dwelling units or rental
units are proposed, shall also comply with the minimum parcel area for each such unit required by
the zone regulations. An increase in the number of such units existing on a parcel shall not be
allowed unless the density criteria are met, exclusive of land used or designed for other than
residential uses on the same parcel.
(D) The parcel shall further have the following minimum area requirements:
1. No Service By Public Sewer System: When the parcel is not served by a public sewer system,
minimum area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. No Service By Community Water System: When the parcel is not served by a community water
system, minimum area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. No Service By Any System: When the parcel is not served by a public sewer system and is not
served by a community water system, minimum area: One acre. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
4. Sloping Parcels: This provision increases the minimum parcel area for parcels having a cross
slope exceeding ten percent (10%). For the purposes of this section, cross slope shall be
calculated by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance on sections drawn
perpendicular to the contours for the full dimension of the lot at fifty foot (50') intervals with a
minimum of two (2) such sections per lot. The cross slope is the average of the sections taken.
Cross slopes ending in one-half percent (1/2%) or more shall be rounded to the next highest
whole number. Each lot or remainder created shall individually meet the minimum lot size
standard based upon that lot's particular slope. The provisions of this section shall apply only to
R-1 (Single-Family) property divisions.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 541/710
The provisions of this section shall only apply to applications to subdivide property submitted after
the effective date hereof.
(a) Cross Slopes Over Forty Percent: It is the intention of this chapter to prohibit development on
cross slopes over forty percent (40%) unless a design waiver is approved. That portion of a
parcel on which the cross slope exceeds forty percent (40%):
(1) Shall be excluded in determining minimum parcel area, and
(2) Shall be excluded when determining the slopes between the highest and lowest point used
to determine the slope of the parcel.
(3) A map restriction shall be recorded against the parcel prohibiting development on the
excluded area.
(4) If a design waiver is approved for construction on cross slopes greater than forty percent
(40%), the provisions of subsection (D)4(a)(1), (D)4(a)(2) and (D)4(a)(3) of this section will
not be applied when determining cross slopes and minimum parcel area. (Ord. 1502, 9-14-
1993)
(b) Minimum Parcel Area: The minimum parcel area for sloping parcels with slopes in excess of
ten percent (10%) is determined by the following formulas:
Slope Range Minimum Parcel Area
0% - 10% 6,000 sq. ft. or that allowed by the zone the parcel is within
10.1% - 30% ((S-10%) x 1,200 sq. ft.) + 6,000 sq. ft. = minimum parcel size
30.1% - 35% ((S-30%) x 2,000 sq. ft.) + 30,000 sq. ft. = minimum parcel size
35.1% - plus ((S-35%) x 10,000 sq. ft.) + 35,000 sq. ft. = minimum parcel size
S = Slope of parcel
(Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(c) Design Waiver: Design waivers associated with a division of a property may be allowed if the
applicant applies for such a waiver and provides adequate justification to the approving body
for the waiver. The burden of proof in the granting of the design waiver is upon the applicant.
The applicant shall provide supporting information to the planning commission and city
engineer including, but not limited to, engineered grading and improvement plans, erosion
control plans, tree removal and reforestation plans, road and driveway profiles, drainage plans
and any additional information that the planning commission or city engineer may require as it
is associated with the waiver. The planning commission shall make findings that the design
waiver will not involve excessive grading or land alteration and impacts to the site will be
minimized. The applicant shall make a separate application for such a waiver. This request
shall be reviewed by the city engineer and a report from the engineer shall be made to the
planning commission and/or the city council. The planning commission and/or the city council
shall review the request and the report from the city engineer and make a final ruling on the
request. Design waivers shall not be allowed for minimum parcel size or density.
A design waiver for construction on slopes greater than forty percent (40%) shall be required
for any roadway or structure requiring a building permit. The applicant shall submit information
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 542/710
with the application to subdivide a parcel that makes it clear to the approving body that the
development of a slope greater than forty percent (40%) will not detract from the project or the
city as a whole. (Ord. 1502, 9-14-1993)
10-4-3: YARDS:
No structure shall be constructed on any yard required by this chapter unless in compliance with all the
following requirements:
(A) Zone regulations imposed on minimum parcel width shall not apply to a parcel of record, or a parcel
divided and conveyed by valid deed, or written contract of sale executed before the effective date of
such provision made applicable to such parcel; if such parcel has less than the minimum required
width, the minimum side yard required in all residential zones is reduced to five feet (5'); provided,
that the structure is not higher than one and one-half (11/2) stories; if such parcel fronts streets on
two (2) adjoining sides, the minimum front yard required in all residential zones is reduced to ten
feet (10') on one of the streets.
(B) An unenclosed and uncovered patio, terrace, swimming pool, stairway or landing not higher than
three feet (3') above the natural ground level may be located on the required yards. Cornice, eaves,
canopy, chimney, fire escape, unenclosed and uncovered balcony, patio, terrace, stairway or
landing and other similar projections or overhangs higher than three feet (3') above the natural
ground level, may extend into the required yards to a distance of not more than two feet (2').
(C) A fence, wall or hedge not higher than six feet (6') above the natural ground level, may be located
on the required yards; provided, that in all residential zones such fence, wall or hedge is not higher
than three feet (3') above the natural ground level on corner parcels fronting on two (2) or more
intersecting streets, within a triangle formed by the intersecting rights of way and a line drawn
between points on such rights of way thirty feet (30') distant from their point of intersection.
(D) Detached accessory structures not higher than one story or twelve feet (12') may be located on the
required rear yard up to five feet (5') of the rear parcel line.
(E) Where more than one-half (1/2) the building sites along the same side of the street in the same
zone have been improved with buildings, the required front yard is the average of the front yards in
improved building sites within three hundred feet (300') in each direction.
(F) On corner parcels the side yard abutting the street shall be one-half (1/2) the distance of the
required front yard for the zone with a minimum distance of ten feet (10'). (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(G) On corner parcels the development services director shall determine which portions of the parcel
are the front, side and rear yards.
(H) On irregular shaped parcels the development services director shall determine which portions of
the parcel are the front, side and rear yards. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 543/710
10-4-4: PARKING AND LOADING:
No structure shall be constructed unless open spaces for automobile parking, and truck loading and
unloading, are permanently provided and maintained for the benefit of residents, employees,
customers and visitors, within or outside of buildings or in a combination of both, in compliance with all
the following requirements:
(A) 1. Applicability: A new use, structure, addition, or alteration on existing parcels shall be allowed only
if it does not increase or create a parking deficiency as determined in this section.
2. Parking District: The requirements of this section shall also apply to the city parking district,
except that any owner of property within the downtown parking district may request to pay an "in
lieu fee" instead of providing the required parking as provided in section 10-4-5 of this chapter.
(B) The required parking shall be provided on the parcel or contiguous parcel where the use is located.
For nonresidential uses, the required parking may be provided on a parcel no farther than three
hundred feet (300') from the boundaries of the parcel where the use is located, providing that the
parcel is under the same ownership, within the city, in the same zone, or in a less restrictive zone
and that no major thoroughfare lies between the use and any of the required parking. The required
loading shall be provided on the parcel where the use is located and no farther than twenty feet
(20') from the building to be served.
(C) The layout of parking stalls, loading berths, and parking aisles shall comply with all the following
requirements:
1. The required parking stalls, loading berths, and parking aisles may not be located on any street
right of way.
2. The required parking stalls, loading berths, and parking aisles, if outdoors, may be located on the
required side and rear yards, and within the required front yards up to three feet (3') from the
street right of way.
3. Each parking stall shall have a minimum size of nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') when free of
obstructions such as columns or walls; ten feet by eighteen feet (10' x 18') where columns or
walls are located adjacent to space; each loading berth shall have a minimum size of twelve feet
by twenty five feet (12' x 25') whether indoors or outdoors.
4. Parking aisles shall have a minimum width of twelve feet (12') when stalls are parallel to the aisle
or up to an angle of forty degrees (40°); seventeen feet (17') when stalls are at an angle between
forty degrees (40°) and seventy degrees (70°); and twenty four feet (24') when stalls are at an
angle between seventy degrees (70°) and ninety degrees (90°).
5. Parking stalls and aisles shall have a maximum grade of ten percent (10%). If the grade is over
five percent (5%) then the required width of a parking stall shall increase to ten feet (10').
6. Each parking stall and aisle shall have a minimum eight foot (8') vertical clearance; each loading
stall and access thereto shall have a minimum fifteen foot (15') vertical clearance.
7. Each parking stall and loading berth shall have vehicular access to the street, without passing
over other parking stalls. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 544/710
8. Each parking stall, except those serving one- and two-family dwellings, shall have vehicular
access to the street without backing into the public travelway or potential travelway; an exit shall
be provided in the direction of the traffic flow when parking stalls are laid out at an angle of less
than ninety degrees (90°) with the aisle. Any parking stalls or aisles that are to be located in the
public right of way shall be approved or conditionally approved by the planning commission and
obtain an encroachment permit from the development services department. Exception: Vehicles
on the streets listed below may back into the public travelway or potential travelway when a
conditional use permit is obtained in accordance with section 10-3-6 of this title: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-
1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(a) Reservoir alley.
9. Up to twenty percent (20%) of the parking stalls can be for compact cars. These stalls shall have
a minimum size of seven feet by seventeen feet (7' x 17'). All compact parking stalls shall be
marked or so indicated as "Compact Parking Only". Where a compact space is located adjacent
to columns or walls, the stall shall be ten feet (10') in width.
10. Tandem parking is allowed if all the following conditions are met:
(a) The subject parcel is located within the downtown parking district.
(b) The parking spaces are designated and marked for employees only. The applicant shall
provide data on the maximum number of employees per shift.
(c) A space of nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') shall be provided for each tandem space.
(d) The spaces shall be paved per city standards.
(e) The applicant shall obtain a conditional use permit from the city planning commission per
sections 10-3-3, 10-3-4, and 10-3-6 of this title. The applicant shall submit a scaled drawing of
the proposal to the planning commission for review and approval. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(D) Improvements: Improvements listed below shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate
of occupancy by the building division:
1. Each driveway, parking stall, loading berth; all parking lots; new and used vehicle sales lots;
except those serving one-family dwellings, shall be graded, drained, and surfaced with a
minimum of two inches (2") of asphaltic concrete over four inches (4") of aggregate base, as per
city standards.
2. A minimum four foot (4') high solid fence, wall or thick hedge shall be permanently maintained
between any residential zone and a parking area serving a commercial use, where such area is
contiguous to such a zone. (Ord. 1582, 1-22-2002)
(E) Minimum Parking Spaces: The following minimum number of parking stalls shall be required, to
serve the uses or buildings listed:
Automotive service
center
1 space each 500 square feet maintenance area. 1 space each
200 square feet office/retail area
Beauty shop,
barbershop
2 for each operating chair
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 545/710
Bowling establishment 8 for each lane
Eating or drinking
establishment
1 for each 4 seats of maximum seating capacity
Employee housing,
large
On site parking shall be provided according to the following
schedule. For group quarter facilities, a minimum of 1 parking
space for every 3 authorized beds. For individual unit facilities, a
minimum of 2 parking spaces shall be provided for each unit or
space
Employee housing,
small
2 spaces
Fast food eating and
drinking establishments
1 for each 50 square feet of floor area, plus 1 space for every 4
seats of maximum indoor and outdoor seating capacity, with a
minimum of 5 required
General office, bank,
studio, retail repair and
service
1 for each 200 square feet of floor area, measured to the nearest
200 square feet
Hospitals 11/2 for each bed
Medical office 1 space each 150 square feet of floor area
Miniature golf course 2 for each hole
Multiple uses The sum of the requirements for each individual use
Packing, manufacturing,
processing service or
research facilities
1 parking space per 500 square feet of gross floor area or 1 space
per employee of maximum working shift, whichever is the greater
of the 2
Place of assembly or
worship, mortuary
1 for each 4 seats of maximum seating capacity
Pool and billiard tables,
golf driving ranges,
pinball machines and
other indoor recreational
uses
2 for each recreational unit, such as a table, range or machine or
court, or 1 space for each 100 square feet of floor area measured
to the nearest 100 square feet, whichever is the lesser of the 2
Rest homes,
sanatoriums, and
convalescent hospitals
1 space for each 3 employees and 1 space for each 3 beds
Retail furniture,
appliance stores and
similar uses
1 parking space per each 250 square feet of gross floor area,
measured to the nearest 250 square feet
Retail sales 1 for each 200 square feet of floor area, measured to the nearest
200 feet
Rooming or boarding
house, motel, hotel
1 for each rental unit
Schools:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 546/710
Nursery schools 1 space for every 500 square feet
Elementary schools 2 spaces for each classroom
High schools 7 spaces for each classroom
Colleges 15 spaces for each classroom
Shopping centers 1 space for each 200 square feet of floor space. A "shopping
center", for the purpose of this section, is defined as an area upon
which there are situated multiple retail or service type business
enterprises in which the total floor space is at least 20,000 square
feet
Fast food restaurants shall not be considered part of a shopping
center and shall provide parking at a ratio as specified under fast
foods of this section
Single-family residence
2 spaces
Multi-family 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Single room occupancy
facility
1 stall per 3 single room occupancy units, plus 1 additional stall if
on site management office is required per subsection 10-4-8(F) of
this chapter
Wholesale or bulk
storage
1 parking space per 1,500 square feet of gross floor area or 1 for
each employee of maximum working shift, whichever is the greater
of the 2
(Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1627, 9-9-2008; Ord. 1664, 9-23-2014; Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014)
(F) Loading Berths: Loading berths shall be provided, in addition to parking stalls, as follows:
Total Square Footage Of Building Space
(Gross Floor Area)
Loading Spaces Required
Commercial and industrial buildings:
3,000 to 20,000 1
20,001 to 50,000 2
50,001 and over 3
Warehouse and storage areas:
Each 7,000 1
Hospitals, institutions, hotels and office buildings:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 547/710
10,000 to 50,000 1
50,001 to 100,000 2
100,001 and over 3
(Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-4-5: PARKING IN LIEU FEE REGULATIONS:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the payment of a fee in lieu of providing
additional parking upon construction of a new facility, the expansion of a facility, or the annexation of
an existing facility into a parking district.
(B) Definitions:
APPLICANT: Any person, corporation or business entity who makes application for the construction
of a new facility, the expansion of an existing facility, or the annexation of an existing facility into a
parking district.
CITY REGULATIONS: All rules and regulations of the city, whether ordinance, resolution or minute
order, relating to parking.
COST OF A PARKING PLACE: The estimated cost of providing a parking place as determined
annually by resolution of the city council.
DISTRICT: Any special assessment parking district.
PARKING ADVISORY COMMISSION: The parking advisory commission of the city of Placerville as
appointed by the city council.
PARKING DISTRICT OR DISTRICT: Any special assessment parking district within the city.
(C) Procedure:
1. When an application is made for an expansion of use, the planning commission, upon
recommendation of the parking advisory commission, shall either:
(a) Make a determination that the applicant shall comply with the city parking requirements as set
forth in section 10-4-4 of this chapter, or
(b) Make a determination as to whether the applicant shall be required to pay a fee as set forth
herein in lieu of providing additional parking. Said determination by the planning commission
shall be made prior to the issuance of any permit for the expansion of use.
The planning commission shall determine whether or not sufficient parking exists within a six
hundred foot (600') radius of the proposed expansion of use. When such a finding is made, the
parking in lieu fee may be assessed, as provided for herein, upon recommendation of the
planning commission and approval of the city council.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 548/710
2. The payment of the in lieu fee shall be made a condition to any permit issued and shall be
evidenced by an agreement in writing providing for the payment of the fee; said fee to be placed
in the city parking fund for future use in acquiring, improving or developing parking within the
parking district. Upon approval by the city, the payment of the fee may be amortized over a period
of fifteen (15) years, with interest thereon at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum, payable
annually.
(D) Exemptions And Credits:
1. Any existing structure assessed by special assessment for parking purposes may be replaced to
the same size and usage without the payment of the fee.
2. If an existing building is replaced and the number of parking places required by city regulations
are placed on the same site, then no fee will be required.
3. Where an existing structure is replaced by a larger structure, only the increased space shall be
subject to the fee.
4. Unimproved property located within the district having been previously assessed shall be given
credit against the fee for the amount of the assessment.
(E) Determination Of The Fee: The fee for each parking place required by the city regulations for the
proposed expansion of use is determined by multiplying the cost of a parking place by a factor of
one-half (1/2).
Example: Assume the cost of a parking place is twelve thousand dollars ($12,000.00).
Fee per space required = ($12,000.00) x (1/2) = $6,000.00
(F) Default In The Payment Of The Fee: In the event the required fee is not paid, or in the event any
installment payment of the fee is delinquent more than ten (10) days, the permit issued conditioned
upon the payment of the fee shall be revoked and all remedies available to the city shall be
enforced. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-4-6: TEMPORARY MOBILEHOME OR COMMERCIAL COACH USE PERMIT:
(A) Intent: The intent of this section is to permit temporary uses which meet established safety
standards where a need for such has been demonstrated. Such use is to be of a temporary nature
only, and a termination date shall be specified on all permits. Permits shall be granted for a period
up to one year, and an extension of six (6) months or longer may be granted if good and valid
reasons have been first established for such extension. A temporary mobilehome or commercial
coach use permit may be permitted in zones where such use will not adversely affect existing land
uses. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Applicability:
1. Temporary mobilehome or commercial coach permits shall apply to:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 549/710
(a) Placement of temporary mobilehomes accessory to, and not exceeding the duration of, the
construction of single-family dwelling units.
(b) Temporary uses for offices or retail sales. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
2. Temporary mobilehome or commercial coach use permits do not apply to:
(a) Licensing of mobile vendors which provide a service to residents.
(b) Temporary construction offices.
(C) Procedure: The procedure for obtaining a temporary mobilehome or commercial coach use permit
shall be as follows:
1. Application: An application for a temporary mobilehome or commercial coach use permit shall be
filed by the owner of the property for which the permit is sought or by the authorized
representative of the owner. Such application shall be made to the commission and shall be on
forms furnished by the secretary of the commission. As part of the application a plot plan shall be
submitted which is drawn to scale and which designates all land uses on the property, location of
all structures on the property, location of proposed mobilehome or commercial coach, utility
connections, yard, off street parking, and other information that the planning division may require.
2. Filing Fee: The permittee shall pay to the city a filing fee established by resolution of the city
council to defray costs incurred by the city in the issuance of said temporary mobilehome or
commercial coach use permit.
3. Commission Findings And Decision: The commission shall announce and record its decision and
action. Such report shall recite the findings of the commission upon which it bases its decision. If
the decision is favorable to granting the temporary mobilehome or commercial coach use permit,
the report may also contain any conditions to be imposed, including penalties for violation of
termination date. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
4. Notification: The development services director or authorized representative shall notify all
property owners, within three hundred feet (300') of the property for which the permit is sought, of
the requested use permit ten (10) days prior to any action of the planning commission. If
comments are received, said comments shall be included in the staff's report to the planning
commission. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
5. Revocation: The commission may revoke any temporary mobilehome or commercial coach use
permit for noncompliance or violation of the conditions set forth in granting such permit. A written
notice of intention to revoke shall be mailed to the applicant not less than ten (10) days before the
commission action.
(D) Appeals: Appeals to this section shall follow the provisions set forth in section 10-3-7 of this title.
(E) Hardship Mobilehome: A conditional use permit may be granted to the owner of an existing
principal dwelling to permit one mobilehome unit as an additional dwelling unit for the use by a
member of his/her family provided the following findings are made by the planning commission:
1. A hardship connected with a health condition as verified by a physician licensed to practice
medicine and surgery in this state would be substantially reduced by the use of the mobilehome.
2. The use will not detrimentally affect the use of neighboring properties.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 550/710
3. The property is zoned as single-family residential.
4. The placement of the mobilehome on the property complies with minimum yard requirements of
the applicable zone.
5. At least one parking space is provided for the mobilehome.
6. The parcel has a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
7. The mobile unit has a minimum area of three hundred (300) square feet and maximum area of
one thousand (1,000) square feet.
8. All utility connections to be installed as required by city code.
9. The mobilehome is currently licensed as required by the Vehicle Code of the state of California,
has a valid state insignia and remains in a mobile condition.
In all cases, the permit for mobilehome use shall be reinspected annually and must be terminated
if the finding of hardship, for which approval was given, no longer exists. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-4-7: SPECIAL TEMPORARY USE PERMITS:
Uses permitted subject to a special temporary use permit are those temporary uses which are required
for the proper functioning of the community or are temporarily required in the process of establishing a
permitted use, or constructing a public facility. Such uses shall be so conducted that they will not be
detrimental in any way to the surrounding properties or to the community. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(A) Uses Permitted Subject To Special Temporary Use Permits: The following uses shall be allowed
upon the issuance of a temporary use permit:
Carnivals, circuses, special events of not over seventy two (72) consecutive hours.
Christmas tree sales.
Parking and storage of materials and earthmoving or construction equipment incidental to the
carrying on of a public works project, subdivision or construction project.
Temporary outside display and sales of merchandise in the C zone.
Such other uses as the planning commission may, by resolution, deem to be within the intent and
purpose of this section.
(B) Special Temporary Use Permit Procedure:
1. Application And Fee: Application and filing fee for a special temporary use permit may be made
by the property owner or his authorized agent. Such applications shall be filed with the
development services department. The development services department shall charge and
collect a filing fee for each such applicant, as determined by resolution of the city council. The
development services director may require any information of the applicant which may be
necessary to make a determination concerning the proposed use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 551/710
2. Determination: Application for special temporary use permit shall be reviewed by the
development services department. The development services director shall approve, conditionally
approve, or disapprove such application. Approval or conditional approval shall be given only
when in the judgment of the development services director, such approval is within the intent and
purpose of this zoning title.
3. Time Limit: Special temporary use permits shall specify the period of time set by the development
services director during which the use may be carried out, not to exceed one year from date of
issuance of the permit.
4. Appeals From Determinations: If the applicant is dissatisfied with the decision he may appeal to
the commission within ten (10) days after the decision is rendered. Such appeal shall be in writing
and shall be filed with the secretary of the commission. Upon the receipt of such appeal, the
secretary of the commission will establish the date, time and place to hear such appeal. The
commission, upon receipt of the development services director's action, may require said
determination to be presented at a public hearing before the commission. No permits shall be
issued until the planning commission makes a determination. The determination of the
commission may be appealed to the council per the procedure established in section 10-3-7 of
this title. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-4-8: SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY FACILITIES:
(A) Purpose: The provisions of this section are intended to accommodate the development of
permanent, affordable housing for small households, persons with disabilities, the elderly, the
former homeless or lower income individuals.
(B) Location: A single room occupancy (SRO) facility shall comply with the requirements of this section,
where allowed by chapter 5, "Zone Regulations", of this title along with the general regulations
within the allowed zones.
(C) Project Review And Approval: A proposed SRO facility shall require site plan review in compliance
with section 10-4-9 of this chapter. Where specified in this title, an SRO facility shall require
approval of a conditional use permit in compliance with sections 10-3-3 and 10-3-6 of this title.
(D) Development Standards:
1. Single Room Occupancy Facilities:
(a) Common Area: Four (4) square feet per living unit shall be provided, with at least two hundred
(200) square feet in area of interior common space, excluding cleaning supply room, laundry
facilities and common hallways.
(b) Laundry Facilities: Laundry facilities must be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one
washer and one dryer for every twenty (20) units or fractional number thereof, with at least one
washer and dryer per floor.
(c) Cleaning Supply Room: A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a washtub with hot and
cold running water shall be provided on each floor of the SRO facility.
(d) Bicycle Parking: A minimum of one bicycle parking space shall be provided for every three (3)
SRO units.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 552/710
(e) Trash Enclosure: An SRO facility shall provide a trash enclosure, subject to the criteria of
section 10-4-9, "Site Plan Review", of this chapter.
(f) Vehicle Parking: Off street parking shall be provided consistent with subsection 10-4-4(E) of
this chapter.
2. Single Room Occupancy Units:
(a) Unit Size: An SRO unit shall have a minimum size of one hundred fifty (150) square feet and a
maximum of four hundred (400) square feet.
(b) Occupancy: An SRO unit shall accommodate a maximum of two (2) persons.
(c) Bathroom: An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full bathroom facilities. A
partial bathroom facility shall have at least a toilet and sink; a full facility shall have a toilet, sink
and bathtub, shower or bathtub/shower combination. If a full bathroom facility is not provided,
common bathroom facilities shall be provided in accordance with the California building code
for congregate residences with at least one full bathroom per floor.
(d) Kitchen: An SRO unit is not required to but may contain partial or full kitchen facilities. A full
kitchen includes a sink, a refrigerator and a stove, range top or oven. A partial kitchen is
missing at least one of these appliances. If a full kitchen is not provided, common kitchen
facilities shall be provided with at least one full kitchen per floor.
(e) Closet: Each SRO unit shall have a separate closet.
(f) Code Compliance: SRO units shall comply with all requirements of the California building
code.
(E) Accessibility: All SRO units and facilities shall comply with all applicable accessibility and
adaptability requirements. All common areas shall be fully accessible.
(F) Management:
1. Facility Management: An SRO facility with fifteen (15) or more units shall provide on site
management. An SRO facility with less than fifteen (15) units shall provide a management office
on site.
2. Management Plan: A management plan shall be submitted with the required conditional use
permit and/or site plan review application for an SRO facility and shall be approved by the
planning commission, or city council upon appeal. The management plan must address
management and operation of the facility, rental procedures, safety and security of residents and
building maintenance.
(G) Tenancy: Tenancy of SRO units shall be limited to thirty (30) or more days.
(H) Existing Structures: An existing structure may be converted to an SRO facility, consistent with the
provisions of this section and the development standards of the zone regulations of the zones in
which the SRO is an authorized use.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 553/710
(I) Business License: The organization or company operating the SRO facility shall obtain a city
business license before commencing operations, in accordance with title 5, chapter 1 of this code.
(Ord. 1664, 9-23-2014)
10-4-9: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
(A) Site Plan Review: The city council finds and determines that to encourage the orderly and
harmonious development of property within the city, maintain public health, safety, and welfare,
maintain property and improvement values throughout the city, encourage the physical development
of the city, and preserve the historic and scenic character of state designated scenic highway
corridors, the following provisions be established to provide clear guidelines for site plan review.
(B) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to recognize the interdependence of land values and
aesthetics and to provide a method by which the following goals can be achieved:
1. Promotion of sound land use development.
2. Assist in the development of architectural standards and guidelines for residential, commercial
and retail business structures.
3. Preservation of the historic and scenic character of state designated scenic highway corridors.
4. To implement the goals and policies of the community design element of the general plan. (Ord.
1474, 1-8-1991)
(C) Site Plan Review Required: The planning commission shall review each application for a building
permit in the following land use categories:
1. All new construction of commercial structures; or multi-family structures, including duplexes,
located within the R-2, R-3 and R-4 zones. (Ord. 1665, 9-23-2014)
2. Any exterior additions or combination of additions thereof which would add one thousand (1,000)
square feet or more to existing commercial or multi-family buildings within the lifetime of the
building. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
3. Any additions or conversions to commercial, multi-family, or single-family structures which would
cause a change in occupancy as defined by the California building code. (Ord. 1642, 6-14-2011)
4. Relocation of buildings and structures, except single-family dwellings.
5. Parking structures and lots.
6. Any destruction or alteration of buildings in a historical district or historical building as identified in
subsection (H)1 of this section.
7. All new construction of structures in the PF zone.
8. All new construction of single-family attached dwellings.
9. Any structure which increases the coverage of Hangtown Creek as defined in section 8-3-28 of
this code. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 554/710
10. New formula businesses and major exterior modifications to existing formula businesses within
the central business district (CBD) zone. Major modifications are those defined in subsection (P)
of this section. (Ord. 1597, 2-24-2004)
11. Single room occupancy facilities. (Ord. 1664, 9-23-2014)
12. All new construction of professional office conditional uses within the R-5 zone.
13. Multi-family residential housing structures or owner occupied single-family residential housing
structures under subsection 10-5-12(E)3 of this title within the R-5 zone. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
Exceptions: The following shall not be subject to site plan review:
1. Relocation of or construction of new single-family dwellings. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
2. Any change in occupancy from a more intensive occupancy to a less intensive occupancy as
defined in the California building code and where no additional parking is required. (Ord. 1642, 6-
14-2011)
3. The change in occupancy in any building or use that has received site plan approval within ten
(10) years of the approval date of the original site plan; provided, that no additional parking is
required. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
4. Multi-family structures or owner occupied single-family residential housing structures under
subsection 10-5-12(E)2 of this title within the R-5 zone. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
(D) Development Design: The planning commission may use, but will not be limited to, those types of
development exemplified by photographs, drawings and notes as shown in the "design manual" and
"historic design guide" adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(E) Procedure: The following procedure shall govern the submission and review of site and building
plans:
1. The following items must be submitted to the development services department at least thirty (30)
days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the commission:
(a) An application for design review on forms prescribed by the development services
department.
(b) Copies of each of the following, as specified on application forms, or as prescribed by the
development services department:
(1) Plot plan drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20') showing
dimensions and size of each lot to be built upon or otherwise used; the size, shape, and
location of existing and proposed buildings; the location and layout of parking areas, parking
spaces and driveways, drainage systems, finished contour of site.
(2) A landscaping plan including location of proposed plantings and screenings; proposed
location of fences, signs and advertising structures.
(3) Exterior elevations of all sides of proposed new buildings and additions to existing buildings;
exterior elevations or proposed remodeling or "facelifting". Elevations shall be drawn to a
scale of not less than one-eighth inch equals one foot (1/8" = 1'). In the case of additions to
existing buildings, photographs of existing buildings are required.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 555/710
(4) Exterior color samples.
(5) Such other information, drawings, plans, or renderings that may be required by the
development services department to assist the commission in arriving at a decision. The use
of color renderings and photographs is encouraged.
(6) Development services director or designated representative may at their discretion, waive
certain submittal requirements when such information, as required in this subsection (E)1,
would not, in his opinion, assist in describing the proposed change. These waivers shall be
reviewed by the planning commission.
2. Notification of applicant and adjacent property owners within three hundred feet (300') as shown
on the last adopted tax roll. The development services director shall specify the following within
the notice:
(a) Type of development.
(b) Locational map.
(c) Time in which comments are to be received in order to be considered by the planning
commission.
3. Within sixty (60) days after the completion of the necessary environmental documents as per the
city of Placerville's "Guidelines And Procedures For The Implementation Of The California
Environmental Quality Act Of 1970", as amended; the development services department shall
refer the submittals, with its comments, to the commission. The commission shall act on the
application within thirty (30) days after such referral, unless applicant requests, and the
commission grants, an extension of time. If the commission has not acted on the application
within sixty (60) days, the application shall be deemed approved. Such mandatory approval shall
not constitute violation of city ordinance.
4. The development services department shall advise the applicant in writing of the time, date and
place of the commission's consideration of the application and of the final disposition thereof.
5. The decision of the commission is final unless appealed as provided for in section 10-3-7 of this
title. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
(F) Filing Fee: When the application for a site plan review is filed, a uniform fee set by resolution of the
city council shall be paid to the city for the purpose of defraying the costs incidental to the
proceedings. Said fee is nonrefundable.
(G) Criteria: The planning commission may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the
application for a building permit or other required approval in any matter subject to its scope of
authority after considering whether the following criteria are met. These criteria are not intended to
supersede any requirements in the city's construction regulations, restricting imagination,
innovation, or variety, but rather to assist in focusing on design principles which can result in
creative solutions to assist in promoting the purpose of this title. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
1. Relationship Of Buildings To Site:
(a) The site shall be planned to achieve harmony and continuity between neighborhoods and
commercial areas to maintain the historic foothill small town character, as opposed to suburban
patterns of development. (Ord. 1597, 2-24-2004)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 556/710
(b) The site shall be planned to accomplish a desirable transition with the streetscape and to
provide for adequate planting, pedestrian movement, and parking areas.
(c) Site planning in which setback and yards which exceed current regulations is encouraged to
provide an inviting streetscape.
(d) Parking areas shall be treated with decorative elements, variety of paving materials, building
wall extension, plantings, berms or other innovative means so as to break up large expanses of
paved area.
(e) The height and scale of each building shall be compatible with its site and buildings in the
surrounding area.
(f) Privacy of existing adjacent properties shall be maintained.
2. Relationship Of Building And Site To Surrounding Area:
(a) Adjacent buildings of different architectural styles shall be made compatible by such means as
screens, sight breaks, colors and materials.
(b) Attractive landscape transition to surrounding properties shall be provided.
(c) Harmony in texture, lines, and masses is required. Monotony shall be avoided.
(d) Buildings shall have compatible scale to those in the surrounding area. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(e) "Standardized" corporate architecture which involves the use of materials, textures, facades,
colors, rooflines, siding and other materials and features is contrary to the city's historic small
town character. In lieu of standardized corporate architecture, formula businesses shall use the
following: natural and manufactured wood siding; large timbers; varied rooflines, openings and
facade treatments; brick, brick veneer and rock treatments; gridded windows; and, earth tone
colors in lieu of bright, glossy or reflective colors. (Ord. 1597, 2-24-2004)
3. Landscape And Site Treatment And Tree Preservation Required: Landscape elements included
in these criteria consist of all forms of trees, planting and vegetation, ground forms, rock
groupings, water patterns, and all visible construction except buildings and utilitarian structures:
(a) Natural Patterns Preserved: Where natural or existing topographic patterns contribute to
beauty and utility of a development, they shall be preserved and developed. Modification to
topography will be permitted where it contributes to good appearance.
(b) Inviting Ambiance: Grades of walks, parking spaces, terraces, and other paved areas shall
provide an inviting and stable appearance for walking and, if seating is provided, for sitting.
(c) Landscape Treatment: Landscape treatment shall be provided to enhance architectural
features, strengthen vistas and important axis, and provide shade.
(d) Unity Of Design: Unity of design shall be achieved by repetition of certain plant varieties and
other materials, and by correlation with adjacent developments.
(e) Plant Material: Plant material shall be selected for interest in its structure, texture, and color
and for its ultimate growth.
(f) Plant Protection: In locations where plants will be susceptible to injury by pedestrian or motor
traffic, they shall be protected by appropriate curbs, tree guards, or other devices.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 557/710
(g) Parking Areas: Parking areas and trafficways shall be enhanced with landscaped spaces
containing trees or tree groupings which shall be adequately irrigated and maintained. Shrubs
shall be used only where they will not obscure vision. At a minimum, twenty percent (20%) of
all parking areas shall be landscaped with shrubs and ground covers. Shade trees shall be
planted and maintained in planters or landscaped areas so that at tree maturity (15 years), at
least fifty percent (50%) of the total paving area not including the entrance drives, parking
areas under carports, or multi-story parking structures, shall be shaded at solar noon on June
21.
(h) Landscape Planter Strips: Landscape planter strips shall be provided for each ten (10) linear
parking stalls.
(i) Irrigation: An automatic sprinkling system shall be installed to irrigate all landscaped areas.
(j) Screening: Service yards, and other places which tend to be unsightly, shall be screened by
use of walls, fencing, planting, or combinations of these.
(k) Fences, Walls And Pavings: In areas where general planting does not prosper, other
materials, such as fences, walls, and pavings of wood, brick, stone, gravel and cobbles, shall
be used. Carefully selected plants shall be combined with such materials where possible.
(l) Exterior Lighting: Exterior lighting, when used, shall enhance the building design and the
adjoining landscape. Lighting standards and fixtures shall be of a design and size compatible
with the building and adjacent areas. Lighting shall be restrained in design, color and brilliance.
(m) Water Efficient/Drought Resistant Landscaping Required: Projects subject to this chapter with
landscaped area equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet; rehabilitated
landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand
five hundred (2,500) square feet, and cemeteries are also, where specified, subject to the
water efficient landscape requirements under sections 10-6-1 through 10-6-15 of this title, and
shall be required to design and install water efficient and drought resistant landscaping. Such
landscaping design shall be prepared by a licensed architect or contractor, certified irrigation
designer, licensed landscape contractor, or other person authorized under the California
Business And Professions Code and the Food And Agricultural Code to design a landscape. To
the extent feasible, landscaped design shall take into consideration the following:
(1) Provisions for grading and drainage to promote healthy plant growth and to prevent
excessive erosion and runoff, and the use of mulches in shrub areas, garden beds and
landscaped areas where appropriate.
(2) Provisions for the use of automatic irrigation systems and seasonal irrigation schedules
incorporating water conservation design and utilizing methods appropriate for specific
terrains, soil types, wind conditions, temperatures and other environmental factors in order to
ensure a high degree of water efficiency.
(3) Provisions for water conservation through the appropriate use or groupings of plants that
are well adapted to particular sites and to particular climatic, geological or topographical
conditions.
(4) Provisions for the use of reclaimed water supplied through dual distribution systems, if
feasible and cost effective, and subject to the city and county health standards.
(5) Provisions for landscape maintenance practices which foster long term landscape water
conservation. Landscape maintenance practices may include, but are not limited to,
performing routine irrigation system repairs and adjustments, conducting water audits and
prescribing the amount of water applied per landscape area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 558/710
(n) Landscaping Maintenance: All vegetation and landscaping shall be maintained free of
physical damage or injury from lack of water, excess chemical fertilizer or other toxic chemical,
blight, or disease, and such vegetation or those that show signs of such damage or injury at
any time shall be replaced by the same, similar or substitute vegetation of a size, form and
character, which will be comparable at full growth. Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure
water use efficiency. A landscaping maintenance agreement between the applicant and the city
shall be required to ensure the ongoing maintenance of landscaping. Irrigation systems shall
be properly maintained to prevent water waste from leaving landscape due to low head
drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property,
nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Repair of all irrigation
equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or equivalents.
(o) Weeds: Landscaping shall be kept free from weeds and undesirable grasses.
(p) Tree Preservation Guidelines: Projects approved under this chapter shall, whenever possible,
comply with the "Tree Preservation Guidelines" adopted by resolution by the city council.
(q) Fence Construction: Fences shall be constructed of quality low maintenance materials. Fence
design shall be compatible with landscaping and site design.
(r) Bikes: Bicycle racks and bikeways, when appropriate, shall be provided. (Ord. 1676, 11-24-
2015)
4. Building Design:
(a) Evaluation of appearance of a project shall be based on the quality of its design and
relationship to surroundings. Inappropriate, incompatible, bizarre, exotic designs and
standardized corporate architecture, other than registered trademarks, shall be avoided. (Ord.
1597, 2-24-2004)
(b) Buildings shall have form and scale with permanent neighboring development and
topography.
(c) Materials shall be of durable quality, and shall be selected for harmony of the building with
surrounding buildings.
In any design in which the structural frame is exposed to view, the structural materials shall
meet the other criteria for materials.
(d) New building components, such as windows, doors, eaves and parapets, shall have continuity
to one another. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(e) Colors shall be harmonious to site and surrounding area. The use of standardized bright, bold,
glossy nonearth tone colors is discouraged, as they generally do not project the historic foothill
character of the community. (Ord. 1597, 2-24-2004)
(f) Mechanical equipment or other utility hardware on roof, ground, or buildings shall be screened
from public view with materials harmonious with the building, or they shall be located so as not
to be visible from any public ways.
(g) Exterior lighting shall be part of the architectural concept. Fixtures, standards and all exposed
accessories shall be harmonious with building design.
(h) Refuse and waste removal areas, service yards, storage yards and exterior work areas shall
be screened from view from public ways, using materials as stated in criteria for equipment
screening.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 559/710
(i) Monotony of design in single or multiple building projects shall be avoided. Variation of detail,
form, and siting shall be used to provide visual interest. In multiple building projects, variable
siting or individual buildings may be used to prevent monotonous appearance.
(j) The architectural style which should be appropriate for the project in question, and the form
and roof type of commercial buildings shall not, without planning commission approval, reflect a
standardized basic architectural style which is similar to other such projects constructed
through related contractual or other agreements statewide or nationally. It is not the intent of
this section to establish any particular architectural style.
5. Signs:
(a) Wall signs shall be accomplished in continuity with the architectural concept. Size, color,
lettering, location and arrangement shall be harmonious with the building design, and shall be
compatible with approved signs on adjoining buildings. Signs shall have good proportions.
(b) Ground signs shall be designed to be compatible with the architecture of the building. The
same criteria applicable to wall signs shall apply to ground signs.
(c) Materials used in signs shall have good architectural character and be harmonious with
building design and surrounding landscape. Wherever possible signs shall be incorporated
within the building components such as facias, and/or eaves.
(d) Every sign shall have good scale in its design and in its visual relationship to buildings and
surroundings.
(e) Colors shall be harmonious and used with restraint. Lighting shall be harmonious with the
design. If external spot or floodlighting is used, it shall be arranged so that the light source is
shielded from view.
6. Density In Units Per Acre: The following factors are to be considered in determining the
maximum allowable density in units per acre:
(a) Required grading, soil removal, and cut and fill operations.
(b) Tree removal or removal of shrubs and other natural ground cover as it may affect erosion and
drainage.
(c) The criteria set forth in subsections (G)1 and (G)2 of this section.
(d) The slope of the property.
(e) Geological conditions.
(f) Any other conditions or criteria that may relate to the density potential of the property.
7. Access And Circulation: Access and traffic circulation to the site should be in such a manner as
to allow for safe and reasonable pedestrian and vehicular access to and from the site and,
further, so as to cause the least interference with existing uses of adjacent properties.
8. Community Design: All site plans shall be compatible with the goals and policies established in
the community design element of the general plan.
(H) Destruction Or Alteration Of Buildings In A Historical District Or To Historical Buildings:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 560/710
1. No building in any historical district nor any building officially designated by the council as
"historical" shall be torn down, demolished, destroyed, altered, improved, or otherwise changed in
exterior appearance except as hereinafter provided. Minor repair and maintenance to buildings of
same material and color are exempt from this chapter.
2. If any historical building be damaged by any act of God, including, but not limited to, earthquake
or fire, the owner thereof may repair such building if he/she secures approval from the planning
commission.
3. Any owner making any alterations on the exterior of a historical building shall first secure
approval from the planning commission.
4. Alteration of such buildings shall comply with requirements as stated in the city's construction
regulations, title 4 of this code.
5. Buildings within a historical district shall not be demolished unless approved by the commission.
6. Any building or structure which is structurally unsafe as a result of fire, earthquake or other acts
of God shall be removed at the direction of the building official.
(I) New Buildings In Historical District: All buildings situated within the boundaries of a historical district
which are hereafter constructed shall conform to the provisions of section 10-4-10, "Historical
Buildings In The City", of this chapter.
(J) Hangtown Creek: Construction within the historical district shall not encroach into or cover
Hangtown Creek unless approved by the planning commission.
(K) Building Permit; Issuance:
1. Building Permit To Be Issued Within Eighteen Months: The approval of the site plan shall expire
and become null and void eighteen (18) months after the date of approval unless a building
permit has been obtained for any building thereon before the date of expiration. Should the
building permit expire for any building thereon, then the site plan review approval shall also
simultaneously expire. In no case shall site plan review approval be valid for a period exceeding
five (5) years from the original approval date. The planning commission may grant a one year
extension for the project if the applicant makes such a request and pays a new fee prior to the
expiration date. The planning commission shall consider any changes to this code or to the
project when granting the extension. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
2. Determination Of The Development Services Director Or The Authorized Representative: Before
a building permit may be issued for any building or structure in a development requiring a site
plan review, the development services director or the authorized representative shall make a
determination that the proposed building or structure is in conformity with the approved site plan
review. If conformity does not exist, the building permit shall not be issued. Stop order notice may
be issued in accordance with section 1-4A-13 of this code if violations are discovered. (Ord.
1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(L) Disapproval; Notice: If the planning commission disapproves an application for a site plan review, it
shall state its findings and judgment in specific detail so that the applicant is informed precisely as
to the basis for the commission's disapproval. (Ord. 1597, 2-24-2004)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 561/710
The secretary shall furnish the applicant with the findings of the commission promptly and in no
case later than five (5) days after the commission disapproves the application.
(M) Appeals: The applicant or an interested party, including a member of the planning commission or
the council who is dissatisfied with the findings of the commission, may appeal to the council by
filing a notice of appeal. A filing fee as set by resolution of the city council shall be required from all
parties except members of the commission or a city council member. Such appeals shall be filed in
accordance with section 10-3-7 of this title.
(N) Violation; Penalty: A person who violates this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished
as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
(O) Chapter Application: This chapter shall apply to all construction for which a building permit
application has not been applied prior to the effective date of this chapter.
(P) Site Plan Changes; Major And Minor: Application to change an approved site plan must be made in
writing and filed with the secretary of the planning commission accompanied by a site plan (if
applicable) and description of the modifications proposed. (Ord. 1597, 2-24-2004)
Proposed changes to an approved site plan shall be classified as either minor or major by the
development services director or his duly appointed representative. Minor changes shall not in any
way change the appearance, character or intent of the approved site plan nor modify the exterior
building elevations of an existing formula business in the central business district (CBD) zone. Major
changes will generally be any change that would alter the appearance, character or intent of the
approved site plan. Examples of major changes include, but are not limited to, changes in: building
facade and roofline; wall and roof materials; window and door openings; sign modifications; building
illumination and exterior lighting; new mechanical equipment visible from a public way; exterior
colors which deviate from existing colors which propose colors other than earth tone colors, such as
"bone white", "canary yellow", or "fire engine red". Any proposed change, which does not clearly fit
into one of the classifications, minor or major, shall be considered as a major change. (Ord. 1597,
2-24-2004; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
Upon the classification of a proposed change as either minor or major, the procedures described
herein shall be followed: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
Minor changes: May be approved by the development services director or his duly appointed
representative. Approval of a minor change shall be made in writing and must include the finding
that the minor change will not in any way change the appearance, character or intent of the
approved site plan. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
Major changes: May be approved only by the planning commission. The planning commission shall
hold a public hearing to consider the major change in accordance with the procedure set forth in
subsections (E)2 through (E)5 of this section. The applicant shall submit the following items at least
fourteen (14) days prior to a regularly scheduled meeting of the commission:
1. Ten (10) copies of the site plan illustrating the proposed changes.
2. A fee as determined by resolution of the city council shall be paid to defray the costs incidental to
the proceedings.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 562/710
3. Radius map and property owners list of owners within three hundred feet (300') of the subject site
as shown on the latest adopted tax roll. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
4. Any other information which the development services director or his duly appointed
representative has determined necessary for the planning commission's review. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-
1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-4-10: HISTORICAL BUILDINGS IN THE CITY:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide conditions and regulations for the protection,
enhancement and perpetuation of the old and historical buildings in historical districts of the city and
the perpetuation of historic type architecture within historical districts, which have special historical
and aesthetic interest and value. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Historical Criteria: Secretary of the interior "Standards For Rehabilitation And Guidelines For
Rehabilitating Historic Buildings". (Ord. 1640, 1-11-2011)
(C) Historical District: Said historical district shall include all of the territory bounded as shown in exhibit
A, which is on file in the office of the city clerk. A historical district shall predominantly comply with
this historical ordinance.
(D) Existing Historical Buildings Preserved: No presently existing building of special historical or
aesthetic value or of the historic type of architecture situated within that portion of a historical district
described in subsection (C) of this section, shall be torn down, demolished or otherwise destroyed
without conforming to this section.
(E) Building Removal; Permit Required: In the event that any building of historical value or interest is
damaged by fire, act of God, or in any other manner, or becomes unsafe as defined in the adopted
city building codes, or in such state of disrepair or dilapidation as to be untenable by reason of any
cause that it cannot with reasonable diligence be repaired and restored, the same may be removed
upon issuance of a permit for removal as hereinafter provided.
(F) Construction And Repairs; Conformity Required: All buildings which shall be hereinafter constructed
or altered as to their exterior appearance (within the historical districts described in subsection (C)
of this section) shall, as to their exterior architecture visible from the street, conform to the historical
criteria described in subsection (B) of this section.
(G) Removal Or Permit Issuance: No permit for demolition or removal of any building of historical
architecture or special historical or aesthetic interest situated within the area set forth in subsection
(C) of this section shall be issued without the approval of the planning commission.
It is the intent of this section not to require new construction to duplicate historic type construction
and/or historical architecture. However, it is a requirement that new construction be compatible with
historical architecture.
(H) Construction And Repairs; Permit Issuance: No permit for construction or alteration of any building
within the area set forth in subsection (C) hereof shall be issued until the plans for construction or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 563/710
alteration have been approved by the planning commission. Notwithstanding anything contained in
this section to the contrary, in cases requiring any repair to prevent substantial loss or damage to
property, emergency repairs to adequately provide for health and safety, may be made prior to the
obtaining of a permit as required by this section.
(I) Notice: The planning commission secretary shall notify the historical advisory committee of any
application which is related to this section.
(J) Appeal To City Council: Appeals of planning commission decisions shall be in such manner as
provided in section 10-3-7 of this title.
(K) Minor And Major Changes: Any minor changes to an approved plan shall follow the procedure
established in subsection 10-4-9(P) of this chapter.
(L) Violation Of Permit: It shall be unlawful for any person to proceed under any permit in a manner
which constitutes a material variance from the terms of the permit or the representations on which it
was issued, and in the event of such a violation, the permit may be cancelled forthwith by action of
the planning commission.
(M) Scope Of Section: The regulations contained in this section are additional to this title as amended,
and other sections; provided, however, that in the event of any conflict, the provisions of this section
shall prevail.
(N) Penalties: Every person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for a term not to exceed three (3) months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment, and such person deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day, or
portion thereof, during which any violation of this section is committed or continued. (Ord. 1474, 1-
8-1991)
10-4-11: BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS:
(A) General Provisions: This section shall be known as the bed and breakfast ordinance of the city.
(B) Purposes: This section is hereby established to allow for the establishment of bed and breakfast
establishments within the residential zones of the city upon conforming to set criteria and conditions
and upon review and approval by the Placerville planning commission.
(C) Criteria And Conditions:
1. The structure to be used as a bed and breakfast establishment shall be of historic significance. It
is the applicant's responsibility to show proof of historic significance to the planning commission.
2. Two (2) parking spaces plus one additional space per room to be rented must be provided.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 564/710
3. Tandem parking is allowed; however, not more than two (2) cars per tandem space shall be
allowed.
4. No residential structure shall be removed in order to allow for a bed and breakfast use, nor shall
such a structure be removed in order to provide parking for such a use.
5. All parking spaces shall be paved to city standards with materials that maintain the historical
character of the neighborhood.
6. If the applicant is unable to meet the criteria of subsections (C)2, (C)3, (C)4 or (C)5 of this
section, the applicant may request special consideration from the Planning Commission. The
City's intent is not to encourage yards to be destroyed, landscaping removed, or the integrity of
the neighborhood altered in order to provide parking. In such a case the applicant shall submit an
analysis of parking required and parking provided within a three hundred foot (300') radius of the
subject parcel.
7. One nonilluminated sign may be erected on the property, not to exceed eight (8) square feet in
size. No single dimension of the sign shall exceed four feet (4'). The sign shall complement the
nature of the use; i.e., historic structures should have a historic style sign.
8. The proprietor and owner are required to occupy the property.
9. The structure shall remain a residential structure; i.e., the kitchen shall not be remodeled into a
commercial kitchen.
10. Meals shall be served only to residents and overnight guests.
11. The use is subject to review at any time and may be revoked after a hearing by the Planning
Commission and a finding by the Planning Commission that the use has become detrimental to
the surrounding neighborhood.
12. A bed and breakfast use must comply with all other provisions of the zone in which it is located
and must comply with all other ordinances of the City.
13. A City business license is required.
14. Any other conditions deemed essential and desirable by the Planning Commission may be
imposed on such a use.
15. Permit to allow bed and breakfast use shall be issued for a period not to exceed two (2) years.
16. Any permit is transferable provided that the criteria and conditions are adhered to.
(D) Procedures: An applicant for a bed and breakfast establishment shall follow the procedures for a
conditional use permit as specified in section 10-3-6 of this title. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
This section has been affected by a recently passed ordinance, 19-01 - ACCESSORY DWELLING
UNITS . Go to new ordinance.
10-4-12: ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS (ADU):
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 565/710
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide for the creation of accessory dwelling units in
residential zones and to set forth criteria and regulations of those accessory dwelling units.
(B) Applicability Of Regulations: The provisions of this section shall apply to all parcels that are
occupied by one single-family dwelling unit and zoned RE, R-1A, R1-6,000, R1-10,000, R1-20,000,
R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5.
(C) Permitted Use: Accessory dwelling units as defined in section 10-1-4 of this title are a permitted use
in the City's residential zoning districts for residential use that is consistent with the City's General
Plan, the specific zone for the parcel on which the accessory dwelling unit is to be located, and this
section.
(D) Development And Use Regulations: ADUs are subject to the following standards, restrictions and
regulations:
1. Minimum Parcel Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet, or as provided under subsection 10-4-
2(A) of this chapter, parcel area.
2. Primary Residence: A single-family residence must be located on the parcel.
3. Density: No more than one ADU is permitted on any one parcel.
4. Subdivision: A parcel having an ADU may not be subdivided in a manner that would allow for the
main dwelling and accessory dwelling unit to be located on separate parcels that do not meet the
minimum parcel area, width and/or depth required by the single-family zoning district in which the
parcel is located.
5. Minimum Yards:
(a) An attached ADU shall comply with all minimum yard requirements for the main dwelling
established by the single-family zoning district in which the parcel is located.
(b) A detached ADU shall comply with all minimum yard requirements for the main dwelling
established by the residential zoning district in which the parcel is located, with the exception of
a detached ADU that would not exceed the height standard per subsection 10-4-3(D) of this
chapter, may be located on the required rear yard up to five feet (5') from the rear parcel line.
6. Floor Area:
(a) Detached ADU: Maximum permissible floor area shall be fifty percent (50%) of the square
footage of the existing primary residence, except that the maximum shall not be less than six
hundred (600) square feet, or more than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.
(b) Attached ADU: The increased floor area of an ADU attached to an existing primary residence
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the existing living area, except that the maximum shall
not be less than six hundred (600) square feet, or more than one thousand two hundred
(1,200) square feet.
7. Passageway: No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an ADU.
8. Building Coverage: ADU units shall count towards the total building coverage for the parcel and
the entire building coverage of all buildings may not exceed the permitted building coverage
established by the Single-Family Zoning District in which the parcel is located.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 566/710
9. Height: The maximum permitted height of an ADU is the same as the maximum permitted height
for the residential zoning district in which the parcel is located.
10. Parking: One off-street parking space is required, except as provided in subsection (D)11,
"Parking Exceptions", of this section, in addition to the required parking for the main dwelling unit,
that may be provided in the following configurations and areas in addition to the areas allowed for
the main dwelling:
(a) In tandem, meaning one car located directly behind another car, including a single-car
driveway leading to two (2) required parking spaces for the main dwelling; or
(b) Within required interior side yards.
11. Parking Exceptions: The off-street parking requirement of subsection (D)10, "Parking", of this
section, does not apply to the following ADUs:
(a) ADUs located within one-half (1/2) mile of public transit as determined by the Director.
(b) ADUs located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.
(c) Existing ADUs that were permitted without additional parking.
(d) When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU.
(e) When a car share vehicle is located within one block of the accessory dwelling unit as
determined by the Director.
12. Consistency: All accessory dwelling units shall comply with all applicable development
regulations for the zoning district in which the parcel is located and Building Code requirements
set forth in title 4, "Construction Regulations", of this Code unless otherwise specifically provided
for in this section.
13. Aesthetics: The accessory dwelling unit shall be similar or compatible in character to the primary
residence on the site and to the surrounding residences in terms of roof pitch, eaves, building
materials, colors and landscaping.
For residential zoned properties listed on the California Register of Historic Places, Placerville
Historic Resource Inventory, or in an adopted historic district, any exterior changes that can be
visible from the public street to the architecture of existing buildings to create an accessory
dwelling shall meet the historical criteria requirements of subsection 10-4-10(B), "Historical
Criteria", of this chapter and shall comply with the requirements of sections 10-4-9 and 10-4-10 of
this chapter.
14. Tenancy: Either the main dwelling or the ADU shall be occupied by the property owner when
both units are occupied as dwelling units.
(E) Conversion Of Accessory Buildings:
1. An accessory building may be eligible to convert into an ADU, subject to meeting criteria as
outlined in subsection (E)2 of this section and approval through the process outlined in
subsection (F) of this section. No additional off-street parking shall be required to convert an
accessory building into an ADU.
2. The following criteria must be met in order to be eligible for the conversion of an accessory
building:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 567/710
(a) Other supporting documentation to show the building was legally built may be substituted for a
building permit subject to review by the Director.
(b) The accessory building must be upgraded to meet the Building Code requirements based on
the change of occupancy at the time of the conversion.
(c) The accessory building must meet all of the development regulations of subsection (D) of this
section, with the exception that no setback shall be required if the conversion is of an existing
garage, and a setback of no more than five feet (5') from the side and rear parcel lines shall be
required for an ADU that is constructed above an existing garage.
3. All or any portion of an accessory building that meets the eligibility criteria as provided in this
section may be demolished and reconstructed to meet the Building Code requirements based on
the change of occupancy at the time of conversion. The accessory dwelling unit that replaces the
accessory building may retain the setbacks and the footprint of the legally constructed accessory
building. The existing setbacks and footprint of the accessory building must be evidenced by valid
building permits or other supporting documentation subject to review by the Director. Nothing in
this section shall be deemed to authorize the expansion of the footprint or reduction of the
setbacks beyond that evidenced by a valid building permit or other supporting documentation
subject to review by the Director or to allow the continuation of any other nonconformity.
(F) Application And Processing Requirements:
1. Submittal: The application for an accessory dwelling unit permit shall be submitted to the
Development Services Department concurrent with an application and submittal requirements for
a building permit. In addition to the standard submittal requirements for a building permit, an
application for an accessory dwelling unit permit shall include all of the following (except as noted
below):
(a) Site Plan: A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the dimensions of the perimeter of the parcel
proposed for the accessory dwelling unit; the location and dimensioned setbacks of all existing
and proposed structures on the site; all easements, building envelopes, and special
requirements of the subdivision as shown on the Final Map and improvement plans, if any; and
average slope calculations for the site.
(b) Floor Plan: A floor plan, drawn to scale, that shows the dimensions of each room, and the
resulting floor area. The use of each room shall be identified, and the size and location of all
windows and doors shall be clearly shown.
(c) Elevations: Architectural elevations of the proposed structure showing all openings, exterior
finishes, original and finish grades, stepped footing outline, and roof pitch.
(d) Materials And Color Board: A materials and color board for the existing residence and the
proposed second dwelling unit.
(e) Photographs: Color photographs of the site and adjacent properties, taken from each property
line of the site, to show the project site and adjacent sites. Label each photograph and
reference to a separate site plan indicating the location and direction of each photograph.
(f) Exceptions: Applications for accessory dwelling units which do not modify a building's exterior
are not required to submit the items described in subsection (F)1(c), (F)1(d), or (F)1(e) of this
section.
(g) Fee: A fee set by the City Council for an ADU shall accompany the application.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 568/710
(h) Historic Resources: For residential properties described in subsection (D)13 of this section
involving residential historic resources, an ADU request shall also comply with the application
and submittal requirements under sections 10-4-9, "Site Plan Review", and 10-4-10, "Historical
Buildings In The City", of this chapter.
2. Application Review And Decision:
(a) Non-Historic Residential Resources: The Director, or the duly appointed representative, shall
act on an application for an ADU permit within one hundred twenty (120) days of submittal of a
complete application for residential properties not described in subsection (D)13 of this section
involving historic residential resources. The ADU permit shall be issued only if the proposed
ADU complies with all development and use regulations in this section.
(b) Historic Residential Resources: The Planning Commission shall act on an application for an
ADU for residential properties described in subsection (D)13 of this section. The Planning
Commission shall consider all development and use regulations in this section, and the
historical criteria requirements of subsection 10-4-10(B), "Historical Criteria", of this chapter
when making its decision.
3. Utility Connection Fees:
(a) Except as provided in subsection (F)3(b) of this section, a separate new utility connection and
payment of a connection fee or capacity charge pursuant to State law and City fee schedule
will be required for any new ADU, payable at time of building permit issuance.
(b) No new or separate utility connection or related connection fee or capacity charge will be
required for ADUs that are internal conversions of existing space within a single family
residence or an accessory structure.
4. Covenant And Agreement: A covenant and agreement shall be executed by the property owner,
it shall be recorded, and shall contain the following:
(a) A statement that the property owner shall be an owner-occupant and shall reside either in the
primary residential dwelling or the ADU.
(b) The ADU shall not be sold separately from the primary residential dwelling.
(c) The ADU permit shall run with the land and the ADU permit is binding and enforceable on
future property owners. (Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
10-4-13: ATTACHED SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLINGS:
(A) Maintenance Agreement Required For Various Forms Of Attached Single-Family Dwellings: The
applicant shall submit a copy of a maintenance agreement covering the eleven (11) items listed
below. A maintenance agreement must be recorded prior to receiving the certificate of occupancy
for any unit. Applicants should contact the lending institution of their choice to review the
maintenance agreement proposed to be recorded. The items that must be mentioned in the
maintenance agreement are as follows:
1. Purpose of the agreement. Included in this area should be comments with reference to the
protection of the value and desirability of the property. The conditions, covenants and restrictions
of the agreement shall stay with the real property and will run with the land in perpetuity.
Therefore, the agreement must be recorded.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 569/710
2. The legal description of the property.
3. The maintenance agreement must define the scope of the maintenance; what is to be
maintained; i.e., roof, foundation, walkways, parking areas, etc.
4. A provision must be included for insurance coverage with reference to the common area and the
common improvements. The insured amount must be sufficient to cover the replacement value of
the common area improvements and the common improvements.
5. Allocation of costs per unit (monthly, semiannual or annual homeowners' dues).
6. Define method for notification of levying assessments and liens.
7. Lien foreclosure plan.
8. Mortgage protection clause.
9. A stipulation that no alterations to the exterior of the building can be made without approval of all
owners.
10. No accumulation of garbage, rubbish or offensive material shall be permitted.
11. Define how a dispute will be settled in the event of a disagreement by the owners with reference
to assessments, maintenance, etc.
(B) Separate Utility Hookups Required: Separate utility hookups are required for all attached singlefamily
units. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-4-14: SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to control the installation of satellite dish antennas. It is
recognized that the unrestricted use of these installations will be contrary to the City's efforts to
stabilize economic and social aspects of neighborhood environments and the City's efforts to
promote safety and aesthetic considerations, family environments and a basic residential character
within the City. It is the intent of this chapter to permit antennas where they can be installed without
creating an adverse economic, safety and aesthetic impact on neighboring property owners and the
overall community.
(B) General: The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to satellite dish antennas as defined by
section 10-1-4 of this title. Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted uses in any zone in the City
provided such installations meet the requirements set forth herein. If such installation cannot meet
the requirements set forth herein, then such installations shall be processed as a variance as
provided in sections 10-3-5 and 10-3-6 of this title.
(C) Development Standards: The following development standards shall apply to all satellite dish
antennas:
1. Setbacks: Satellite dish antennas shall not be located within any required front, side or rear yard
setback.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 570/710
2. Height: The maximum height of any satellite dish antenna shall be thirteen feet (13'). Satellite
dish antennas that are roof mounted, or those which exceed thirteen feet (13') in height above
natural grade, shall be processed as a variance as described herein.
(D) Screening:
1. A solid fence or wall (wood, brick masonry, or slatted chainlink or some combination thereof) shall
be installed around all sides visible from the public right of way when a satellite dish is so located
as to be visible from the public right of way, or
2. Landscaping screening and/or trees of sufficient growth to screen the majority of the satellite dish
antenna from the public view when the satellite dish is visible from the public right of way.
(E) Application: An application for a satellite dish antenna installation shall be filed with the building
division and shall include the following:
1. Location map drawn to scale showing the location of antenna, height of antenna as measured
from the natural grade, and setback distances.
2. Site plans showing the location of existing trees and other natural features, buildings on the site,
the location and design of proposed landscaping and screening materials or varieties of plants
and other landscape features including fences.
3. Additional information, plans, and drawings as deemed necessary by the building or planning
division to assist in the evaluation of the design adequacy and a building permit application fee
established and amended by resolution of the city council.
(F) Satellite Dish Antenna Installations Within A Historic District: All installations of satellite dish
antennas within a historic district shall meet the requirements described herein for any installation
within a historic district. Such application shall also be subject to review and recommendation by the
historic advisory committee.
(G) Nonconforming Satellite Dish Antennas: Nonconforming satellite dish antennas erected prior to the
effective date of this amendment shall be brought into compliance with all development standards of
the applicable zoning district regulations as described herein, no later than five (5) years after the
said effective date.
(H) Severability: If any section, subsection, phrase or clause of this chapter is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and each section,
subsection, phrase or clause thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections,
phrases or clauses be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-4-15: MOBILEHOME PARKS:
(A) General Provisions: This section shall be known as the MOBILEHOME PARK ORDINANCE OF
THE CITY OF PLACERVILLE.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 571/710
(B) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to comply with section 65852.7 of Government Code that
requires all cities and counties within California to deem a mobilehome park, as defined in section
18214 of the Health And Safety Code, a permitted land use on all land planned and zoned for
residential land use as designated by the city's general plan; provided, however, that a city, county,
or a city and county may require a use permit. This section also furthers the legislature's intent to
eliminate the distinctions between mobilehome park developments and conventional forms of
residential land use. Furthermore, the purpose of this section is to allow for the establishment of
mobilehome parks within the residential zones of the city upon review and approval of a conditional
use permit by the Placerville planning commission.
(C) Enforcement:
1. The city of Placerville's mobilehome park regulations are intended to complement and be
subordinate to state law. The state law governing mobilehome parks is entitled the "mobilehome
parks act" and may be found in division 13, parts 2.1 and 2.3 of the California Health And Safety
Code.
Mobilehome park regulations are contained in the California Code Of Regulations, title 25,
division 1, chapters 2 and 2.2. The city of Placerville does not assume responsibility for the
enforcement of the regulations contained therein and all mobilehome parks within the city remain
subject to the jurisdiction of the California housing and community development department in its
role as the enforcement agency for the above described state laws.
2. Mobilehomes located within areas of special flood hazard are required to be in compliance with
title 4, chapter 9, "Flood Damage Protection", of this code.
(D) Definitions:
LOT: As defined by section 18210 of the Health And Safety Code, means any area or tract of land
or portion of a mobilehome park designated or used for the occupancy of one manufactured home,
mobilehome, or recreational vehicle.
MOBILEHOME: A mobilehome, as defined in section 18008 of the Health And Safety Code, or a
manufactured home, as defined in section 18007 of the Health And Safety Code, a structure that
was constructed prior to June 15, 1976, is transportable in one or more sections, is eight (8) body
feet or more in width, or forty (40) body feet or more in length, in the traveling mode, or, when
erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, is built on a permanent chassis
and designed to be used as a single-family dwelling with or without a foundation system when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and
electrical systems contained therein.
"Mobilehome" does not mean:
1. A recreational vehicle, as defined in section 799.29 of the Civil Code and section 18010 of the
Health And Safety Code;
2. A commercial coach; or
3. Factory built housing, as defined in section 19971 of the Health And Safety Code.
MOBILEHOME PARK: As defined in section 18214 of the Health And Safety Code, means an area
of land where two (2) or more lots are rented or leased, held out for rent or lease, or were formerly
held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 572/710
form of resident ownership, to accommodate manufactured homes or mobilehomes. (Ord. 1649, 7-
10-2012)
(E) Mobilehome Park Conditional Use Permit Submittal Requirements:
1. An application for conditional use permit approval for the mobilehome park shall be filed with the
development services department. (Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
2. The application for the use permit shall include, in addition to the requirements of sections 10-3-3
and 10-3-6 of this title, the following:
(a) A site location map indicating the location of the proposed park in relation to the surrounding
area or region.
(b) A site plan indicating the following:
(1) Park name, date, north point, scale, boundaries and area (square feet and acres) of the
site.
(2) The number of proposed mobilehome spaces.
(3) Names and addresses of record owner, engineer or surveyor.
(4) Location, names, and present width and grades of adjacent or abutting streets.
(5) Contour lines shall have the following intervals:
A. One foot (1') contour intervals for ground slope between zero percent (0%) and five
percent (5%);
B. Two foot (2') contour intervals for ground slope between five percent (5%) and ten percent
(10%);
C. Five foot (5') contour intervals for ground slope greater than ten percent (10%).
(6) Existing topography, including trees, rock formations and other unusual features of the site,
and at least one hundred feet (100') beyond its boundaries.
(7) Proposed changes to topography involving grading cut and fill quantities.
(8) Location of all mobilehome spaces; radii of all curves and central angles.
(9) Location of all existing structures identified by type and indicating which are proposed to be
removed and which will remain.
(10) Approximate width and location of all existing easements.
(11) Location of existing overhead utility lines and poles on site and on peripheral streets.
(12) Approximate location of all areas subject to inundation of stormwater overflow, and
location, width, and direction of flow of all watercourses.
(13) Individual trees with a diameter of more than seven and one-half inches (71/2"), measured
twenty four inches (24") above existing grade, shall be identified by type, circumference, and
dripline. Any trees proposed for removal shall also be indicated.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 573/710
(14) Screening detail of mobilehome park along full length of its street frontage at street side
setback lines.
(15) Landscape plan for mobilehome park street frontage.
(16) Sign plan for mobilehome park identification sign.
(17) Utility plan (electric, water and sanitary sewer).
(18) Vehicular access to the mobilehome park from the public street.
(F) Standards:
1. Development:
(a) Minimum Mobilehome Park Area: Five (5) acres.
(b) Density: Residential density of a mobilehome park shall not exceed the allowable density of
the underlying residential zone, except as permitted under the city's density bonus ordinance
for approved residential development projects incorporating a density bonus, and state law.
(c) Screening Wall: Along the mobilehome park's public street frontages, a minimum six foot (6')
in height screening wall or fence shall be provided and maintained, subject to planning
commission approval.
(d) Landscaping: The setback back area along the mobilehome park's public street frontages
shall be landscaped with street trees and other plant materials, and equipped with an automatic
irrigation system, subject to planning commission approval.
(e) Landscape Maintenance: All vegetation and landscaping subject to the conditional use permit
approved by the planning commission shall be maintained free of physical damage or injury
from lack of water, excess chemical fertilizer or other toxic chemicals, blight, or disease, and
such vegetation of those that show signs of such damage or injury at any time shall be
replaced by the same. A landscaping maintenance agreement between the applicant and the
city shall be required to ensure the ongoing maintenance of landscaping.
(f) Identification Signs: Mobilehome park identification signs shall be consistent with subsection
10-4-17(G)7, "Residential Signs", of this chapter.
(g) Grading And Drainage: Grading and drainage facilities shall conform to title 8, chapter 7,
"Grading, Erosion And Sediment Control", of this code and the current edition of the "El Dorado
County Drainage Manual".
(h) Traffic Impact Analysis: A traffic impact analysis shall be required if the park consists of forty
(40) or more units.
2. Access Standards:
(a) Access: Primarily, access to the mobilehome park must be from a city or county road or a
private road built and maintained to applicable city of Placerville standards.
(b) Sight Distances: The minimum sight distance shall be ten (10) times the posted speed limit on
the existing road. Sight distances shall be measured from the driver's seat of a vehicle that is
ten feet (10') behind the curb or edge of shoulder line with the height of the eye three and onehalf
feet (31/2') above the pavement to an object two feet (2') high. Where necessary, the park
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 574/710
land bordering the intersection shall be cleared of all growth and sight obstructions to achieve
the required visibility.
(c) Centerline Of A Street: The centerline of any street within a park intersecting an existing public
street shall be at least one hundred twenty five feet (125') from the centerline of any other
street intersecting that public street.
(d) ADA Accessible Path: An ADA accessible path of travel shall be provided from the
mobilehome park to the public right of way.
(e) Guest Parking: In addition to occupant parking, off street guest and service parking shall be
provided within the boundaries of the park at a ratio of one space for each four (4) mobilehome
lots. (Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012)
10-4-16: EXTERIOR LIGHTING REGULATIONS:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to regulate lighting to balance the safety and security needs
for lighting with the city's desire to preserve the nighttime skyscape and to ensure that light trespass
and glare have a negligible impact on surrounding property, especially residential. It is not the intent
of this section to require exterior lighting of an entire site or property, but rather to only provide
lighting standards and criteria in areas where exterior lighting is necessary to provide for the health
and safety of the community.
(B) Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them in this subsection:
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination produced on a surface, all points of which are one foot (1')
from a uniform point of one candle.
FULL SHIELDING: A technique or method of construction which causes all light emitted from an
outdoor light fixture to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through the lowest
point on the fixtures from which light is emitted.
GLARE: A light emitting from a luminaire with an intensity great enough to reduce a viewer's ability
to see and, in extreme cases, causing momentary blindness.
HIGH INTENSITY DISCHARGE (HID) LAMP: An exterior lighting type which produces light by
passing an electrical current through a gas. HID lamps include mercury vapor, high pressure
sodium (HPS), low pressure sodium (LPS), and metal halide.
LIGHT POLLUTION: An artificial light which causes a detrimental effect on the environment,
astronomical research or enjoyment of the night sky or causes undesirable glare or unnecessary
illumination of adjacent property.
LIGHT TRESPASS: The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the
property on which it is located.
LUMINAIRE: A complete lighting unit consisting of a light source and all necessary mechanical,
electrical, decorative, and support parts.
SHIELDING: A technique or method of construction which causes light emitted from an outdoor light
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 575/710
fixture to be projected below an imaginary horizontal plane passing through fixtures. (Ord. 1582, 1-
22-2002)
(C) Site Plan Review Required: Unless otherwise exempt by this section, all outdoor light fixtures for
new multi-family residential and nonresidential development shall be subject to review and approval
in conjunction with any land use and development permits for a project. Any retrofit or amendment
to an existing multi-family residential or nonresidential site and/or building with a value greater than
twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or twenty five percent (25%) of its assessed value as
shown on the most recent tax rolls, whichever is less and whose exterior lighting is deemed by the
development services director to have a measurable impact on abutting property or views from
street rights of way shall require planning commission approval and may be subject to the criteria
set forth herein. (Ord. 1582, 1-22-2002; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(D) Exemptions: The following types of outdoor lighting fixtures are exempt from the requirements of
this section as specified below and are subject to compliance with all other provisions of this title:
1. All outdoor light fixtures existing and legally installed prior to the effective date hereof are exempt
from the provisions of this section, provided, however, that no replacement, structural alterations,
or restoration of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the
provisions of this section. However, exemptions shall be granted to this conformance standard if:
(a) Utilization of conforming outdoor light fixtures would have the effect of decreasing the lighting
levels to below the minimum illumination levels required by this section, and the additional cost
necessary to meet the minimum illumination levels would pose an unreasonable financial
burden; and/or
(b) Utilization of conforming outdoor light fixtures would negatively impact the aesthetic
quality/architectural design of the property or immediate area by mixing substantially different
styles and types of fixtures/poles.
2. All outdoor light fixtures producing light directly by the combustion of fossil fuels, such as
kerosene lanterns or gas lamps.
3. Temporary lights used for holiday decorations.
4. Construction or emergency lighting, provided such lighting is temporary and is discontinued
immediately upon completion of construction work or abatement of said emergency.
5. Lighting of temporary uses and special events permitted consistent with the provisions of this
title.
6. Low wattage, noncommercial incandescent, or fluorescent luminaries typically considered "porch
lights" in association with multi-family residential uses.
(E) Outdoor Lighting Standards:
1. Shielding Required: Except as otherwise exempt, all outdoor lighting fixtures for new multi-family
residential and nonresidential development shall be constructed with full shielding. Where the
light source from an outdoor light fixture of a nonresidential development is visible beyond the
property line, shielding shall be required to reduce glare so that neither the light source nor its
image from the reflective surface shall be directly visible from any point five feet (5') or more
beyond the property line.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 576/710
In single-family residential zoning districts, outdoor lighting shall be located and/or shielded in a
manner to ensure that the intensity and direction of lighting does not constitute a nuisance to
abutting residential dwellings or abutting street rights of way.
2. Minimum/Maximum Level Of Illumination: The minimum and maximum levels of illumination
permitted are listed below. A photometric study listing the number, type, height, and level of
illumination of all outdoor lighting fixtures shall be required in conjunction with the development
permit application and prior to issuance of a building permit or site improvement plans to ensure
compliance with these provisions.
(a) Minimum lighting for sidewalks, walkways, parking areas, and other similar areas shall not
average less than 0.5 foot-candle, measured at ground level.
(b) The maximum level of illumination on any lighted area shall not exceed an average greater
than ten (10) foot-candles, measured at ground level.
(c) In order to prevent severe contrasts in illumination levels in parking areas, the ratio of the
average level of illumination to the minimum level of illumination shall not exceed four to one
(4:1).
(d) In order to minimize light trespass on abutting property, illumination measured on the property
line of a subject parcel shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candle, measured on a vertical plane at six
feet (6') in height along the property line.
3. Maximum Height Of Outdoor Light Fixtures: The maximum height of freestanding outdoor light
fixtures for new multi-family residential development and nonresidential development abutting a
single-family residential zoning district or use shall be twenty feet (20'). The maximum height for
freestanding outdoor light fixtures in nonresidential zones shall be twenty five feet (25').
4. Type Of Illumination: All new outdoor lighting fixtures shall be energy efficient. Energy efficient
lights include all high intensity discharge (HID) lamps (high pressure sodium, low pressure
sodium, and metal halide).
Outdoor light fixtures used to illuminate flags, statues, or any other objects mounted on a pole,
pedestal, or platform shall use a very narrow cone of light for the purpose of confining the light to
the object of interest and minimize light trespass and glare.
5. Hours Of Illumination: Automatic timing devices shall be required for all new outdoor light fixtures
on multi-family residential and nonresidential development with off hours (exterior lights turned
off) between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. Exceptions are that outdoor
lights may remain on in conjunction with the hours of operation of the corresponding use, for
security purposes, or to illuminate walkways, roadways, equipment yards, and parking lots.
(F) Lighting Prohibited: The following outdoor light fixtures shall be prohibited as specified below.
Existing light fixtures legally permitted or authorized prior to adoption hereof may be maintained.
1. Uplighting/backlit canopies unless otherwise approved by the planning commission in conjunction
with a site plan review.
2. Neon tubing or band lighting along building structures as articulation, unless otherwise approved
by the planning commission in conjunction with a site plan review.
3. Flashing lights.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 577/710
4. Illumination of entire building. Building illumination shall be limited to security lighting and lighting
of architectural features authorized by the planning commission in conjunction with the required
development permit(s).
5. Any light that imitates or causes visual interference with a traffic signal or other necessary safety
or emergency light.
6. Mercury vapor lights.
(G) Variances: Variances from the provisions of this section shall be processed in accordance with the
criteria and procedures specified in sections 10-3-5 and 10-3-6 of this title.
(H) Severability: If any provision of this section is invalid, all valid parts that are severable from the
invalid part remain in effect. If a part of this section is invalid in one or more applications, the part
remains in effect in all valid applications that are severable from the invalid applications. (Ord. 1582,
1-22-2002)
10-4-17: SIGN REGULATIONS:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, health,
property, and the public welfare in keeping with the unique aesthetic and historic character of the
city of Placerville by regulating and controlling the size, height, design, quality of materials,
construction, location, electrification, and maintenance of all permanent and temporary exterior
signs and sign structures and to accomplish the following results:
1. To promote and maintain healthy commercial centers and property values for effective
communication as to the nature of goods and services available and the avoidance of wasteful
and unsightly competition in signs;
2. To protect and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods, open views and vistas and
property values by prohibiting incompatible or unsafe signs;
3. To encourage signs which are well designed and pleasing in appearance and to provide latitude
for variety, design, spacing and location and to provide a reasonable and comprehensive system
for the control of signs consistent with the goals and policies of the city general plan;
4. To attract and direct persons to various activities and enterprises in order to provide for the
maximum public convenience;
5. To enhance the economic value of the entire community through the regulation of the size,
location, design and illumination of all signs;
6. To preserve and enhance the historic and scenic character of the city and of the state designated
scenic highway corridors.
(B) Definitions:
A-BOARD: A temporary portable sign capable of standing without support or attachment. An Aboard
sign includes an A-frame sign.
ABANDONED BUSINESS: One that has not operated on a regular and active basis for a period of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 578/710
one hundred eighty (180) days or more, during which the business advertised has not carried on
those activities which are necessary and incidental to the operation of a business of like type or
character.
ACCESSORY SIGN: A sign that identifies the business or organization located on the premises or
advertises or informs about business, products, or services sold or rendered on the premises.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE: Any structure or device erected for the purpose of supporting any
sign or other advertising or informational media in the framework of the sign.
ALTERATION: Any change in the size, shape, method of illumination, copy, construction, or
supporting structure of the sign.
ANIMATED SIGN: Any sign that uses movement or a change of lighting to depict action or create a
special effect or scene.
AWNING SIGN: A sign painted upon or affixed to an awning. For the purposes of this section, an
awning sign shall be considered a wall sign.
BANNER: Any sign of lightweight fabric, plastic or similar material that is mounted to a pole or
building and generally temporary in nature. National flags, state or municipal flags shall not be
considered banners.
BILLBOARD: A sign that advertises a business commodity or activity which is sold, offered or
conducted other than on the premises where such sign is located.
BUILDING FACE OR WALL: All window and wall area of the building in one plane or elevation.
BUSINESS FRONTAGE: The lineal front footage of a building or portion thereof devoted to a
specific business or enterprise, and having an entrance/exit open to the general public.
CANOPY SIGN: Any sign that is a part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic
or structural protective cover over a door entrance, window, or outdoor service area. For the
purposes of this section, a canopy sign shall be considered a wall sign.
COMMERCIAL CENTER: A site with three (3) or more nonresidential occupants, businesses, or
uses or a site occupying more than one acre in area.
COMMUNITY WIDE SPECIAL EVENT: A temporary commercial or noncommercial activity for the
sale and/or promotion of goods, services or entertainment activities. A communitywide special event
is one that benefits, promotes, entertains or educates the community as a whole in contrast to one
or several individual interests.
CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A sign with information of those individuals or businesses directly
associated with a construction project on the premises.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign utilized only for the purposes of indicating the location or direction of
any object, place or area.
DIRECTORY SIGN: A sign displaying the name of each occupant of a building who is engaged in a
business, profession, or occupation, provided such sign does not exceed two (2) square feet.
DISPLAY AREA: See definition of Sign Area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 579/710
ENTITY: A business, person or persons, owner or lessee or their heirs, executors, administrators, or
assigns for whom a sign is proposed. Each business is considered a separate entity.
FLASHING SIGN: A sign incorporating intermittent electrical impulses to a source of illumination or
revolving in a manner which creates the illusion of flashing or which changes color or intensity of
illumination. This definition does not include electronic time, date and temperature signs.
GRADE (ADJACENT GROUND ELEVATION): The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface
of the ground at the base of the sign or the lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the
ground between the base of the sign and the property line if there is less than five feet (5') distance
from said sign.
GROUND SIGN: A permanent sign which is supported upon one or more uprights or braces on the
ground and not attached to any building, with an overall total height that does not exceed ten feet
(10') above grade.
HEIGHT OF SIGN: The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the sign.
ILLEGAL ON PREMISES SIGN: This term means any of the following:
1. Any on premises sign erected without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect
at the time of its construction and erection or use;
2. Any on premises sign that was legally erected, but whose use has ceased, in that the business
identified or advertised has been abandoned;
3. Any on premises sign which is a danger to the public, creates or causes a nuisance or is unsafe.
ILLUMINATION, EXTERNAL: A source of illumination directed toward a sign so that the light falls
upon the exterior surface of the sign.
ILLUMINATION, INTERNAL: A source of illumination on the surface of a sign from within a sign. A
neon sign shall be considered an internally illuminated sign.
INCIDENTAL SIGN: A sign intended primarily for the convenience and direction of the public on the
premises which does not advertise but is informational only and does not contain any commercial
messages. Incidental signs include those which denote hours of operation, entrances and exits, no
parking, loading only, telephone, and other signs required by law.
MARQUEE: A permanent roof structure attached to and supported by the building and projecting
outward from the building or over a public right of way.
MARQUEE SIGN: A sign attached to a marquee. For the purposes of this section, a marquee sign
shall be considered a wall sign.
MASTER SIGN PLAN: A sign plan for a "commercial center" defined herein. Master sign plan also
includes any sign plans or sign packages previously reviewed and approved by the planning
commission.
MONUMENT SIGN: See definition of Ground Sign.
NONCONFORMING SIGN: An existing sign lawful at the time of enactment hereof which does not
conform to the requirements of this section. Any sign or signs upon property for which the business
has ceased for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days or more.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 580/710
PENNANT: Any lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material, whether or not containing a message of
any kind, suspended from a rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
POLE SIGN: A sign erected on one or more uprights supported from the ground the height of which
is greater than ten feet (10') and which is not a part of any building or structure other than a
structure erected solely for the purpose of supporting a sign.
POLITICAL SIGN: Any temporary sign which supports the candidacy or a candidate for public office
or urges action on any other matter on a ballot of primary, general or special election.
PROJECTING SIGN: Signs other than wall signs which are attached to and project from a structure
or building face usually perpendicular to the building face.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign indicating that the premises upon which the sign is located or any
portion thereof is for sale, lease or rent.
ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof or a building supported
by the roof structure.
SETBACK: The distance from the front property line to the nearest part of the applicable building,
structure or sign measured perpendicularly to the property line.
SIGN: Any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses any color, form, graphic, illumination,
symbol, or writing to advertise, announce the purpose of or identify the purpose of a person or entity
or to communicate information of any kind to the public.
SIGN AREA: The area of a sign face or sum of sign faces computed by means of the smallest
square, circle, rectangle, triangle or combination thereof that encompasses the extreme limits of the
writing, representation, emblem, canister or display together with any material or color forming an
integral part of the background of the display, but not including architectural features, bracing,
framework or pole structure.
SPECIAL EVENT: A temporary commercial activity for the sale, promotion or marketing of goods or
services. A special event shall not exceed twenty one (21) consecutive days nor occur more than
twice per calendar year per business, entity or occupancy.
STREET FRONTAGE: The street that a structure upon property fronts or abuts.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign which is temporary in nature and is not permanently affixed to an
object or structure. Temporary signs include: flags (not including flags of nations or states); banners;
searchlights; sandwich boards; A-boards; sidewalk signs; curb signs; captive balloons, and other
air, windblown or inflatable devices.
WALL SIGN: Any sign attached parallel to but within six inches (6") of a wall, painted on a wall
surface of or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure
which is supported by such wall or building.
WIND SIGN OR DEVICE: Any sign or device in the nature of banners, flags, balloons, or other
objects fastened in such a manner as to move upon being subject to pressures by wind or breeze.
WINDOW SIGN: Any sign, picture, symbol or combination thereof designed to communicate
information about an activity, business commodity, event, sale, or service that is placed inside a
window or upon the window panes or glass and is visible from the exterior of a window.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 581/710
(C) Exempt Signs: The following signs are exempt from this section provided that such exempt signs
are not placed, constructed, or located in any manner to cause hazard or nuisance to persons or
property:
1. Signs placed or authorized by an official of the city of Placerville in the performance of public
duty;
2. Memorial tablets, cornerstones or similar plaques;
3. Flags of national, state or local governments;
4. Temporary political signs not exceeding sixteen (16) square feet in area in commercial districts
nor more than eight (8) square feet in residential districts provided the signs are erected no more
than sixty (60) days prior to, and removed within fifteen (15) working days following the election
for which they were intended. Political signs are not permitted on public property, rights of way,
nor attached to trees or natural features;
5. Nameplates indicating the name, address and profession of the occupant not exceeding two (2)
square feet in area;
6. Small incidental signs displayed strictly for direction, safety or convenience of the public including
signs that identify restrooms, public telephones, parking area entrances and exits, freight
entrances provided said signs do not exceed more than four (4) in number on any parcel or two
(2) per street frontage whichever is greater; (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002)
7. One temporary on premises nonilluminated real estate or construction sign not exceeding four (4)
square feet in residential districts or sixteen (16) square feet in commercial and industrial districts
provided said sign is removed within fifteen (15) days from the sale, lease or rental of the property
or upon the completion of the project. Subdivisions of five (5) or more parcels may have one on
site sign not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet in area displaying information about the
subdivision for a period not to exceed two (2) years. In the event that the subdivision is
constructed in phases or if unsold lots remain beyond two (2) years, the development services
director may grant reasonable time extensions for the real estate sign; (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002;
amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
8. Signs painted or placed upon windows in conjunction with nonresidential use, provided that no
more than twenty five percent (25%) of the window area is covered;
9. Temporary off premises, directional, open house, or real estate signs provided such signs do not
exceed four (4) square feet in area, are located upon private property, and are temporarily
erected during the actual function for which the sign is used;
10. One temporary on site nonilluminated sign not exceeding thirty two (32) square feet in area to
promote charitable fundraising events for nonprofit and charitable organizations. No more than
two (2) such events may be promoted in this manner per parcel per calendar year;
11. Murals (pictures, paintings or similar graphics applied directly to a wall) provided that no mural
or portion thereof identifies a business, entity, occupancy or premises;
12. Seasonal decorations placed no earlier than fifty five (55) days before and removed no later
than twenty one (21) days after the seasonal event, provided that no seasonal decoration or
portion thereof identifies a business entity, occupancy or premises;
13. A sign in conjunction with a grand opening or closing provided that such sign shall not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet, or be displayed for a period in excess of thirty (30) days. The sign shall
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 582/710
not be placed upon any roof or extend above any roofline or parapet and must be attached or
affixed to a solid wall;
14. Balloons under eighteen inches (18") in diameter on private property provided that the tether or
anchor of said balloons does not exceed ten feet (10') in length nor interfere with pedestrians,
public or private utilities, nor attached to trees or other natural feature.
(D) Prohibited Signs; Exception: The following signs shall be prohibited except as may be permitted
herein:
1. Flashing signs;
2. Signs that have or consist of any moving, rotating or otherwise animated part, except such sign
that gives public service information such as time, date, temperature and weather;
3. A-board signs, sandwich board, sidewalk menu signs, or any other freestanding temporary sign;
4. Dilapidated, abandoned signs or dangerous to health and safety;
5. Signs or other advertising devices affixed to a fence, utility pole or structure, rock or other natural
feature;
6. Mobile signs or signs attached to a motor vehicle or trailer which is parked with the intent to
advertise to the traveling public;
7. Pennants and banners;
8. Balloons over eighteen inches (18") in diameter;
9. Commercial billboards or other commercial off premises advertising signs;
10. Wind signs, inflatable signs or devices, or captive balloons;
11. A public address system or sound device used in conjunction with any sign or advertising;
12. A sign of either internal or external illumination which when lighted causes a dangerous effect
on motorists or pedestrians or causes a nuisance to adjacent properties;
13. Roof signs;
14. Internally illuminated canopies or fascias unless otherwise approved by the planning
commission. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002)
(E) Special Event Signage: Temporary signs in conjunction with a "special event" or "community wide
special event", as defined herein, shall be subject to review and approval by the development
services director. Said request shall be made on an application filed with the development services
department and shall be accompanied by an application fee set forth by resolution of the city
council.
(F) Sign Permits:
1. Sign Permit Required: No sign regulated by this section shall be erected or displayed unless a
sign permit has been issued by the development services department. Signs exempt from the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 583/710
provisions of this section shall not require a sign permit. Permits shall not be required for minor
maintenance and repair to existing signs or for changes in sign copy for conforming signs.
2. Required Information For A Sign Permit: For the purposes of review by the development services
department, a drawing to scale shall be submitted which indicates fully the material, color, texture,
dimensions, shape, relation and attachment to the building and/or other structures, structural
elements of the proposed sign, and the size and dimensions of any other signs located upon the
building or property. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
3. Application Fees: The sign permit application must be accompanied by an application fee. Such
fee shall be set by resolution of the city council, no part of which is refundable.
(G) Regulations For On Premises Signs: On premises signs shall comply with requirements and criteria
set forth herein. Signs for commercial centers defined herein shall comply with subsection (H) of
this section.
1. General Regulations:
(a) Number Of Signs: Unless otherwise authorized herein, each separate entity or occupancy
shall be permitted to have two (2) signs which shall be limited to not more than one pole, one
projecting, or one ground sign. Such signs shall comply with the specific requirements for each
type of sign set forth herein.
(b) Aggregate Area Of Signs: Unless otherwise authorized herein, the aggregate area of on
premises signage shall not exceed two (2) square feet of sign area for each one lineal foot of
business frontage for each business, entity, or occupancy, unless authorized by the planning
commission, under the provisions of the master sign plan or conditional use permit referenced
herein.
2. Pole Signs; Regulations And Transferability:
(a) Pole signs permitted herein must be approved by the planning commission in accordance with
section 10-3-6, "Conditional Use Permit And Variance Procedure", of this title and shall be
subject to the following criteria:
(1) Pole signs approved after the effective date hereof are not transferable unless the purpose
and use for which the pole sign was approved remains for uses or sites that cater to the
highway traveling public.
(2) Pole signs permitted herein must be set back from the front property line one foot (1') for
each foot of sign height, unless otherwise approved by the planning commission.
(3) Pole signs shall only be permitted for uses or sites that cater to the highway traveling public
in nonresidential zones.
(4) Pole signs shall not exceed the structure height restriction of the zone in which the pole sign
is placed. In reviewing and/or approving pole signs, the planning commission, or city council
upon appeal, shall limit the height and area of pole signs to the minimum level necessary to
serve the purpose for which the sign is intended. The applicant shall have the burden to
submit evidence which demonstrates the necessity for the height and area requested.
(5) The pole(s) or support structure shall be decoratively treated in such a manner using
materials and colors which are complementary to the site or surrounding area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 584/710
(b) In reviewing a permit for a pole sign, the commission shall consider the appropriateness of the
sign to the site, topography, surrounding area, setbacks, aesthetics, business needs, existing
or proposed signage, alternatives, and other factors. The commission shall have the discretion
to approve, approve with modifications, or deny a permit for a pole sign.
(c) Pole signs shall either be nonilluminated or internally illuminated. Internally illuminated pole
signs shall have an opaque background and shall be designed so that only the lettering or
advertising copy is visible at night.
3. Ground Signs:
(a) The ground sign shall have an architecturally compatible support structure cover consisting of
at least fifty percent (50%) but not greater than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
width of the ground sign.
(b) The permitted area of a ground sign is one-half (0.5) square foot of sign area per lineal foot of
street frontage, forty (40) square foot display area maximum in commercial zones, and twenty
four (24) square feet in other nonresidential zones.
(c) Maximum height of a ground sign is ten feet (10') above grade in commercial zones and six
feet (6') in nonresidential zones.
(d) Internally illuminated ground signs shall have an opaque background and shall be designed
so that only the lettering or advertising copy is visible at night. Externally illuminated signs shall
utilize light fixtures which are fully shielded and designed to focus light only on the sign surface.
4. Projecting Signs:
(a) Projecting signs shall not exceed the height of the wall or parapet upon which they are placed.
(b) Projecting signs shall not project more than four feet (4') beyond the building or wall upon
which they are placed.
(c) Projecting signs must be a minimum of eight feet (8') above the ground or sidewalk. Projecting
signs less than twelve feet (12') in height above the ground or sidewalk shall be placed in a
manner which avoids safety conflicts with vehicles, pedestrians or other objects.
(d) The permitted area of a projecting sign is one-half (0.5) square foot per linear foot of street
frontage, thirty two (32) square feet maximum.
(e) Internally illuminated projecting signs shall have an opaque background and shall be designed
so that only the lettering or advertising copy is visible at night. Externally illuminated signs shall
utilize light fixtures which are fully shielded and designed to focus light only on the sign surface.
5. Wall Signs:
(a) Wall signs shall only be permitted in nonresidential zones, except as otherwise permitted
herein.
(b) The area of a wall sign or combination of wall signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet of
sign area for each one linear foot of business frontage for businesses that have up to fifty feet
(50') of business frontage and an additional sixty seven hundredths (0.67) of a square foot for
businesses with street frontage greater than fifty feet (50'), not to exceed a total aggregate area
of two hundred (200) square feet.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 585/710
(c) In addition to the regulations of this subsection (G)5, businesses which have more than one
"street frontage", as defined herein, may place one additional (2 maximum) wall sign on
premises provided the combined area of the signs does not exceed the area set forth in
subsection (G)5(b) of this section.
(d) Internally illuminated wall signs shall have an opaque background and shall be designed so
that only the lettering or advertising copy is visible at night. Externally illuminated signs shall
utilize light fixtures which are fully shielded and designed to focus light only on the sign surface.
6. Historic Signs:
(a) A sign having historical significance, as determined by the planning commission by minute
order, shall not be deemed an illegal or nonconforming sign subject to the removal provisions
of this section.
(b) Historic signs are not subject to the sign area limitations set herein for entities, occupancy, or
businesses with historic signs.
(c) Illumination of historic signs shall be subject to review and approval by the planning
commission.
7. Residential Signs:
(a) One nonilluminated ground or wall sign not exceeding ten (10) square feet is permitted per
entry or driveway for single-family subdivisions and multi-family developments.
(b) Illuminated signs are not permitted in residential zones unless otherwise approved by the
planning commission. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002)
(H) Master Sign Plan: New signage for any site having three (3) or more nonresidential occupants or
those wishing to deviate from the standards herein shall submit a master sign plan to the
development services department. Such plan must be approved by the planning commission prior
to issuance of any permit for signs. Major changes, as defined in subsection 10-4-9(P) of this
chapter, to any master sign plan previously reviewed and approved by the planning commission
shall also require planning commission approval. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-
2013)
1. Applications For Approval: Applications for approval of a master sign plan shall be submitted to
the planning division and shall include the following:
(a) A master sign plan, drawn to scale, delineating the site proposed to be included within the
signing program and the locations of all signs;
(b) Drawings, sketches and color samples/renderings indicating the dimensions and sign area for
proposed signs;
(c) Drawings and/or sketches indicating the exterior surface details of all buildings on the site on
which wall signs, and directory signs, or projecting signs are proposed; and
(d) A statement of the reasons for any requested modifications to the regulations or standards of
this section.
2. Findings: A master sign plan may include more than one ground or pole sign per parcel or other
deviations from the standards of this section, provided that the total sign area for the site or
commercial center shall not exceed the maximum aggregate area permitted in subsection (G) of
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 586/710
this section, unless the planning commission, or city council upon appeal, makes a finding based
upon a preponderance of evidence that unique site characteristics, topography, business needs
or other factors exist, in which case it may authorize greater sign area. In approving a master sign
plan, the planning commission shall also find:
(a) That the plan's contribution to the design quality of the site and surrounding area will be
superior to the quality that would result under the regulations and standards of this section; and
(b) That the proposed signs are compatible with the style and/or character of existing
improvements on the site and are well related to each other.
3. Reasonable Conditions: The commission, or city council upon appeal, may require any
reasonable conditions necessary to carry out the intent of the master sign plan requirements.
4. Appeal: Any interested party may appeal the decision of the planning commission to the city
council whose decision shall be final.
5. Master Sign Plan Exceptions:
(a) Change in copy or content for any signs;
(b) General maintenance and repair of signs; (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002)
(c) Minor changes as determined by the development services director to an approved master
sign plan providing that the minor changes are consistent with the intent of the approved
master sign plan. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
6. Application Fee: A master sign plan must be accompanied with an application fee adopted by
resolution of the city council.
(I) Prohibited Locations: At intersections, no sign shall create a visual obstruction within a vertical
space between thirty inches (30") and ten feet (10') above the curb. The obstruction restriction area
includes all land in a triangular area extending from a point fifteen feet (15') in from an intersection
to a distance of fifty feet (50') from the intersection along the street property line.
(J) Variances: Variances from the provisions of this section shall be processed in accordance with the
criteria and procedures specified in sections 10-3-5 and 10-3-6 of this title.
(K) Uniform Sign Code: All signs subject to this section shall comply with the standards and
requirements of the latest adopted version of the uniform sign code. Where this section may conflict
with the USC the stricter of the applicable regulations shall apply.
(L) General Requirements For Abatement: A sign or sign structure placed or maintained contrary to this
section may be abated as follows:
1. A sign which imposes an immediate peril to the safety of people or property may be summarily
removed or abated by the city without the necessity of prior notice or hearing. The property owner
is responsible for the removal of such a sign. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002)
2. Temporary or portable signs or other signs prohibited by this section shall be subject to removal
within ten (10) days of notice by the development services director to the occupant of the property
on which the sign is located. The development services director shall remove or cause to be
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 587/710
removed any such temporary or portable sign which has not been removed within the same time
period specified in the notice. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
3. The director of public works may summarily remove a sign which is an encroachment in the
public right of way without an encroachment permit issued under title 8, chapter 3 of this code.
4. A political sign not posted in accordance with this section shall be removed by the candidate,
property owner or person advocating the message on the sign and, upon their failure to do so
within the time required herein, by the city.
5. Each person who erects or maintains a sign which is subject to removal under subsection (L)1,
(L)2, or (L)3 of this section is jointly and severally liable for the cost of removal. The city shall
have lien rights for the cost of removal pursuant to section 1-4B-1 of this code and shall keep
possession of such sign until the owner redeems it by paying the city the cost of removal. The city
may dispose of such sign thirty (30) working days after removal without further liability to the
owner.
6. An illegal or abandoned sign may be abated and the expense of abatement shall be a lien
against the property and a personal obligation against the property owner pursuant to section 1-
4B-1 of this code. The abatement procedure is that set forth in subsection (O) of this section.
(Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002)
(M) Reconstruction Of A Partially Damaged Nonconforming Sign: A nonconforming sign which has
been more than fifty percent (50%) destroyed, and the destruction is other than sign copy, and
which cannot be repaired within thirty (30) days shall not be restored except in full conformity with
the regulations of this section unless a variance is granted to legalize nonconforming aspects of the
sign. If the damage is fifty percent (50%) or less, the nonconforming sign may be restored provided
that restoration is started within thirty (30) days and diligently pursued until completion. The extent
of damage or partial destruction shall be based on the ratio of: 1) the estimated cost of repairing the
sign to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction to 2) the estimated cost of
duplicating the entire sign. Estimates for this purpose shall be made by or reviewed and approved
by the development services director. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-2002; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(N) Alteration Or Relocation Of A Nonconforming Sign: A nonconforming sign whose owner requests
permission to relocate, alter or remodel the sign, other than change the sign copy, shall only be
permitted to do so if the relocation, alteration or enlargement will result in elimination of the
nonconformity and compliance with all of the requirements of this section, unless variance or master
sign package approval is granted to legalize nonconforming aspects of the sign.
(O) Abatement Of Illegal Or Abandoned Signs:
1. Scope And Authority: This subsection is enacted to implement chapter 2.6 of division 3 of the
California Business And Professions Code.
2. Designation Of Illegal On Premises Signs:
(a) The city council may declare, by resolution, as public nuisances and abate all illegal on
premises signs located within the city of Placerville. The resolution shall describe the property
upon which or in front of which the nuisance exists, by giving its assessor's parcel number and
its street address, if known. Any number of parcels of private property may be included in one
resolution.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 588/710
(b) Prior to adoption of the resolution by the city council, the city clerk shall send not less than a
ten (10) working days' written notice to all persons owning property described in the proposed
resolution by way of registered mail. The notice shall be mailed to each person on whom the
described property is assessed on the last equalized assessment roll available on the date the
notice is prepared. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing, and generally
describe the purpose of the hearing and the nature of the illegality of the display. (Ord. 1585, 5-
14-2002)
3. Posted Notice: After adoption of the resolution, the development services director shall institute
abatement procedures pursuant to title 1, chapter 4B of this code.
(P) Enforcement: The provisions of this section shall be administered by the development services
director or designee.
(Q) Revocation Of Sign Permits, Master Sign Plans And Conditional Use Permits:
1. Duties Of The Planning Commission: Upon determination by the development services director
that there are reasonable grounds for revocation of a sign permit, or a temporary sign permit, or
other discretionary approval authorized by this section, a revocation hearing shall be set by the
approving or issuing authority which took final previous action on the permit. (Ord. 1585, 5-14-
2002; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
2. Notice Of Public Hearing: Notice shall be given in the same manner required for a public hearing
to consider approval.
3. Hearing: The person or body conducting the hearing shall hear testimony of city staff, the owner
of the sign for which the permit was granted if present, and any other interested persons. The
hearing may be continued without additional public notice.
4. Required Findings: The person or body conducting the hearing shall revoke the permit upon
making one or more of the following findings:
(a) That the permit was issued on the basis of erroneous or misleading information or
misrepresentations; or
(b) The terms or conditions of approval of the permit have been violated or other laws or
regulations have been violated; or
(c) That there has been a discontinuance of the exercise of entitlement granted by the permit for
ninety (90) working days.
5. Decision And Notice: Within ten (10) working days of the conclusion of the hearing, the person or
body that conducted the hearing shall render a decision, and shall mail notice of the decision to
the owner of the sign for which the permit was revoked and to any other person who has filed a
written request for such notice.
6. Effective Date; Appeals: A final decision by a body other than the city council to revoke a
discretionary permit shall become final ten (10) days after the date of decision unless appealed to
the city council within said ten (10) day period. Any decision by the city council shall be final and
not subject to appeal.
7. Right Cumulative: The city's right to revoke a discretionary permit, as provided in this section,
shall be cumulative to any other remedy allowed by law.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 589/710
(R) Violations: Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this section shall be guilty of
an infraction and shall be subject to fines pursuant to subsection 1-4A-3(A) of this code.
(S) Severability: If any provision of this section is invalid, all valid parts that are severable from the
invalid part remain in effect. If a part of this section is invalid in one or more applications, the part
remains in effect in all valid applications that are severable from the invalid applications. (Ord. 1585,
5-14-2002)
10-4-18: KEEPING OF CHICKENS:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations for the keeping of hen chickens in
residentially zoned parcels while protecting the public health and safety, and the health and safety
of the chickens, through specific standards regarding sanitation, space, and proper animal
husbandry.
(B) General: It is unlawful to keep, possess, or maintain chickens on any parcel of property located in
the city, except in accordance with the regulations, standards, and restrictions prescribed in this
section. Roosters are not permitted on any developed lot used exclusively for residential purposes
unless subject to the exemptions under subsection (E) of this section, or as permitted by conditional
use permit under subsection (G) of this section.
(C) Applicability: The restrictions and regulations herein shall only apply to the keeping of chickens in
single-family residentially zoned parcels not otherwise permitted in the particular zone district or as
exempted under subsection (E) of this section.
(D) Development Standards:
1. A maximum of six (6) hen chickens may be kept on a developed lot used exclusively for
residential purposes; and, provided further, that the keeping of hen chickens shall not create a
health or nuisance problem.
2. All chickens shall be provided a coop, or other enclosure, and adhere to the following
performance standards:
(a) Any enclosure or other accessory structure exceeding one hundred twenty (120) square feet
shall not be constructed without first obtaining a building permit.
(b) Nesting boxes in enclosure required. The interior of any enclosure shall include nesting boxes
of three (3) to five (5) square feet for each chicken.
(c) Any enclosure shall be a minimum of twenty five (25) square feet.
(d) Enclosures must have four (4) walls and a roof and be constructed of suitable material. Any
enclosure shall be maintained in good repair.
(e) Enclosures shall maintain at least twenty feet (20') from any property line and from any
structure used for human habitation. Any enclosure shall be restricted to either the rear or side
yard and shall not be visible from a public street.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 590/710
(f) Enclosures shall at all times be maintained in a clean, sanitary condition, and free from
offensive odors. An odor is offensive if it can be detected at the adjoining property line.
(g) The interior of enclosures shall include chicken roost(s), feeder(s), water, and adequate
ventilation at all times.
(h) All chicken feed shall be secured and stored in airtight containers and shall not be accessible
by other animals, wild or domestic.
(i) No hen chickens shall be slaughtered on any developed lot used exclusively for residential
proposes.
(j) Chickens shall be controlled and maintained within the confines of the owner's property at all
times to protect the animals from injury, restrict entrance of other animals and predators, and
prevent the escape of animals.
(E) Exceptions To Restrictions: This section shall not apply to the following:
1. To any parcel of property zoned for agricultural uses by provisions of the Placerville zoning
ordinance in accordance with the general plan; or to any property zoned estate residential (RE) or
single-family acre residential zone (R-1A).
2. Where keeping, harboring, or maintaining hen chickens would constitute a valid nonconforming
use under the applicable provisions of the Placerville zoning ordinance.
(F) Treatment Of Animals: All animals shall be treated in a humane manner at all times. Persons
engaged in animal abuse, or otherwise in violation of sections 597 and/or 597.1 of the California
Penal Code, shall be subject to enforcement and penalties under the applicable provisions of this
code and/or title 6 - Animals of the El Dorado County code.
(G) Conditional Use Permit Required: Any person seeking to deviate from the regulations and
standards set forth in this section may only engage in the keeping of chickens upon approval of a
conditional use permit. (Ord. 1682, 10-11-2016)
10-4-19: SIDEWALK DINING REGULATIONS:
(A) Purpose And Intent: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations to allow limited dining
areas to encroach into the public right of way as an ancillary component of an adjacent primary
business that is located on private property. It is intended that such sidewalk dining areas will not
unduly restrict public access or utilize a design that detracts from the image and appearance of the
surrounding area.
(B) Definitions: The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this section:
CHAIR: Further defined as either a distinct piece of furniture designed to allow one person to sit
upon the same, or when seating is provided on a bench or other similar structure, then every twenty
inches (20") of seating space shall be considered as the equivalent of one chair for determining
seating capacity.
DIRECTOR: The director of development services department.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 591/710
FURNITURE: Collectively includes tables, chairs, benches, umbrellas, waiter stands, barriers, tray
stands, planters, trash receptacles, or other furniture normally associated with dining.
SIDEWALK DINING AREA: Use of an adjacent, outside area by a food or beverage establishment
for the same eating and drinking activities that occur within the establishment. The outdoor dining
area may be located in a public right of way pursuant to this section.
(C) Sidewalk Dining Areas Permitted: Sidewalk dining areas shall be permitted to encroach into the
public sidewalks abutting eating establishments for sidewalk dining purposes within all commercial
zone districts.
(D) Location:
1. Sidewalk dining areas in the public right of way shall not extend beyond the boundaries of the
primary business property to which such activity is subordinate.
2. Sidewalk dining areas may extend into the public right of way; however, a clear pedestrian
pathway shall be maintained the full width of the property. The pathway shall maintain a minimum
unobstructed passageway of five feet (5') as measured from the dining area to edge of curb or to
any obstruction including, but not limited to, light standards, benches, street trees, trash
containers, and newsracks.
(E) Insurance: The permittee shall maintain general liability insurance for the benefit of the city of a
type and amount as determined appropriate by the city manager.
(F) Standards: General standards for sidewalk dining areas:
1. Development Standards:
(a) Facilities and equipment shall be of a quality and style that is consistent with the design
guidelines adopted by the city and any other applicable design standards and policies. The
design, quality, materials and colors used for chairs, tables, lighting and other fixtures shall
complement the architectural style and colors used on the adjacent buildings. Sidewalk dining
furniture, equipment, and other amenities shall be constructed of metal, unless an alternative
material is approved by the director or the planning commission.
(b) Sidewalk dining areas that have more than four (4) tables or more than eight (8) chairs shall
separate the dining area from the walkway with fencing, swag roping, decorative plants,
landscape planters, or other architectural barriers that prevent encroachment of tables and
chairs into the five foot (5') pathway being maintained for pedestrian access. The planning
commission may relax this standard when it is clear that there is no reasonable possibility of
tables or chairs being moved to encroach on the required pedestrian pathway.
(c) Lighting will be required for sidewalk dining areas where food will be eaten during the evening
hours. The lighting fixtures must be decorative and complement the architectural character of
the building and area. Lights mounted on the building shall not cause direct glare or other
visual obstruction to pedestrians or vehicle drivers along the street and public walkway, and
should illuminate only the sidewalk area.
(d) Portable umbrellas may be permitted provided they do not obstruct the public right of way or
walkway, and do not contain advertising. The minimum vertical clearance from the pedestrian
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 592/710
surface for any overhead obstruction including umbrellas shall be eight feet (8').
(e) Furniture shall not be attached, drilled into, adhered to, chained to, or otherwise affixed to the
sidewalk tree, pole, or other furniture, or to any permanent structure or building.
(f) Sidewalk dining furniture shall be placed immediately adjacent to and abutting the eating
establishment and shall not be placed adjacent to the curb. Exceptions to this requirement may
be made by the director or planning commission for self-serve seating (i.e., no table service).
(g) Dining areas serving alcohol shall delineate and separate the sidewalk dining area with a
nonaffixed, removable barrier/fence (e.g., a planter box, rope, fence, or other material)
approved by the approving authority. Each such barrier shall be easy to remove and store. No
barrier shall exceed thirty six inches (36") in height. Dining areas that do not serve alcohol are
not permitted to delineate the sidewalk dining area with a barrier in order to keep the
appearance of an open sidewalk.
(h) Use of sound amplification on the exterior of a sidewalk dining area is prohibited.
(i) Sidewalk dining area permits are interruptible and terminable licenses for use granted by the
city. No property interest shall be conveyed to the eating establishment or to any other person.
The city shall have the right and power, acting through the director or planning commission, to
revoke, prohibit, or limit operation and use of a sidewalk dining area permit at any time by
reason of anticipated, threatened, or actual problems or conflicts in the use for the sidewalk
area. Such circumstances may arise from, but are not limited to, changing patterns of sidewalk
use, scheduled festivals or similar event, parades or marches, repairs to the street or sidewalk,
or for any other reason.
(j) Any sidewalk dining area shall be temporary in nature and designed so that the entire dining
area can be easily removed. Sidewalk dining area furniture, equipment, and other amenities
must be removed from the public sidewalk dining area for extended periods of eating
establishment closure (2 weeks or more). The city may require removal during special events,
etc. The city shall have the right to unilaterally remove unapproved exterior furniture and/or
equipment from the sidewalk dining area, and costs of removal shall be borne by the eating
establishment.
2. Operational Standards:
(a) The owner of the primary business is responsible for proper operation of the sidewalk dining
area. Sidewalk dining shall be continuously supervised by management or employees. Food
establishments serving alcoholic beverages shall have a supervisor, at least twenty one (21)
years of age, on site at all times of operation. Any behavior that disturbs customers or
passersby on the sidewalk will constitute grounds for revocation of any permit(s) to operate an
outdoor dining area.
(b) Establishments are required to maintain all areas in and around the sidewalk dining area in a
manner which is clean and free of litter and debris.
(c) The sidewalk dining hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of operation of the
associated food or beverage establishment.
(d) All plans and permits for the sidewalk dining area approved by the city must be kept on the
premises for public inspection at all times during which the associated establishment is open
for business.
(e) Sidewalk dining areas shall be operated in a manner that meets all requirements of the El
Dorado County environmental management division and all other applicable regulations, laws,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 593/710
ordinances, and standards. Food establishments serving alcoholic beverages shall also obtain
all necessary permits required by the state alcoholic beverage control department.
(f) Smoking and/or vaping of any substance shall not be permitted within any sidewalk dining or
seating area authorized pursuant to this section.
(G) Application For Special Temporary Permit Required: Applications for each sidewalk dining area
permit must include:
1. Description: A brief written description to include the name and address of the eating
establishment, a description of the propertied sidewalk dining area, the number of tables and
seats, and whether the establishment intends to serve alcohol.
2. Site Plan: A plan, drawn to scale, showing the proposed sidewalk dining area including all tables,
seats, associated furniture, and barrier; the plan shall show all sidewalk clearance dimensions
and elevation. Specifications shall be provided for all barriers, and for any sidewalk heaters. A
seating and pedestrian routing plan with dimensions and the anticipated periods of use during the
year.
3. Photos Or Drawings: Color photos, renderings, and/or graphics shall show the setup, type of
furniture, and materials to be used for all surfaces, including tablecloths, barriers, and umbrellas.
(H) Review Process: A special temporary use permit shall be required as provided in section 10-4-7 of
this chapter.
1. Review Authority:
(a) The director shall have administrative authority to review and approve sidewalk dining areas
that have not more than two (2) tables or four (4) chairs. For purposes of this chapter, each
twenty inches (20") of space on a bench shall be considered as one chair. The development
services director may impose reasonable conditions to assure that the dining area is not
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and is consistent with applicable
redevelopment plans and design guidelines.
(b) The planning commission shall have authority to review and approve sidewalk dining areas
with more than two (2) tables or more than four (4) chairs and/or dining areas serving alcohol.
2. Conditions Of Approval: The director or planning commission, as applicable, may impose
reasonable conditions of approval to ensure that sidewalk dining and display areas operate in a
manner that is not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, is consistent with all
applicable codes, policies and guidelines, and enhances the image, appearance and vitality of
the area in which the use is located. This includes, but is not limited to, authority to regulate the
design, layout, materials, colors, quality and appearance of outside dining and display areas; to
require security deposits, insurance and other reasonable financial guarantees and to prescribe
operating terms that the permittee must follow.
3. Appeal:
(a) The decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission.
(b) The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council.
(c) The above decisions must be appealed in writing to the city clerk's office within ten (10) days
after the decision is made.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 594/710
4. Fees: Each sidewalk dining area permit shall require payment of two (2) fees: a) the
encroachment permit fee; and b) special temporary use permit application fee associated with the
continued use of the public sidewalk. The fees shall be determined by the city council and
adopted by resolution which may be amended from time to time.
(I) Encroachment Permit: An encroachment permit must be obtained from the city engineer before any
sidewalk dining is permitted.
(J) Terms And Renewal: A special temporary use permit for a sidewalk dining area may be approved
for a maximum of one year. Renewal permits may be granted for one year periods. Special
temporary use permits approved by the planning commission may be extended by the director. The
city reserves the right to temporarily suspend the permit upon seven (7) days' notice because of
anticipated or actual conflicts in the use of sidewalk areas due to street repairs, parades, festivals
and other similar events.
(K) Enforcement:
1. Penalties: Any person violating any provisions of this section is subject to section 1-4-5,
"Penalty", of this code. In addition, the city may seek civil remedies for any violation, including,
but not limited to, the recovery of reasonable costs for the enforcement and correction of the
violation.
2. Revocation: Violation of any of the standards in this code or any of the conditions imposed under
subsection (H) of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the permit to operate a sidewalk
dining area. Such revocation shall require a majority vote of the planning commission at a regular
meeting to which the permittee has been given at least ten (10) calendar days' notice. The
decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 1689, 2-28-2017)
Chapter 5
ZONE REGULATIONS
10-5-1: ZONE CLASSIFICATIONS:
The zones dividing the territory of the City in accordance with the provisions of section 10-2-4 of this
title are designated and abbreviated as follows in order generally from the least restricted to the most
restricted classification:
OS Open Space Zone
RE Estate Residential
R-1A Single-Family Acre Residential
R-1, 20,000 Single-Family Residential
R-1, 10,000 Single-Family Residential
R-1, 6,000 Single-Family Residential
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 595/710
R-2 Low Density Multi-Family Residential
R-3 Medium Density Multi-Family Residential
R-4 High Density Multi-Family Residential
R-5 Very High Density Multi-Family Residential
BP Business-Professional
CBD Central Business District
C Commercial
CC Convenience Commercial
HWC Highway Commercial
HC Heavy Commercial
I Industrial
PF Public Facilities
PD Planned Development Overlay
PDI Planned Development Industrial
AO Airport Overlay
HO Housing Opportunity Overlay
CBO Cannabis Business Overlay
(Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1510, 8-23-1994; Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012; Ord. 1651, 8-14-2012; Ord.
1655, 7-9-2013; Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016; Ord. 1680, 8-9-2016; Ord. 1695, 1-22-2019)
10-5-2: APPLICABILITY:
(A) Provisions of this chapter imposing regulations for a particular zone classification shall apply
uniformly to all zones of that classification; provisions of the general regulations shall also apply to
any particular zone whenever the specified circumstances exist.
(B) The use of lands and structures in each zone is limited to the uses listed in the zone regulations for
that particular zone as allowed by right, and to the similar or accessory uses to the purposes of
such zone. Such uses may be carried out without a use permit. Any use not so listed is unlawful in
such a zone.
(C) Uses listed in the zone regulations for a particular zone as allowed by use permit, and the similar or
accessory uses listed in resolutions adopted by the commission as conforming to the purposes of
such zone, are unlawful in such zone unless a use permit therefor has been granted by the
commission, and all terms and conditions of such permit have been complied with.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 596/710
(D) Uses referred to in this chapter include the structures ordinarily devoted to such uses.
(E) Failure to comply with the regulations for land and structures for a particular zone is unlawful,
unless a variance therefor has been granted by the commission, and all terms and conditions of
such variance have been complied with. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-5-3: OS OPEN SPACE ZONE:
(A) Purpose: To reserve and protect those areas whose primary purpose is to be open space, either
natural or design consistent with the open space element of the general plan.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Accessory buildings and accessory uses.
Agricultural uses.
Cemetery.
Golf courses.
Natural areas.
Parks.
Playgrounds.
Waterways and basins.
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title.
(D) General Regulations:
1. Minimum Lot Size: Four thousand (4,000) square feet.
2. Maximum Building Coverage: Thirty five percent (35%).
3. Building Height Limit: Buildings shall not exceed thirty feet (30') in height for a residential building
and sixty feet (60') for a public building or a commercial building. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-5-4: RE ESTATE RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone designation is to:
1. Protect the watershed, preserve steep lands in their natural state and provide open spaces.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 597/710
2. Preserve lands suited for eventual development, pending proper scheduling for the economical
provision of utilities, streets, schools, recreation areas and other necessary facilities at the time
demand warrants it.
3. Provide lands for outdoor recreational uses on all types of agricultural activities such as raising
crops, fruits and animals, providing they do not constitute a nuisance to adjoining properties.
4. Provide for the development of single-family estates in areas served with limited utilities and
facilities.
5. Create conditions conducive to a desirable rural environment, protect it from the encroachment of
unrelated uses affecting the development of vacant land and detrimental to existing residences,
and limit the continuance of such uses in existence in the area. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Agricultural use such as raising and grazing of livestock, poultry or other animals; growing and
harvesting of trees, fruits, vegetables, flowers, grains or other crops; storage, packing or processing
of agricultural products produced on the property, without changing the nature of the products; sale
on the property of products produced thereon; provided, that such uses are carried on by a resident
of the property, are incidental to the residential use thereof and are not a nuisance to the contiguous
properties; employee housing, large.
Domestic violence shelter.
Employee housing, small.
Home occupations.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
One-family dwelling, one guesthouse; renting of not more than one room.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents, provided
said facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
Small and medium family daycare home. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1627, 9-9-2008; Ord.
1667, 10-28-2014; Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
Mobilehome parks.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Maximum density: 0.20 dwelling unit per acre.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 598/710
2. Minimum parcel area: Five (5) acres.
3. Maximum building coverage: Twenty percent (20%).
4. Minimum parcel width: One hundred fifty feet (150').
5. Minimum yards; setback:
(a) Dwelling: Front, fifty feet (50'); sides, twenty feet (20'); rear, thirty feet (30').
(b) Agricultural structure: Front, fifty feet (50'); sides, fifty feet (50'); rear, fifty feet (50').
6. Maximum building height: Thirty five feet (35').
7. Minimum parcel frontage: One hundred fifty feet (150'). (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-5-5: R-1A SINGLE-FAMILY ACRE RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for the development of single-family residences in outlying areas and areas having
special topographic features, and to prevent a higher population density requiring a higher level
of services, or damage to the natural appearance of an area.
2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable low density environment, and protect it from the
encroachment of unrelated uses affecting the development of vacant land and of such uses in
existence in the area.
3. Provide for sufficient space to enable residents of the property to raise crops and fruits and keep
animals in a limited and controlled manner so as to be in keeping with the residential character of
the area. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Domestic violence shelter.
Employee housing, small.
Home occupations.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
One-family dwelling, one guesthouse, renting of not more than one room.
One stable for not more than two (2) horses, cows or other hoofed animals not kept for
remuneration, hire or sale, poultry and other small animals, provided that the keeping of such
animals does not create a nuisance to adjacent properties.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents, provided
said facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 599/710
Small and medium family daycare home. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1514, 11-22-1994; Ord.
1548B, 6-23-1998; Ord. 1627, 9-9-2008; Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014; Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
Mobilehome parks.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Maximum density: One dwelling unit per acre.
2. Minimum parcel area: One acre.
3. Maximum building coverage: Thirty five percent (35%).
4. Minimum parcel width: One hundred feet (100').
5. Minimum yards: Front, thirty feet (30'); sides, ten percent (10%) of the parcel width or ten feet
(10') whichever is less; rear, thirty feet (30').
6. Maximum building height: Thirty five feet (35').
7. Minimum parcel frontage: One hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-5-6: R-1, 20,000 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for single-family residential development in areas with urban level services and facilities,
but limited for development by topography, terrain, or other physical and environmental
constraints.
2. Provide housing in areas conducive to low density development and protect such areas from
incompatible development.
3. Ensure light, air, privacy and usable open spaces for residential living.
4. Provide for those facilities primarily serving the neighborhood and serving it best by being located
within it, providing such facilities are in the appropriate locations and in harmony with the
neighborhood. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Domestic violence shelters.
Employee housing, small.
Home occupations.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 600/710
Keeping of chickens subject to the requirements of section 10-4-18 of this title.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
One-family dwelling, one guesthouse, renting of not more than one room.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents, provided
said facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
Small and medium family daycare homes. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1548B, 6-23-1998; Ord.
1627, 9-9-2008; Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014; Ord. 1682, 10-11-2016; Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
Mobilehome parks.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Maximum density: 2.18 dwelling units per acre.
2. Minimum parcel area: Twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. Maximum building coverage: Thirty five percent (35%).
4. Minimum parcel width: One hundred feet (100').
5. Minimum yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, ten percent (10%) of parcel width or ten feet (10'),
whichever is less; rear, thirty feet (30').
6. Maximum building height: Thirty five feet (35'). (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
7. Minimum parcel frontage: One hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 1627, 9-9-2008)
10-5-7: R-1, 10,000 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for single-family residential development in areas with urban level services and facilities,
but limited for development by topography, terrain, or other physical and environmental
constraints.
2. Provide housing in areas conducive to low density development and protect such areas from
incompatible development.
3. Ensure light, air, privacy and usable open spaces for residential living.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 601/710
4. Provide for those facilities primarily serving the neighborhood and serving it best by being located
within it, providing such facilities are in the appropriate locations and in harmony with the
neighborhood. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Employee housing, small.
Home occupations.
Keeping of chickens subject to the requirements of section 10-4-18 of this title.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
One-family dwelling, one guesthouse, renting of not more than one room.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents, provided
said facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
Small and medium family daycare home. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1548B, 6-23-1998; Ord.
1627, 9-9-2008; Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014; Ord. 1682, 10-11-2016; Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
Mobilehome parks.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Maximum density: 4.36 dwelling units per acre.
2. Minimum parcel area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
3. Maximum building coverage: Thirty five percent (35%).
4. Minimum parcel width: Seventy five feet (75').
5. Minimum yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, ten percent (10%) of parcel width or ten feet (10'),
whichever is less; rear, twenty feet (20').
6. Maximum building height: Thirty five feet (35').
7. Minimum parcel frontage: Seventy five feet (75'). (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-5-8: R-1, 6,000 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 602/710
1. Provide for the development of medium density single-family uses in areas feasibly served by
utilities, streets, schools, recreation areas and other necessary facilities.
2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable residential environment, protect it from the
encroachment of unrelated uses effecting the development of vacant land and detrimental to
existing residences, and limit the continuance of such uses in existence in the area.
3. Ensure light, air, privacy and usable open spaces for residential living.
4. Provide for those facilities primarily serving the neighborhood and serving it best by being located
within it, providing such facilities are in the appropriate locations and in harmony with the
neighborhood. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Employee housing, small.
Home occupations.
Keeping of chickens subject to the requirements of section 10-4-18 of this title.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
One-family dwelling, one guesthouse, renting of not more than one room.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents, provided
said facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
Small and medium family daycare home. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1548B, 6-23-1998; Ord.
1627, 9-9-2008; Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014; Ord. 1682, 10-11-2016; Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
Mobilehome parks.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Maximum density: 7.26 dwelling units per acre.
2. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
3. Maximum building coverage: Thirty five percent (35%).
4. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60').
5. Minimum yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, ten percent (10%) of the parcel width or ten feet
(10'), whichever is less; rear, twenty feet (20').
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 603/710
6. Maximum building height: Thirty five feet (35').
7. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-5-9: R-2, LOW DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for the development of duplexes and other types of residences, and multi-family
dwellings in garden apartments, in areas properly located in relation to commercial and other
residential areas, and where utilities, streets, sidewalks, transit, bikeways, schools, recreation
areas and other necessary facilities can feasibly serve a high population density.
2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable multi-family residential environment, protect it from
the encroachment of unrelated uses affecting the development of vacant land and detrimental to
existing residences, and limit the continuance of such uses in existence in the area.
3. Ensure light, air, privacy and usable open spaces for residential living.
4. Provide for those facilities primarily serving the neighborhood and serving it best by being located
within it, providing such facilities are in the appropriate locations and in harmony with the
neighborhood. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Attached single-family dwelling units, including condominiums or townhouse dwellings, subject to
the requirements of sections 10-4-13, "Attached Single-Family Dwellings", and 10-4-9, "Site Plan
Review", of this title.
Employee housing, small.
Home occupations.
Multi-family dwelling units.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents, provided
said facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
Single room occupancy facilities.
Small and medium family daycare home. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016; amd. Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
(C) Conditional Uses:
Detached single-family dwelling, when the Planning Commission finds that due to site
circumstances, such as limited parcel area, irregular parcel size, topography, etc., the development
of multi-family dwellings is not practicable.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 604/710
Mobilehome parks.
Professional offices such as accountants, architects, dentists, lawyers, physicians, and engineers
provided that development standards as listed in subsection 10-5-13(F) of this chapter be
incorporated with the proposed use.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title.
(D) General Regulations:
1. Maximum density: Eight (8) dwelling units per acre.
2. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet or minimum lot area shall be two
thousand (2,000) square feet when proposed with various forms of attached single-family
dwellings.
3. Minimum parcel area per dwelling unit: Two thousand (2,000) square feet.
4. Maximum parcel coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of the total lot shall be devoted to
main and accessory building area, parking area, driveway and covered patio area.
5. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60') or twenty feet (20') when proposed with attached singlefamily
dwelling.
6. Minimum yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, ten percent (10%) of the parcel or ten feet (10')
whichever is less; rear, fifteen feet (15'); or zero feet (0') setback for all yards where common wall
or party wall exists with attached single-family dwellings.
7. Maximum building height: Forty feet (40').
8. Minimum room areas: As defined in the California Residential Code.
9. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
10-5-10: R-3, MEDIUM DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for the development of duplexes and other types of residences, and multi-family
dwellings in garden apartments, in areas properly located in relation to commercial and other
residential areas, and where utilities, streets, sidewalks, transit, bikeways, schools, recreation
areas and other necessary facilities can feasibly serve a high population density.
2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable multi-family residential environment, protect it from
the encroachment of unrelated uses effecting the development of vacant land and detrimental to
existing residences, and limit the continuances of such uses in existence in the area.
3. Ensure light, air, privacy and usable open spaces for residential living.
4. Provide for those facilities primarily serving the neighborhood and serving it best by being located
within it, providing such facilities are in the appropriate locations and in harmony with the
neighborhood. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 605/710
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Attached single-family dwelling units, including condominiums or townhouse dwellings, subject to
the requirements of sections 10-4-13, "Attached Single-Family Dwellings", and 10-4-9, "Site Plan
Review", of this title.
Employee housing, small.
Home occupations.
Multi-family dwelling units.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents, provided
said facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
Single room occupancy facilities.
Small and medium family daycare home. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016; amd. Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
(C) Conditional Uses:
Detached single-family dwelling, when the Planning Commission finds that due to site
circumstances, such as limited parcel area, irregular parcel size, topography, etc., the development
of multi-family dwellings is not practicable.
Mobilehome parks.
Professional offices such as accountants, architects, dentists, lawyers, physicians, and engineers
provided that development standards as listed in subsection 10-5-13(F) of this chapter, be
incorporated with the proposed use.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title.
(D) General Regulations:
1. Maximum density: Twelve (12) dwelling units per acre.
2. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet or minimum lot area shall be two
thousand (2,000) square feet when proposed with various forms of attached single-family
dwellings.
3. Minimum parcel area per dwelling unit: Two thousand (2,000) square feet.
4. Maximum parcel coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of the total lot shall be devoted to
main and accessory building area, parking area, driveway and covered patio area.
5. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60') or twenty feet (20') when proposed with attached singlefamily
dwellings.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 606/710
6. Minimum yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, ten percent (10%) of the parcel or ten feet (10')
whichever is less; rear, fifteen feet (15'); or zero feet (0') setback for all yards where common wall
or party wall exists with attached single-family dwellings.
7. Maximum building height: Forty feet (40').
8. Minimum room areas: As defined in the California Residential Code.
9. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
10-5-11: R-4, HIGH DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for the development of duplexes and other types of residences, and multi-family
dwellings in garden apartments, in areas properly located in relation to commercial and other
residential areas, and where utilities, streets, sidewalks, transit, bikeways, schools, recreation
areas and other necessary facilities can feasibly serve a high population density.
2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable multi-family residential environment, protect it from
the encroachment of unrelated uses effecting the development of vacant land and detrimental to
existing residences, and limit the continuance of such uses in existence in the area.
3. Ensure light, air, privacy and usable open spaces for residential living.
4. Provide for those facilities primarily serving the neighborhood and serving it best by being located
within it, providing such facilities are in the appropriate locations and in harmony with the
neighborhood. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Attached single-family dwelling units, including condominiums or townhouse dwellings, subject to
the requirements of sections 10-4-13, "Attached Single-Family Dwellings", and 10-4-9, "Site Plan
Review", of this title.
Employee housing, small.
Home occupations.
Multi-family dwelling units.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents, provided
said facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
Single room occupancy facilities.
Small and medium family daycare home. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016; amd. Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 607/710
(C) Conditional Uses:
Detached single-family dwelling, when the Planning Commission finds that due to site
circumstances, such as limited parcel area, irregular parcel size, topography, etc., the development
of multi-family dwellings is not practicable.
Mobilehome parks.
Professional offices such as accountants, architects, dentists, lawyers, physicians, and engineers
provided that development standards as listed in subsection 10-5-13(F) of this chapter be
incorporated with the proposed use.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title.
(D) General Regulations:
1. Maximum density: Sixteen (16) dwelling units per acre.
2. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet or minimum lot area shall be two
thousand (2,000) square feet when proposed with various forms of attached single-family
dwellings.
3. Minimum parcel area per dwelling unit: Two thousand (2,000) square feet.
4. Maximum parcel coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of the total lot shall be devoted to
main and accessory building area, parking area, driveway and covered patio area.
5. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60') or twenty feet (20') when proposed with attached singlefamily
dwellings.
6. Minimum yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, ten percent (10%) of the parcel or ten feet (10')
whichever is less; rear, fifteen feet (15'); or zero feet (0') setback for all yards where common wall
or party wall exists with attached single-family dwellings.
7. Maximum building height: Forty feet (40').
8. Minimum room areas: As defined in the California Residential Code.
9. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
10-5-12: R-5, VERY HIGH DENSITY MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for the development of high density multi-family housing, in areas properly located in
relation to commercial and other residential areas, and where utilities, streets, sidewalks, transit,
bikeways, schools, recreation areas and other necessary facilities can feasibly serve a high
population density.
2. Create conditions conducive to a desirable high density multi-family residential environment,
protect it from the encroachment of unrelated uses affecting the development of vacant land and
detrimental to existing residences, and limit the continuance of such uses in existence in the
area.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 608/710
3. Ensure light, air, privacy and usable open spaces for multi-family residential living.
4. Provide for those facilities primarily serving the neighborhood and serving it best by being located
within it, providing such facilities are in the appropriate locations and in harmony with the
neighborhood.
5. Provide high density housing at a density consistent with the default, or minimum, density
requirements set forth in California Government Code section 65583.2. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Home occupations.
Multi-family housing units.
One accessory dwelling unit, subject to the requirements within section 10-4-12 of this title.
Residential care facilities and residential service facilities for six (6) or fewer residents provided said
facility is located at a distance of one thousand feet (1,000') or more from any other existing
community care facility as measured from any point upon the outside walls of the structures housing
such facilities.
Single room occupancy facilities.
Small and medium family daycare home. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016; amd. Ord. 1692, 10-24-2017)
(C) Conditional Uses:
Attached single-family dwelling units, including condominiums or townhouse dwellings, subject to
the requirements of section 10-4-13, "Attached Single-Family Dwellings", of this title.
Mobilehome parks.
Professional offices such as accountants, architects, dentists, lawyers, physicians, and engineers
provided that development standards as listed in subsection 10-5-13(F) of this chapter are
incorporated with the proposed use.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title.
(D) General Regulations:
1. Residential Density: Housing development density shall be determined at the time the site is
rezoned to the R-5 Zone. The density shall be based on the State mandated minimum of twenty
(20) dwelling units per acre but will allow for a maximum of twenty four (24) dwelling units per
acre. The minimum required density for a site shall be the net density. Net density shall be based
on the developable areas of the site, considering site specific environmental constraints such as
slope, watercourses, road rights-of-way and/or easements, etc., and the R-5 development
regulations of this section.
2. Minimum Parcel Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet or minimum lot area shall be two
thousand (2,000) square feet when proposed with various forms of attached single-family
dwellings.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 609/710
3. Minimum Parcel Area Per Dwelling Unit: Two thousand (2,000) square feet.
4. Maximum Parcel Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of the total lot shall be devoted to
main and accessory building area, parking area, driveway and covered patio area.
5. Minimum Parcel Width: Sixty feet (60') or twenty feet (20') when proposed with attached singlefamily
dwellings.
6. Minimum Yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, ten percent (10%) of the parcel or ten feet (10')
whichever is less; rear, fifteen feet (15'); or zero feet (0') setback for all yards where common wall
or party wall exists with attached single-family dwellings.
7. Maximum Building Height: Forty feet (40').
8. Minimum Room Areas: As defined in the California Residential Code.
9. Minimum Parcel Frontage: Sixty feet (60').
(E) Specific Regulations:
1. Environmental Review: The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) environmental review
will be completed for sites designed under the R-5 Zone at the time the sites are rezoned. All
identified site specific development standards and CEQA mitigation measures during the rezone
process shall be applicable to the development of residential housing for the site. Subsequent
environmental review may be required if, and to the extent necessary, to comply with CEQA.
2. Multi-Family Residential Housing: Multi-family residential housing, when developed per
Government Code sections 65583.2 and 65589.5 (or "when required by State law") for either low
income, very low income or extremely low income households, shall be developed by right in that
the use and density shall not require a conditional use permit, planned unit development or other
discretionary action for the use or density of the site. Housing development must include legal
commitments to the City to ensure the continued availability of the affordable housing for a
minimum period of thirty (30) years at the low, very low, extremely low income household or in
combination.
3. Design Review: Site plan review (section 10-4-9 of this title) shall be required for all housing
developments proposed within the R-5 Zone that are not developed per subsection (E)2 of this
section, and conditional uses under subsection (C) of this section. (Ord. 1679, 2-9-2016)
10-5-13: BP BUSINESS-PROFESSIONAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The Business-Professional Zone is intended to provide for the development of
professional offices and facilities devoted to professional uses.
(B) Criteria: The following criteria are hereby established for use in the classification or reclassification
of land to business-professional office use:
1. General Plan: Compliance with the General Plan.
2. Utilities: The existing utilities system (water, sewer, drainage, electrical, gas and communications
facilities) shall be adequate or new systems shall be constructed to adequately service the
business-professional development of the property.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 610/710
3. Environmental: The development will be consistent with good commercial development and will
be reviewed in light of its impact on traffic circulation, width of street, open space areas which
surround the property, drainage, environmental controls, ingress and egress, fire protection, and
accessibility of the property to emergency vehicles. Development shall be compatible with the
surrounding zoning. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
(C) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Administrative offices.
Financial offices.
Hospitals.
Medical, dental clinics, laboratories, pharmacies, and related facilities.
Medical training and related facilities.
Professional offices, such as offices for architects, attorneys, dentists, engineers, optometrists,
physicians, chiropractors, real estate brokers, physical therapists, and other similar type
professions.
Public buildings and facilities.
Reconstruction of single-family dwellings provided that the other regulations of this title are met.
Residential uses and residential service facilities and employee housing, small, when above or
below the ground floor.
Any other use deemed by the Planning Commission to be compatible with the intent of the
Business-Professional Zone and surrounding uses. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. 1666, 9-23-
2014; Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014)
(D) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-4 of this title.
Office supply stores, gift shops, barbershops, beauty shops, florist shops, etc., may be considered,
provided the applicant can submit economic data to show that said retail business will provide
services to establishments and workers within the area.
Restaurants and coffee shops.
(E) Uses Prohibited: The following prohibited uses are deemed incompatible with the uses permitted in
the business-professional zone and are, therefore, prohibited:
Industrial uses.
Retail commercial uses other than those specifically listed or provided for in subsections (C) and (D)
of this section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 611/710
(F) General Regulations: The following developmental standards shall apply to the businessprofessional
zone unless a waiver (a deviation of not more than 5 percent) of one or more of the
standards has been granted by the planning commission and city council:
A request for such waiver shall be submitted in writing and the justification shall be based upon
improving the quality of the development or assisting the logical and practical utilization of the zone
while still maintaining its intent and purpose. This waiver shall not be used for increasing a building
by deleting a requirement under the standards. The planning department will analyze the request
and, based upon its content, shall make a firm recommendation to the planning commission.
1. Minimum Lot Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Minimum Lot Width: Sixty feet (60').
3. Maximum Building Height: Forty feet (40').
4. Yards And Building Setbacks:
(a) Front yards: Ten feet (10'), except when abutting a residential zone the setback shall be
twenty feet (20').
(b) Side yard: Ten feet (10').
(c) Rear yard: Five feet (5'), except where abutting a residential zone the setback shall be not
less than twenty five feet (25').
(1) Rear yards may be used for parking when the yard is of adequate size and depth and the
provisions of the parking section, subsection (F)6 of this section, and the regulations for off
street parking and loading1 are met.
5. Maximum Building Coverage: Sixty percent (60%). (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
6. Off Street Parking And Loading: Off street parking requirements shall comply with section 10-4-4
of this title.
7. Landscaping:
(a) All open areas, with the exception of vehicular accessways, parking areas and pedestrian
walkways, shall be landscaped and irrigated. Such landscaping and irrigation shall be
permanently maintained.
(b) A minimum of twenty four (24) square feet of planting area with a tree (minimum 15 gallon
container size) shall be provided for every ten (10) open, single rows, or twenty (20) open,
double rows, of parking stalls.
(c) Landscaping shall consist of combinations of trees, shrubs and ground cover, with careful
consideration given to eventual size and spread, susceptibility to disease and pests, durability
and adaptability to existing soil and climatic conditions. Fountains, ponds, sculptures, and
decorative screen type walls, as an integral part of the landscaping scheme, are permitted and
encouraged.
(d) Trees shall be planted in the parkway area in front of the development and along the parkway
area of corner lots in accordance with the specifications of approximately one tree (minimum 15
gallon container size) for each forty feet (40') of property abutting a city right of way.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 612/710
(e) Existing trees, to the greatest extent possible, shall be protected and incorporated into any
proposed development plan.
8. Refuse Storage:
(a) All materials, refuse and wastes from business professional uses shall be stored outdoors
only in closed containers, and outdoor facilities for refuse or waste disposal shall have a
minimum dimension of five feet by seven feet (5' x 7') and shall be screened on all sides from
public view by a minimum five and one-half foot (51/2') high decorative concrete, block or
masonry wall, and the openings provided with a gate of durable wood or comparable material.
Such area shall be so located as to be easily accessible for trash pick up. No materials, refuse
or waste shall be deposited in such form or manner that they may be transferred off the
property by natural causes or force.
(b) Driveways or designated parking areas may not be used for storage of vehicles and/or
equipment.
9. Lighting: All lighting of the building, landscaping, parking area, or similar facilities shall be so
hooded and directed as to reflect away from adjoining properties.
10. Mechanical Equipment: All ground mechanical equipment shall be completely screened and all
rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened to be completely restricted from all view from
ground level.
11. Signs: The provisions of section 10-4-17 of this title shall apply. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
12. Minimum Parcel Frontage: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1627, 9-9-2008)
10-5-14: CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT ZONE:
(A) Purpose: This zone is established in order to:
1. Provide for a broad range of pedestrian oriented commercial, institutional and public uses.
2. Protect the downtown area from encroachment by unrelated and incompatible uses.
3. Differentiate the downtown area from all other land use designations because of its unique
character. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Antique stores.
Business and professional offices.
Consignment stores.
Eating and drinking establishments.
Government facilities.
Hotels and motels.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 613/710
Institutional uses.
One or more multi-family dwellings and residential service facilities, and employee housing, small,
when above or below the ground floor.
Pawnshops.
Reconstruction of single-family dwellings, provided that the other regulations of this title are met.
Retail sales. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. 1636, 4-27-2010; Ord. 1666, 9-23-2014; Ord. 1667,
10-28-2014)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
Bus or taxi stations.
Formula businesses.
Gasoline service stations.
Parking facilities and parking lots.
Places of entertainment.
Single room occupancy facilities when above or below the ground floor.
Used merchandise stores.
Uses as stated in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1597, 2-24-2004; amd. Ord. 1636, 4-27-2010;
Ord. 1664, 9-23-2014)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Minimum parcel area: None.
2. Maximum building coverage: One hundred percent (100%).
3. Minimum parcel width: None. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
4. Minimum yards: None. (A marquee, canopy, eaves, unenclosed and uncovered balcony and
other similar projections, appendages or overhangs may be allowed to encroach beyond the front
yard setback and into the public right of way upon the issuance of an encroachment permit by the
engineering division and a building permit by the building division. Signs will be allowed to extend
into the front yard setback and into the public right of way, and said signs shall conform with the
provisions of section 10-4-17 of this title.) (Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
5. Maximum building height: Forty feet (40').
6. Minimum parcel frontage: None.
7. Maximum floor area ratio: 3.0. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 614/710
10-5-15: C COMMERCIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: This zone is established in order to:
1. Provide the land necessary for retail sales and services, entertainment and other light
commercial activities to serve the residents of the community.
2. Provide for the development of commercial facilities concentrated in well planned areas properly
located in relation to access, topography and residential areas.
3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable environment for customers and
employees, and protect it from the encroachment of objectionable or dangerous uses and uses
which could be located in areas less suited for light commercial activities. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Antique store.
Club or association.
Consignment store.
Domestic violence shelter.
Hospital, sanatorium, dispensary, clinic, mortuary.
Motel and hotel.
One- or multi-family dwellings and residential service facilities, and employee housing, small, when
above and/or below the ground floor.
One sign not to exceed the allowable size established by section 10-4-17 of this title.
Pawnshop.
Place of worship and accessory social activities.
Professional or business office, bank, studio, place of entertainment and new and used retail sales
when fully enclosed in a building, eating or drinking establishments, retail service, exclusive of fast
food restaurants and automobile sales or service.
Public utility structure, fire station.
Reverse vending machines.
School, park, playground, golf course, cemetery.
Used merchandise store. (Ord. 1610, 5-23-2006; amd. Ord. 1636, 4-27-2010; Ord. 1654, 6-25-
2013; Ord. 1666, 9-23-2014; Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 615/710
Animal hospital and/or shelter.
Arcade.
Bus or taxi station.
Fast food restaurant.
Gasoline service station, new and used automobile sales and service, bulk petroleum sale,
underground storage, bulk storage, wholesale operations, and other light industrial activity.
Helicopter takeoff and/or landing sites. No use permit is necessary for emergency landings or
takeoffs by any law enforcement agency, forest service, fire department, hospital or similar
emergency service.
Parking facilities and parking lots.
Place of entertainment, new and used retail sales and retail service.
Single room occupancy facilities when above or below the ground floor.
Small collection and large collection recycling facilities.
Uses permitted in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1538, 2-11-1997; Ord.
1664, 9-23-2014)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Maximum building coverage: Sixty percent (60%).
3. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
4. Minimum yards: Front, four feet (4'); sides and rear, five feet (5') or on the property line if fireproof
wall without opening is provided. Exceptions: A marquee, canopy, eaves, unenclosed and
uncovered balcony and other similar projections, appendages or overhangs may be allowed to
encroach beyond the front yard setback and into the public right of way upon the issuance of an
encroachment permit by the engineering division and a building permit by the building division.
Signs will be allowed to extend into the front yard setback and into the public right of way, and
said signs shall conform with the provisions of section 10-4-17 of this title. (Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
5. Maximum building height: Forty feet (40').
6. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
10-5-16: CC CONVENIENCE COMMERCIAL ZONE:
(A) Purposes: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for small convenience oriented commercial centers to satisfy limited shopping and
service needs to the neighborhood in which it is located. The intent of this designation is to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 616/710
provide an expanded version of what has been historically known as the corner store. It is
intended that this classification will not be introduced into already developed neighborhoods, but
will be limited to newly developing neighborhoods around the perimeter of the city and its
periphery. As these new neighborhoods develop, they will be farther from the center of the city,
and thus it is deemed desirable to include well defined and designed convenience commercial
centers in such areas. Architecturally, development in this designation must be compatible with
the neighborhood in which it is located, and be carefully regulated as to landscaping, signage,
glare, noise, parking and hours of operation.
2. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable environment for customers and
employees.
3. Differentiate convenience commercial uses from those of the downtown business district,
highway commercial areas, and other light commercial areas.
4. Create conditions to promote pedestrian, bicycle, and handicap usage. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Markets (excluding gasoline sales), delicatessens (either takeout or sit down), dry cleaners,
laundries, and barber and beauty shops.
Reconstruction of single-family dwellings provided that the other regulations of this title are met.
Residential uses and residential service facilities and employee housing, small when above or
below the ground floor. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. 1666, 9-23-2014; Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
The uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title.
(D) General Regulations:
1. Minimum parcel area: Ten thousand (10,000) square feet.
2. Maximum building coverage: Twenty five percent (25%).
3. Minimum parcel width: One hundred feet (100').
4. Minimum yards:
(a) Along an arterial street: Twenty five feet (25').
(b) Along a collector street: Twenty feet (20').
(c) Along a subcollector street: Fifteen feet (15').
(d) Between parcels in a CC zone: No setback.
(e) Adjacent to another zone: Same setback as required along the property line of the adjacent
zone.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 617/710
(f) No parking will be allowed within setback areas and all setback areas will be landscaped.
Landscaping plans shall be reviewed and approved by the planning commission.
5. Maximum building height: Thirty feet (30').
6. Minimum parcel frontage: One hundred feet (100').
7. Floor area ratio: 0.25.
8. Maximum floor area per center: Five thousand (5,000) square feet.
9. Maximum floor area per occupancy: Three thousand (3,000) square feet.
10. Minimum landscape requirement: Twenty five percent (25%). (Public right of way area adjoining
the use shall be landscaped and shall not count toward 25 percent landscape requirement.)
11. The hours of operation shall be limited from six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M.
However, a conditional use permit can be granted which would allow operation to ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. In no case shall any business operate between ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
10-5-17: HWC HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for freeway oriented uses, such as fast food restaurants, gas stations and other uses
which are necessary and convenient to the traveling public.
2. Provide for the development of highway commercial facilities concentrated in well defined and
designed areas.
3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable environment for customers and
employees.
4. Protect areas in this designation from encroachment by unrelated and incompatible uses.
5. Differentiate freeway and travel oriented uses from those of the downtown business district and
other light commercial areas. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Business professional and office uses.
Hotels and motels, retail sales and services, eating and drinking and entertainment establishments,
financial institutions, one- or multi-family dwellings, and residential service facilities and employee
housing, small, when above or below the ground floor.
One emergency shelter.
Reconstruction of single-family dwellings provided that the other regulations of this title are met.
(Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. 1506, 11-23-1993; Ord. 1650, 7-10-2012; Ord. 1666, 9-23-2014;
Ord. 1667, 10-28-2014)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 618/710
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
Antique stores.
Auto sales and services.
Consignment stores.
Fast food restaurants.
Gasoline service stations.
Pawnshops.
Reverse vending machines.
Used merchandise stores.
Uses stated in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. 1538, 2-11-1997; Ord.
1636, 4-27-2010; Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Maximum building coverage: Sixty percent (60%).
3. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60').
4. Minimum yards: None.
5. Maximum building height: Forty feet (40').
6. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60').
7. Floor area ratio: 0.6. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
10-5-18: HC HEAVY COMMERCIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide the land necessary for wholesale, bulk storage, industrial services, manufacturing,
processing, packing and other heavy commercial activities to serve the community, and provide
employment and income for its residents.
2. Provide for the development of heavy commercial, industrial and service facilities, concentrated
in well planned areas properly located in relation to utilities, access, topography and residential
uses.
3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable working environment, control the
objectionable or dangerous effects of certain uses necessary in the community but detrimental to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 619/710
other areas, and protect the areas designated under this zone against the encroachment of uses
which could be better located in areas less suited for heavy commercial activities. (Ord. 1487, 1-
14-1992)
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Animal clinic or shelter.
Bulk storage, wholesale, packing, truck, bus, taxi or rail terminal.
Gas station, new and used automobile sales and services.
Manufacturing, processing, services or research, provided that no odor, gas, fumes, dust, smoke,
noise, vibrations, glare, heat, electrical interference, radioactive or waste material is produced or
emitted beyond the confines of the property onto contiguous properties or into the air or
watercourses, to an extent constituting a nuisance, and provided it does not constitute a physical
hazard to persons or properties beyond the confines of the property by reason of fire, explosion or
similar cause.
Office or retail sale.
One dwelling or one mobilehome for caretaker, watchman or person primarily employed on the
property and his/her immediate family.
One sign not to exceed the allowable size established by section 10-4-17 of this title.
Public utility structure, fire station.
Reconstruction of single-family dwellings provided that the other regulations of this title are met.
Trade school. (Ord. 1610, 5-23-2006; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
A processing facility for recyclable materials.
Antique stores.
Consignment stores.
Excavation of earth or building materials, mining or drilling for minerals and petroleum, garbage and
rubbish fill and disposal, junk and wrecking yards.
Parking facilities and parking lots.
Pawnshops.
Small collection and large collection recycling facilities.
Used merchandise stores.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 620/710
Uses as stated in section 10-3-4 of this title. (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992; amd. Ord. 1636, 4-27-2010;
Ord. 1649, 7-10-2012)
(D) General Regulations:
1. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Maximum building coverage: Sixty percent (60%).
3. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60').
4. Minimum yards: Front, ten feet (10'); sides and rear, five feet (5') or on the property line if there is
a fireproof wall without opening.
5. Maximum building height: Fifty feet (50').
6. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
10-5-19: I INDUSTRIAL ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for manufacturing uses, including assembly operations and industrial services, to serve
the community, and provide employment and income to its residents.
2. Provide for the development of industrial facilities concentrated in well defined and planned
areas, properly located in relation to utilities, access, topography and residential uses.
3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable working environment.
4. Control the objectionable effects of certain uses necessary in the community but detrimental to
other areas.
5. Protect areas in this designation from encroachment of uses which could be better located in
areas less suited for industrial activities.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Manufacturing, processing, assembly, outdoor storage, wholesale and retail sales, parking facilities.
Reconstruction of single-family dwellings provided that the other regulations of this title are met.
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
A processing facility for recyclable materials.
Excavation of earth or building materials, mining or drilling for minerals and petroleum, garbage and
rubbish fill and disposal, junk and wrecking yards.
Small collection and large collection recycling facilities.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 621/710
Uses permitted in section 10-3-4 of this title.
(D) General Regulations:
1. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Maximum building coverage: Sixty percent (60%).
3. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60').
4. Minimum yards: Front, ten feet (10'); sides and rear, five feet (5') or on the property line if there is
a fireproof wall without opening.
5. Maximum building height: Fifty feet (50').
6. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60'). (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
10-5-20: PF PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE:
(A) Purpose: This zone is intended to provide for those uses and activities customarily conducted by
government agencies and philanthropic nonprofit organizations.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Charitable and philanthropic institutions.
Governmental buildings and facilities designed for public use and accommodation.
Public libraries, museums and schools.
Reconstruction of single-family dwellings provided that the other regulations of this title are met.
Uses, buildings and structures incidental, accessory and subordinate to permitted uses.
Water and wastewater treatment plants, substations and other public service facilities of a similar
nature.
Any other use deemed by the planning commission to be compatible with the intent of the PF zone
and surrounding uses.
(C) General Regulations:
1. Minimum lot area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Minimum lot width: Sixty feet (60').
3. Maximum building height: Forty five feet (45').
4. Yards and building setbacks:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 622/710
(a) Front yards: Ten feet (10'), except when abutting a residential zone the setback shall be
twenty feet (20').
(b) Side yard: Ten feet (10').
(c) Rear yard: Five feet (5'), except where abutting a residential zone rear yard shall be required,
except as provided in subsections (C)1 and (C)2 of this section. The setback shall be not less
than twenty five feet (25').
(d) Encroachments into required yards shall comply with subsection 10-4-3(B) of this title.
5. Maximum building coverage: Sixty percent (60%). (Ord. 1487, 1-14-1992)
10-5-21: PD PLANNED DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY:
(A) Purpose: The purpose and intent of this section is to allow an option for more flexible design than is
permissible under the conventional zoning codes. The design should stress energy efficiency,
architectural creativity and innovation, use the natural features of the landscape to their greatest
advantage, provide a quality of life equal to or greater than that provided in developments built
under the standard zoning codes, be aesthetically pleasing, provide for more efficient land use, and
reduce the impact of development on the natural environment and neighborhood. This section may
be used in any zone. The intent of this overlay is to maintain the density of the zone.
(B) Permitted Uses: The uses permitted in the zone used in conjunction with this section. (Ord. 1474, 1-
8-1991)
(C) Procedure:
1. Preliminary Development Plan:
(a) Submission Of Preliminary Plan; Contents: A preliminary development plan shall be submitted
to the development services department. The preliminary development plan shall include maps
or drawings in schematic form and shall include the surrounding areas to show the relationship
of the PD to existing adjoining uses. The preliminary development plan shall include the
following: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(1) Proposed land uses; the number of dwelling units; acres and population density for all
residential areas.
(2) Proposed circulation system, indicating both public and private streets and off street
parking.
(3) Public uses, if any, including schools, parks, recreation areas and other open spaces.
(4) The use and description of each different type of structure.
(5) An indication of any proposed modification in the regulations applicable to the subject
property.
(6) The expected schedule and sequence of development. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 623/710
(b) Action By The Development Services Department: The development services department
shall review said development plan and schedule a public hearing before the planning
commission within thirty (30) days after submission. If the development services department
feels that revisions should be made before presentation to the planning commission, a
representative of the development services department shall meet with the applicant to review
the proposed changes.
(c) Public Hearing Before Planning Commission: At the time and place for public hearing, the
planning commission shall review the preliminary development plan considering the
development services department's report thereon, following which the commission shall either:
(Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(1) Disapprove the application and abandon proceedings, or
(2) Instruct the applicant to prepare a proposed development plan for the planning
commission's consideration and further action. The applicant shall submit the proposed
development plan within six (6) months of this action. If no proposed development plan is
submitted in the above said time, the application shall automatically be terminated, or
(3) Continue the public hearing to a date certain and refer the petition and preliminary
development plan back to the petitioner with recommendations as to amending the petition
and preliminary development plan to be consistent with the requirements and intent of this
section. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
2. Proposed Development Plan:
(a) The development services department shall review the proposed development plan which
consists of the following listed details and formulate a recommendation thereon to the planning
commission: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(1) Identification And Description:
A. Proposed name.
B. Location by legal description.
C. Names and addresses of applicant and designer who made the plan.
D. Scale of plan, preferably one inch to twenty feet (1":20').
E. Date.
F. North point.
(2) Existing Conditions:
A. Contours at an interval to be specified by the community development department.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 624/710
B. Boundary lines of proposed planned development indicated by a solid line, and the total
acreage therein.
C. Location, widths and names of all existing or prior plotted streets or other public ways,
railroad and utility rights of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent buildings
and structures and their use, permanent easements and city boundaries within three
hundred feet (300') of the proposed development.
D. Existing sewers, water mains, culverts and other underground facilities within the
development, indicating pipe sizes, grades, manholes and their general locations.
E. The land ownership.
F. Location, type and size of trees.
(3) Proposed Conditions:
A. Land Use:
i. A land use plan indicating all proposed uses.
ii. Any areas proposed for interior circulation. If the developer proposes that any of these
be public spaces, he/she shall indicate them.
iii. Open space that is to be maintained and controlled by the owners of the property, and
their successors in interest, for this planned development.
B. Contours And Drainage:
i. Contours as they will be after development.
ii. Drainage system and sanitary sewers.
iii. Preliminary grading and erosion control plans.
iv. Soils report.
C. Circulation:
i. A street system and lot design with appropriate dimensions.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 625/710
ii. A traffic flow map showing circulation pattern within and adjacent to proposed
development. Any special engineering features and traffic regulation devices needed to
facilitate or ensure the safety of the circulation pattern shall be shown.
iii. Location and dimensions of pedestrian walkways and malls.
D. Parking And Loading:
i. Location, arrangement, number and dimension of automobile garages and parking
spaces, width of aisles, width of bays and angles of parking.
ii. Location, arrangement and dimensions of truck loading spaces and docks.
E. Plans:
i. Types of buildings and their site locations.
ii. General description of units and any available plans or elevations which would be
helpful to the planning commission.
iii. The approximate location, height and materials of all walls, fences and screen planting.
iv. Location, size and tree species to be removed.
v. A tree preservation plan for pre- and post-construction periods prepared by a tree
professional.
vi. A landscaping plan.
F. Miscellaneous:
i. Tables showing the total number of square feet and their distribution use, including off
street parking, streets, parks and open spaces as shown on the proposed development
plan.
ii. Drafts of covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&Rs), providing for the maintenance
of any common open space, drafts of required dedications of development rights.
iii. For purposes of information, a time schedule indicating when construction is to begin,
the anticipated rate of development and the approximate completion date.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 626/710
iv. For purposes of information, the stages, if any, to be constructed in the development of
the planned development. Such stages shall be clearly indicated on the proposed
development plan.
v. Such other information as the commission shall require. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
3. Continued Public Hearing Before The Planning Commission:
(a) At the time and place set for the continued public hearing before the planning commission, the
commission shall consider the proposed development plan, recommendations of the
development services department, the appropriate environmental documentation, and any
other information available, and shall take one of the following actions: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991;
amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(1) The planning commission may recommend approval to the city council, refer the proposed
development plan back to the developer with recommendations as to amending, or may
deny the request, or
(2) The planning commission shall not recommend approval of the application and recommend
the establishment of a PD overlay unless it makes the following findings:
A. That the proposed development is so designed to provide a desirable environment within
its own boundaries.
B. That any exceptions to the standard requirements of the zone regulations are justified by
the design and topography of the development.
4. Action By The City Council:
(a) At the time and place set for public hearing on the PD overlay the city council shall consider
the recommendation of the planning commission, appropriate environmental documentation,
together with any comments and testimony thereon; and take one of the following actions:
(1) Approve the PD overlay and adopt the proposed development plan with any conditions
placed thereon, or
(2) Continue the public hearing to a date certain and refer the application and proposed
development plan to the commission with recommendations to amending said application
and proposed development plan, or
(3) Disapprove the application and proposed development plan and abandon proceedings
thereon. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
5. Filing Of Official Development Plan:
(a) Certified copies of the official development plan shall be on file in the development services
department. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
6. Relationship Of PD Procedures To Other City Regulations:
(a) Compliance with the provisions of this section does not relieve the applicant from compliance
with any other applicable ordinance or resolution of the city, if no waiver has been granted by
the city from compliance with any other ordinance or resolution.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 627/710
(1) Subdivision maps, site plan review or conditional use permits shall be processed
concurrently with the proposed development plan required under this chapter. (Ord. 1474, 1-
8-1991)
(2) Environmental impact reports or negative declarations of environmental impact shall be
prepared in draft form and presented to the development services department. This will
normally be prepared after the public hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary
development plan. The final document shall be considered by the city council concurrently
with the proposed development plan. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
7. Procedure Prior To Issuance Of Building Permit: No building permit shall be issued for any
building, structure or use which does not conform to the official development plan.
8. Dedication Prior To Issuance Of First Building Permit: To assure that open space shall be
available for the proposed development, public sites and development rights to required open
spaces shall be dedicated or conveyed in advance of development. In any event, whether a
subdivision map is required or not, dedication or conveyance of public sites and development
rights to required open spaces for the entire PD overlay or any portion thereof shall be made
before the first building permit is issued. Other dedications or conveyances may be required
before the issuance of the first building permit. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
9. Procedure After Adoption Of The Official Development Plan:
(a) Minor changes in the adopted official development plan may be approved by the development
services department provided that such changes: (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-
2013)
(1) Do not change the boundaries of the subject property.
(2) Do not change any use as shown on the official development plan.
(3) Do not change the intent of the official development plan.
(b) Major changes in the official development plan after it has been adopted by the council shall
be considered the same as if a new application were filed and shall be made in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
10. Post Approval Review: If, after eighteen (18) months from final action approving the
development plan, the land has not been developed as approved, the commission may hold a
public hearing to consider a recommendation to the city council for the revocation of the approved
development plan. (Ord. 1474, 1-8-1991)
(D) Planned Development Overlays: Planned development overlays (PD) shall not be exempt from the
provisions of subsection 10-4-2(D)4 of this title. However it is recognized that in order to conform
with subsection 10-4-2(D)4 of this title, PD overlays have to be calculated differently in order to
determine the relationship between the slope of the property and the density allowed. PD overlays
shall not have a density greater than a subdivision designed to the provisions of this title. Therefor
an application for a PD overlay shall include a subdivision map which conforms to all provisions of
this title except for this section. This map will be used to:
1. Determine the density to which the PD overlay project will be limited; and
2. Will be compared to the PD overlay project to determine if the PD overlay accomplishes the
purpose as described in subsection (A) of this section.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 628/710
Once the density for the project has been established using the map described above, the
applicant shall redesign the subdivision using the more flexible provisions of this section to
produce a final design. (Ord. 1502, 9-14-1993)
10-5-22: PDI PLANNED DEVELOPMENT INDUSTRIAL:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Provide for manufacturing uses including assembly operations and industrial services to serve
the community and provide employment and income to its residents.
2. Provide for the development of industrial facilities concentrated in well defined and well planned
areas properly located in relation to utilities, access topography, and residential uses.
3. Create conditions conducive to a convenient and desirable working environment.
4. Provide an area for incubator industries or cottage industries to flourish and grow within a historic
setting.
5. To provide an area that encourages tourist oriented uses such as campgrounds, recreational
vehicle parks and conference facilities, stores, restaurants and other recreational uses and to
ensure that such uses are constructed in such a way as to be compatible with adjoining planned
industrial uses.
6. To provide for uses and areas that will encourage economic growth and encourage tourism both
locally and regionally.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Assembly.
Incidental wholesale and retail sales.
Manufacturing.
Outdoor storage.
Processing.
Public and quasi-public facilities and uses.
(C) Conditional Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted when authorized in
accordance with the provisions of section 10-3-3 of this title:
A processing facility for recyclable materials.
Amphitheaters.
Campgrounds and recreational vehicle parks.
Conference facilities.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 629/710
Equestrian centers.
Restaurants.
Small and large collection recycling facilities.
Stores.
The uses as stated in section 10-3-4 of this title.
(D) General Regulations:
1. Minimum parcel area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet.
2. Maximum building coverage: Sixty percent (60%).
3. Minimum parcel width: Sixty feet (60').
4. Maximum building height: Forty feet (40').
5. Minimum parcel frontage: Sixty feet (60').
6. Minimum yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, twenty feet (20'); rear, twenty feet (20').
7. Maximum floor area ratio: 0.40.
(E) Definitions:
CAMPGROUND: A plot of ground upon which two (2) or more campsites are located, established or
maintained for occupancy by camping units of the general public as temporary living quarters for
recreation, education or vacation purposes.
EQUESTRIAN CENTER: A facility for horseback riding, staging, showing, keeping, training and
accessory uses for horses. (Ord. 1510, 8-23-1994)
10-5-23: AO AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this zone is to:
1. Implement the Placerville Airport land use compatibility plan (ALUCP) in accordance with state
law, adopted by the El Dorado County airport land use commission (ALUC) and incorporated into
the general plan land use element by city council resolution 8105;
2. Implement the city's general plan policy to provide for land uses surrounding the Placerville
Airport that is consistent with the Placerville ALUCP;
3. Protect land uses around the airport from potential hazards of airport operations;
4. Identify a range of uses compatible with airport accident hazard and airport noise exposure;
5. Prohibit the development of incompatible uses that are detrimental to the general health, safety
and welfare and to existing and future airport operations;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 630/710
6. Require noise attenuated construction within the airport environs; and
7. Comply with federal aviation administration (FAA) regulations.
(B) Applicability: The standards and regulations of this section apply to all lands within the AO overlay
zone mapped on the official zoning map. The AO overlay zone is conterminous with the Placerville
Airport influence area as identified in the adopted ALUCP influence area map in chapter 6 and
defined under section 2.7 of chapter 2 of the ALUCP.
Regulations in the AO overlay zone modify and supplement the underlying zoning designation
regulations. Within the AO overlay zone district, the noise impact zones, airport safety zones,
airspace protection and aircraft overflight zone policies of the ALUCP apply.
(C) Permitted Uses: All of the uses permitted in the underlying zone, provided the use is consistent with
the land use compatibility policies and criteria with respect to airport related noise, public safety,
airspace protection, and aircraft overflight areas established in the ALUCP.
(D) Development Review Procedures: The Placerville ALUCP in effect at the time an application was
deemed complete shall be the basis for compatibility review.
1. Development Services Department Review:
(a) New development or expansion of existing development within this overlay zone shall be
subject to review by the development services director, or designee for ALUCP consistency.
Depending on the type of land use development, a consistency review could also involve action
by the planning commission and possibly city council as part of other land use requests
authorized within this title. Examples of other land use requests include, but are not limited to,
site plan reviews, tentative subdivision maps, general plan amendments, zone changes,
variances, conditional use permits, etc.
Proposed land uses within the zone shall be consistent with the following compatibility policies
and maps in chapters 4 and 6 of the Placerville ALUCP:
(1) Noise compatibility policies: Subsections 4.2.1 through 4.2.4 of section 4.2, the noise
compatibility criteria in table 1 of chapter 4, and the noise zones policy map of chapter 6;
(2) Safety compatibility policies: Subsections 4.3.1 through 4.3.8 of section 4.3, the safety
compatibility criteria in table 2 of chapter 4, and the safety zones policy map of chapter 6;
(3) Airspace protection policies: Subsections 4.4.1 through 4.4.5 of section 4.4 of chapter 4 and
the airspace protection zones policy map of chapter 6;
(4) Overflight policies: Subsections 4.5.1 through 4.5.3 of section 4.5 of chapter 4 and the
overflight zones policy map of chapter 6;
(5) Special circumstances policies: Section 4.6 of chapter 4;
(6) Additional compatibility policies: PLA.1 of chapter 6.
(b) Minimum submittal requirements for development review:
(1) Property location data (assessor's parcel number, street address, subdivision name, lot
number).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 631/710
(2) An accurately scaled map depicting the project site location in relationship to the airport
boundary and runways.
(3) A description of the proposed use(s), current general plan and zoning designations, and the
type of land use action being sought from the city (e.g., zoning variance, conditional use
permit, site plan review, building permit).
(4) When determined by the development services director or designee, a detailed site plan
and supporting data showing: site boundaries and size; existing uses that will remain;
location of existing and proposed structures, open spaces, and water bodies; ground
elevations (above mean sea level) and elevations of tops of structures and trees.
Additionally:
A. For residential uses, an indication of the potential or proposed number of dwelling units
per acre (excluding any secondary units).
B. For nonresidential uses, the total floor area for each type of proposed use, the number of
auto parking spaces, and, if known, the number of people expected to occupy the total site
or portions thereof at any one time during busiest periods.
(5) Identification of features, during or following construction, that would increase the attraction
of birds or cause other wildlife hazards to aircraft operations on the airport or in its environs
(see policy 4.4.3(a)(6)). Such features include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Open water areas.
B. Sediment ponds, retention basins.
C. Detention basins that hold water for more than forty eight (48) hours.
D. Artificial wetlands.
E. Conservation areas.
(6) Identification of characteristics that could create electrical interference, confusing or bright
lights, glare, smoke, or other electrical or visual hazards to aircraft flight.
(7) Submittal requirements as part of other land use requests authorized within this title.
(8) Other relevant information that the ALUC or ALUC executive director, in consultation with
the city development services director, determine to be necessary to enable a
comprehensive review of the proposed action.
2. Airport Land Use Commission Review:
(a) Prior to the city approving any of the following land use actions located within Placerville
Airport influence area as shown on the ALUCP influence area policy map (PLA-1) in chapter 6
of the ALUCP, the development services department shall refer the proposed action to the
ALUC for a formal determination of consistency with the policies of the ALUCP:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 632/710
(1) The adoption or approval of any new general or specific plan or any element thereto.
(2) The adoption or approval of a zoning ordinance, including any proposed change or variance
to any such ordinance, general regulation or development standard.
The land use action project applicant shall submit to the ALUC the applicable ALUC review
fee set by the ALUC. Per Public Utilities Code section 21676(d), the ALUC has sixty (60)
days to make a determination. Failure by the ALUC to make a determination within the sixty
(60) day period, means the action will be deemed consistent with the ALUCP.
(b) The development services department shall refer to the ALUC for informal review and
comment prior to the city approving any of the following land use actions located within the
Placerville Airport influence area as shown on the ALUCP influence area policy map (PLA-1) in
chapter 6 of the ALUCP:
(1) Any proposed expansion of the city's sphere of influence, prezoning associated with future
annexation of land to the city, development agreements or amendments to such agreements.
(2) Any subdivision of land for residential purposes, including parcel divisions consisting of five
(5) or more parcels or dwelling units, or the construction of residential units other than on a
designated single-family residential parcel.
(3) All discretionary development proposals having a building floor area of twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet or greater unless only ministerial approval is required.
(4) Any discretionary development proposal for projects attracting more than one hundred
(100) people to outdoor activities on the project site.
(5) Major infrastructure or other capital improvements which would promote urban uses in
undeveloped areas, and proposed land acquisitions by the city for any facility
accommodating a congregation of people.
(6) Any project involving a building, antenna or other built structure having a height that
requires review by the federal aviation administration (FAA) in accordance with part 77 of the
federal aviation regulations.
(7) Any project that may cause electrical (interference with radio communications or
navigational signals) or visual hazards to aircraft in flight (lighting which could be mistaken for
airport lighting, or glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport).
(8) Any project (e.g., water treatment facilities, waste transfer or disposal facilities, parks with
open water areas) or plan (e.g., habitat conservation plan) having the potential to cause an
increase in the attraction of birds or other wildlife that can be hazardous to aircraft operations
in the airport vicinity.
(9) Any replacement or expansion of existing structures or uses on a site with new or additional
structures or uses to replace an existing use at a density or intensity that may vary from the
existing use.
3. Amendment Request To An Approved Development Permit: A request to amend an approved
development permit (e.g., site plan review, conditional use permit, variance, subdivision map) that
is not in substantial conformance with the previously approved permit shall be made compatible
with the airport land use compatibility plan in effect at the time the application for a development
permit amendment is deemed complete.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 633/710
4. Development Review Exemptions: The following shall be exempt from the requirements of this
section:
(a) Development that is limited to interior modifications or repairs, or any exterior repairs or
maintenance, that does not increase the density, floor area ratio or height of an existing
structure;
(b) Special temporary uses approved in accordance with section 10-4-7 of this title. (Ord. 1655, 7-
9-2013)
10-5-24: HO HOUSING OPPORTUNITY OVERLAY ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The housing opportunity overlay zone is intended to:
1. Provide an overlay zoning district to be applied to sites that may include, but are not limited to,
the potential sites identified as inventoried in the housing element of the general plan as potential
sites for housing, as a part of the implementation of the housing element goals, policies and
programs, or where it can be reasonably demonstrated that the rezoning of the site is necessary
to meet the goals of the regional housing need allocation (RHNA).
2. Provide for the continuation of the ability to develop land uses permitted by the existing base
(underlying) zoning of a property unless the property is developed for residential uses in
accordance with the HO overlay zone.
3. Provide a means of achieving the residential housing objectives of the housing element of the
general plan, particularly by encouraging new multi-family residential development that includes
affordable housing, housing for persons with disabilities, housing for persons with developmental
disabilities, and housing that supports aging in place.
(B) Applicability: A parcel that has the HO overlay zone may be developed either in the manner
provided under this section or the manner provided in the base (underlying) zone, but not both.
Once the parcel has developed in the manner provided in the base zone, the property owner shall
relinquish the right to redevelop the land using the HO overlay zone.
(C) Permitted Uses: The following uses and their accessory uses are permitted outright:
Home occupations.
Medium family daycare home.
Multi-family housing units.
Single-family dwellings, attached.
(D) General Regulations: The HO overlay zone allows for the following:
1. Density: The density for the development of affordable multi-family housing and various forms of
affordable attached single-family residential housing shall be based on state housing law of
twenty (20) dwelling units minimum per acre but will allow for a maximum of twenty four (24)
dwelling units per acre. The minimum required density may be determined by allocating the
density to the total acreage of the site (gross) or by aggregating the developable area of a site to
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 634/710
remove areas considered to be environmentally sensitive, and all areas for driveways and
roadways from the developable area, whichever is more suitable for the site (net). The minimum
number of potential units will be determined by multiplying the developable acreage by twenty
(20). Where such calculation results in a fractional number, the number of units shall be
determined by rounding down to the nearest whole number.
2. Minimum Parcel Area: Six thousand (6,000) square feet or minimum lot area shall be two
thousand (2,000) square feet when proposed with various forms of attached single-family
dwellings.
3. Minimum Parcel Area Per Dwelling Unit: Two thousand (2,000) square feet.
4. Maximum Parcel Coverage: No more than sixty percent (60%) of the total lot shall be devoted to
main and accessory building area, parking area, driveway and covered patio area.
5. Minimum Parcel Width: Sixty feet (60') or twenty feet (20') when proposed with attached singlefamily
dwellings.
6. Minimum Yards: Front, twenty feet (20'); sides, ten percent (10%) of the parcel or ten feet (10')
whichever is less; rear, fifteen feet (15'); or zero feet (0') setback for all yards where common wall
or party wall exist with attached single-family dwellings.
7. Maximum Building Height: Forty feet (40').
8. Minimum Room Area: Minimum room areas as defined in the California residential code.
9. Minimum Parcel Frontage: Sixty feet (60').
(E) Specific Regulations:
1. Environmental Review: The California environmental quality act (CEQA) environmental review
will be completed for sites designed under the HO overlay zone at the time the sites are rezoned.
All identified site specific development standards and CEQA mitigation measures during the
rezone process shall be applicable to the development of residential housing for the site.
Subsequent environmental review may be required if, and to the extent necessary, to comply with
CEQA.
2. Affordability Provisions: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of all housing must be affordable to
very low and low income households, subject to the minimum mix of affordable dwelling units:
(a) Very low income households: thirty percent (30%) of the total units in the development;
(b) Low income households: twenty percent (20%) of the total units in the development.
Housing development must include binding commitments to the city to ensure the continued
availability of the affordable housing for a minimum period of thirty (30) years at the low and
very low income household level.
3. Density Bonus: The HO overlay zone provisions under this section shall not apply if a housing
development applicant requests a density bonus under the city's density bonus provisions set
forth in sections 10-12-1 to 10-12-14 of this title.
4. Energy And Environmental Efficiency: Multi-family and attached single-family residential housing
developed within the HO overlay zone is encouraged to utilize energy efficient design techniques
and environmentally sensitive design and building materials.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 635/710
5. Accessibility: Multi-family and attached single-family residential housing developed within the HO
overlay zone is encouraged to include units accessible for persons with physical disabilities,
persons with developmental disabilities, and that support aging in place.
6. Housing Opportunity Overlay Zone Development Incentives:
(a) Incentives: Applications meeting the purpose and applicability (subsections (A) and (B) of this
section) of the HO overlay zone will qualify for one of several incentive options for the creation
of affordable housing. The following development incentives are available to qualifying
residential developments:
(1) Deferment of city generated construction and impact fees until project completion or
occupancy.
(2) Payment of construction and impact fee over a twelve (12) month or longer period after
project completion.
(3) Reduction of city generated fees for specific facilities or services for which the applicant can
show a connection between the lower fee and lower facility/service demand from project
residents.
(F) By Right Development: When required by state law, housing development that is affordable to low
income and very low income households for sites within an HO overlay zone shall be developed by
right in that the use and density shall not require a use permit, planned unit development plan or
other discretionary action for the use or density of that site. For these sites, the following standards
and alternative process shall apply:
1. Developable Acreage: The developable acreage of the site and the required number of units will
be determined as described in subsection (D)1 of this section.
2. Environmental Review: Environmental review, as required by the California environmental quality
act, will be completed as part of the process for the rezoning of such sites into the HO overlay
zone to address the uses and minimum densities allowed by the HO overlay zone. Subsequent
environmental review may be required if, and to the extent, necessary to comply with CEQA.
3. Site Specific Development Standards: In addition to assigning density, the HO overlay zone shall
outline site specific development standards and any CEQA mitigation measures adopted for each
site at the time the site is rezoned. All identified site specific development standards and CEQA
mitigation measures shall be included within all development of multi-family housing on an HO
site shall be done in compliance with the rezone.
4. Zoning Compliance And Building Permit Issuance: All development proposals within the HO
overlay zone, which meet the by right provision, are subject to zoning compliance and building
permit issuance and the payment of all applicable building permit and mitigation fees, which are
otherwise applicable to the development proposal.
5. Administrative Design Review Process: Development proposals shall be subject to an
administrative design review process at the staff level. An application for design review shall be
filed with the development services department on a form furnished by the department and a fee
set by the city.
The development services department shall use all established and adopted city guidelines,
development and construction standards, general regulations including, but not limited to,
grading, water quality, aesthetics, landscaping, lighting, and air quality when evaluating a
development proposal under design review.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 636/710
6. Utilities: Prior to building permit issuance, it shall be the responsibility of the land owner or
developer to provide written documentation from the applicable public utility, water and sewer
service provider demonstrating that adequate public utilities, water and sewage disposal is
available to accommodate the use and minimum densities required for a site. If the property does
not have direct access to adequate public utilities to serve the anticipated development of the
site, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner or developer to provide adequate
infrastructure to serve the site consistent with the rules, regulations and standards of the
applicable utility provider.
7. Fire Protection: Prior to building permit issuance, it shall be the responsibility of the land owner or
developer to provide written documentation from the fire protection district demonstrating that the
site has adequate fire flow, emergency escape routes, fire equipment access, and is designed to
meet all applicable requirements of the California fire code.
8. Ingress And Egress: If a property does not have direct access to a city maintained roadway, it
shall be the responsibility of the land owner or developer to provide written documentation as to
their legal right to utilize and improve the road(s) that provide ingress and egress to the site,
including secondary access if required, and that the road(s) meet the city minimum standards to
serve the development proposed. The land owner or developer shall also be responsible for
providing an offer of dedication of the road(s) for acceptance into the City maintained road
system, if required by the Development Services Department. If roads are determined to be
inadequate, in width, size, surfacing, capacity, safety or some other standard, it shall be the
responsibility of the land owner or developer to bring the road up to the minimum standard
required by the Development Services Department prior to issuance of a certificate of final
occupancy.
9. Subdivision: Development that includes approval of a tentative map is subject to the provisions of
the Subdivision Map Act and the subdivision regulations under chapter 7 of this title. Where a
tentative map is proposed, the public hearing may be expanded to address findings under the
Subdivision Map Act. Wherever possible the environmental review performed at the time the site
was designated under the HO Overlay Zone will be utilized in the processing of the subdivision.
(Ord. 1680, 8-9-2016)
10-5-25: CBO CANNABIS BUSINESS OVERLAY ZONE:
(A) Purpose: The purpose of this section is to establish regulations to allow for the establishment of
commercial cannabis businesses permitted and licensed in accordance with title 5, chapter 28 of
this Code to limited areas that may include the cultivation, manufacture, processing, laboratory
testing, transporting, dispensing, distribution, or sale of cannabis or a cannabis product.
(B) Definitions: The definitions under section 5-28-5 of this Code shall apply in the interpretation of this
chapter.
(C) Applicability: A parcel of land that has the Cannabis Business Overlay Zone may engage in a
commercial cannabis business activity when permitted, licensed and in compliance with title 5,
chapter 28 of this Code. Said CBO Zone shall only be applied to Commercial, Highway
Commercial, Heavy Commercial, and Industrial Zone Districts.
(D) Permitted Uses: All of the uses permitted by-right or by conditional use permit shall be those listed
in the underlying zone district and to include commercial cannabis business activities as authorized
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 637/710
herein.
(E) Regulations: The regulations under title 5, chapter 28 of this Code shall supplement all
development standards and general regulations in the underlying zone district.
(F) Review Process: Prior to engaging in a commercial cannabis business activity, a Certification from
the Development Services Director must be obtained in accordance with section 5-28-23 of this
Code.
(G) Terms And Renewal: The terms and renewal process for commercial cannabis business permits
shall be in accordance with section 5-28-13 of this Code.
(H) Inspection And Enforcement: Inspection and enforcement shall be in accordance with section 5-28-
46 et seq., of this Code. (Ord. 1695, 1-22-2019)
Chapter 6
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
10-6-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE
REGULATIONS. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-2: PURPOSE:
It is the policy of the state of California to promote water conservation. It is the policy of the city of
Placerville to protect water quality and promote and encourage the installation and maintenance of
landscaping in private and public areas appropriate to street type, surrounding architecture and general
character of local streets will further to upgrade the visual qualities and functional efficiency of
Placerville's local streets. The standards detailed in this chapter are intended to promote the selection,
planting and maintenance of landscaping that is water efficient and water conserving, while allowing
flexibility in designing healthy, attractive and cost effective landscapes. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-3: APPLICABILITY:
(A) These regulations shall apply to all of the following projects:
1. New Development Projects: New development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal
to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan
check, site plan or other discretionary review;
2. Rehabilitated Landscape Projects: Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape
area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building
or landscape permit, plan check, site plan or other discretionary review;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 638/710
3. Existing Landscapes: Existing landscapes limited to subsection 10-6-15(A) of this chapter; and
4. Cemeteries: Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and
rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to subsections 10-6-5(E) and 10-6-9(B) of this chapter and
section 10-6-10 of this chapter; and existing cemeteries are limited to section 10-6-15 of this
chapter.
(B) Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or
less may comply with the performance requirements of these regulations or conform to the
prescriptive measures contained in section 10-6-18, appendix D of this chapter.
(C) For projects using treated or untreated gray water or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel
within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of landscape
and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with
treated or untreated gray water or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to
section 10-6-18, appendix D of this chapter.
(D) These regulations do not apply to:
1. Registered local, state or federal historical sites;
2. Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;
3. Mined land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;
4. Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public;
5. Residential landscaping that does not include an irrigation system (e.g., xeriscape landscaping).
(Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-4: DEFINITIONS:
The terms used in these regulations have the meaning set forth below:
APPLIED WATER: The portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.
AUTOMATIC IRRIGATION CONTROLLER: A timing device used to remotely control valves that
operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule
irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather based) or soil moisture data.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the
water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION: The document required under section 10-6-8 of this chapter.
CERTIFIED IRRIGATION DESIGNER: A person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited
academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S.
environmental protection agency's WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation
Association's certified irrigation designer program.
CERTIFIED LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDITOR: A person certified to perform landscape irrigation
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 639/710
audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such
as the U.S. environmental protection agency's WaterSense irrigation auditor certification program and
Irrigation Association's certified landscape irrigation auditor program.
CHECK VALVE OR ANTIDRAIN VALVE: A valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the
irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the
sprinkler is off.
CITY: City of Placerville.
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENTS: Community apartment projects, condominium projects,
planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code section 1351.
COMPOST: The safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that
is beneficial to plant growth.
CONVERSION FACTOR (0.62): The number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per
square foot.
DISTRIBUTION UNIFORMITY: The measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.
DRIP IRRIGATION: Any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow
rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply
small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.
ET ADJUSTMENT FACTOR (ETAF): A factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential
areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation
efficiency, two (2) major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the
landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape area shall not exceed
1.0. The ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.
ECOLOGICAL RESTORATION PROJECT: A project where the site is intentionally altered to establish
a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.
EFFECTIVE PRECIPITATION OR USABLE RAINFALL (EPPT): The portion of total precipitation which
becomes available for plant growth.
EMITTER: A drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.
ESTABLISHED LANDSCAPE: The point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant
root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two (2) years of growth.
ESTABLISHMENT PERIOD OF THE PLANTS: The first year after installing the plant in the landscape
or the first two (2) years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are
established after one or two (2) years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need
three (3) to five (5) years for establishment.
ESTIMATED TOTAL WATER USE (ETWU): The total water used for the landscape as described in
subsection 10-6-5(E) of this chapter.
EVAPOTRANSPIRATION RATE: The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other
surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.
FLOW RATE: The rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 640/710
gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.
FLOW SENSOR: An inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a
repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation
controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This
combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.
FRIABLE: A soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per
planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to
spread unimpeded.
FUEL MODIFICATION PLAN GUIDELINE: Guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and
businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone.
GRAY WATER: Untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not
been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat
from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Gray water"
includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes
washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or
dishwashers. Health And Safety Code section 17922.12.
HARDSCAPES: Any durable material (pervious and nonpervious).
HYDROZONE: A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting
depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated.
INFILTRATION RATE: The rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of
time (e.g., inches per hour).
INVASIVE PLANT SPECIES: Species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside
cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be
regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at
the California invasive plant inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.
IRRIGATION AUDIT: An in depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a
certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection,
system tune up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or
runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be
conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association's landscape irrigation auditor
certification program or other U.S. environmental protection agency "WaterSense" labeled auditing
program.
IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY (IE): The measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by
the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of
irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of
these regulations is 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.
IRRIGATION SURVEY: An evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation
audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written
recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.
IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS: An analysis of water use data based on meter readings and
billing data.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 641/710
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT: A person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the
state of California Business And Professions Code, section 5615.
LANDSCAPE AREA: All the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan
subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include
footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone
walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for
nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).
LANDSCAPE CONTRACTOR: A person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain,
repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.
LANDSCAPE DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE: The documents required under subsection 10-6-5(D) of
this chapter.
LANDSCAPE PROJECT: Total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the
purposes of these regulations, meeting requirements under this section.
LANDSCAPE WATER METER: An inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures
the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use.
LATERAL LINE: The water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the
valve.
LOCAL WATER PURVEYOR: The city, or in some areas of the city, the El Dorado irrigation district.
LOW VOLUME IRRIGATION: The application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of
tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume
irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root
zone of plants.
MAIN LINE: The pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.
MASTER SHUTOFF VALVE: An automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls
water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed water will not be supplied to the
irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.
MAXIMUM APPLIED WATER ALLOWANCE (MAWA): The upper limit of annual applied water for the
established landscaped area as specified in subsection 10-6-5(E) of this chapter. It is based upon the
area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The
estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape
areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as
orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with
an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)].
MEDIAN: An area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees,
shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.
MICROCLIMATE: The climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall
landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective
surfaces.
MINED LAND RECLAMATION PROJECTS: Any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan
approved in accordance with the surface mining and reclamation act of 1975.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 642/710
MULCH: Any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials
such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial
purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing
soil erosion.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of these regulations, a new building with a landscape or
other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.
NONRESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE: Landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public
settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of
common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.
OPERATING PRESSURE: The pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the
manufacturer to operate.
OVERHEAD SPRINKLER IRRIGATION SYSTEMS: Systems that deliver water through the air (e.g.,
spray heads and rotors).
OVERSPRAY: Irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.
PERMIT: An authorizing document issued by the city for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.
PERVIOUS: Any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the
underlying soil.
PLANT FACTOR OR PLANT WATER USE FACTOR: A factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the
amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of these regulations, the plant factor range for very
low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, and
the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in these regulations are
derived from the publication "Water Use Classification Of Landscape Species". Plant factors may also
be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as
approved by the California department of water resources (DWR).
PROJECT APPLICANT: The individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package
required under subsection 10-6-5(D) of this chapter, to request a permit, plan check, or design review
from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.
RAIN SENSOR OR RAIN SENSING SHUTOFF DEVICE: A component which automatically suspends
an irrigation event when it rains.
RECORD DRAWING OR AS BUILTS: A set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes
in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field
and other data furnished by the contractor.
RECREATIONAL AREA: Areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active
play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course
tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.
RECYCLED WATER, RECLAIMED WATER, OR TREATED SEWAGE EFFLUENT WATER: Treated or
recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water
features. This water is not intended for human consumption.
REFERENCE EVAPOTRANSPIRATION OR ETo: A standard measurement of environmental
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 643/710
parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as
represented in section 10-6-18, appendix A of this chapter, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration
of a large field of four (4) to seven inch (7") tall, cool season grass that is well watered. Reference
evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that
regional differences in climate can be accommodated.
REHABILITATED LANDSCAPE: Any relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or
design review, meets the requirements of section 10-6-3 of this chapter, and the modified landscape
area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.
RESIDENTIAL LANDSCAPE: Landscapes surrounding single- or multi-family homes.
RUNOFF: Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from
the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate
(application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.
SOIL MOISTURE SENSING DEVICE OR SOIL MOISTURE SENSOR: A device that measures the
amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.
SOIL TEXTURE: The classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.
SPECIAL LANDSCAPE AREA (SLA): An area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas
irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water.
SPRINKLER HEAD: A device which delivers water through a nozzle.
STATIC WATER PRESSURE: The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not
flowing.
STATION: An area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.
SUBMETER: A metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the
primary utility water meter.
SWING JOINT: An irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak free connection between the
emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment
damage.
TURF: A ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial
ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool season grasses. Bermuda grass, kikuyu grass, seashore
paspalum, St. Augustine grass, zoysia grass, and buffalo grass are warm season grasses.
VALVE: A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.
WUCOLS: The water use classification of landscape species published by the University Of California
cooperative extension and the department of water resources 2014.
WATER CONSERVING PLANT SPECIES: A plant species identified as having a very low or low plant
factor.
WATER FEATURE: A design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function.
Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools
(where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water
use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on site wastewater treatment or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 644/710
stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or
stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget
calculation.
WATERING WINDOW: The time of day irrigation is allowed. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-5: LANDSCAPE DESIGN PLAN:
(A) Consistency With Specific Plans, Other Design Guidelines And Design Criteria: Other regulations
and design criteria affecting landscape design and maintenance practices are potentially applicable
and should be consulted for additional requirements. These regulations include, but may not be
limited to:
1. Zoning code, including projects subject to section 10-4-9 of this title;
2. The "City Of Placerville Development Guide";
3. The city's "Design And Construction Standards Manual";
4. El Dorado County fire protection district regulations for fire hazard reduction and fuel modification
zones;
5. Any conditions of approval for a specific project;
6. California building code;
7. El Dorado irrigation district design and construction standards.
Where any inconsistencies arise between this chapter and other adopted policy documents, the
more restrictive requirement shall govern.
(B) Designing And Planning Of Landscape: For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully
designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the
following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.
1. Plant Material:
(a) Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the
landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve
water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:
(1) Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;
(2) Selection of water conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants;
(3) Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance;
(4) Selection of trees based on applicable local tree regulations or tree shading guidelines, and
size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area;
(5) Selection of plants from city and local landscape program plant lists; and
(6) Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 645/710
(b) Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of
hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in subsection 10-6-6(A) of this chapter.
(c) Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the
climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water
efficiency shall include one or more of the following:
(1) Use the Sunset western climate zone system which takes into account temperature,
humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence
on local climate;
(2) Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface
roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power
lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and
(3) Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter
solar gain.
(d) Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) where the toe of the slope
is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty five percent (25%) means one foot
(1') of vertical elevation change for every four feet (4') of horizontal length (rise divided by run x
100 = slope percent).
(e) High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street
medians.
(f) A landscape design plan for projects in fire prone areas shall address fire safety and
prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public
Resources Code sections 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire prone plant materials and highly
flammable mulches.
(g) The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California invasive plant council,
is strongly discouraged.
(h) The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community
apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not
prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low water use plants
as a group.
2. Water Features:
(a) Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.
(b) Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.
(c) Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the
water budget calculation.
(d) Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.
3. Soil Preparation, Mulch And Amendments:
(a) Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable
condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 646/710
(b) Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and
what is appropriate for the plants selected (see subsection (F) of this section).
(c) For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four (4) cubic yards per one
thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches
(6") into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent (6%) organic matter in the top six inches
(6") of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.
(d) A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of
planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting ground covers, or direct seeding
applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other
wildlife, up to five percent (5%) of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated
insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.
(e) Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering
standards.
(f) The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydroseeded applications shall meet the
mulching requirement.
(g) Organic mulch materials made from recycled or postconsumer products shall take precedence
over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled postconsumer organic
products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local
fuel modification plan guidelines or other applicable local regulations.
(C) Landscape Design Plan: The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:
1. Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;
2. Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated
areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget
calculation;
3. Identify recreational areas;
4. Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;
5. Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;
6. Identify type of mulch and application depth;
7. Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;
8. Identify type and surface area of water features;
9. Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious);
10. Identify location and installation details, and twenty four (24) hour retention or infiltration
capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on site
retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the city or regional water
quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements.
Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and
examples are provided in section 10-6-14 of this chapter;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 647/710
11. Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in this chapter
and their twenty four (24) hour retention or infiltration capacity;
12. Identify any applicable gray water discharge piping, system components and area(s) of
distribution;
13. Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the regulations and applied
them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan"; and
14. Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any
other person authorized to design a landscape (see sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2,
5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business And Professions Code, section
832.27 of title 16 of the California code of regulations, and section 6721 of the Food And
Agricultural Code).
(D) Elements Of The Landscape Documentation Package:
1. The landscape documentation package shall include the following six (6) elements:
(a) Project information:
(1) Date.
(2) Project applicant.
(3) Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)).
(4) Total landscape area (square feet).
(5) Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner installed).
(6) Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if
the applicant is not served by a private well.
(7) Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package.
(8) Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner.
(9) Applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements of the
water efficient landscape regulations and submit a complete Landscape Documentation
Package".
(b) Water efficient landscape worksheet:
(1) Hydrozone information table.
(2) Water budget calculations:
A. Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).
B. Estimated total water use (ETWU).
(c) Soil management report;
(d) Landscape design plan;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 648/710
(e) Irrigation design plan; and
(f) Grading design plan.
(E) Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet:
1. A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains
information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with
each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment
factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and
0.45 for nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape
project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water
allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45
for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water
use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the
landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.
(a) In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project
applicant shall use the ETo values from the reference evapotranspiration table in section 10-6-
18, appendix A of this chapter.
2. Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:
(a) The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic
institutions or professional associations as approved by the California department of water
resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to
0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0
for high water use plants.
(b) All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated
areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.
(c) All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in
section 10-6-18, appendix B of this chapter.
(d) ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.
(F) Soil Management Report:
1. In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be
completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows:
(a) Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.
(1) Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols
regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.
(2) The soil analysis shall include:
A. Soil texture;
B. Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;
C. pH;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 649/710
D. Total soluble salts;
E. Sodium;
F. Percent organic matter; and
G. Recommendations.
(3) In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil
sampling rate of one in seven (7) lots or approximately fifteen percent (15%) will satisfy this
requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven (7)
lots.
2. The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following:
(a) If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city
as part of the landscape documentation package; or
(b) If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city as
part of the certificate of completion.
3. The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals
preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary
adjustments to the design plans.
4. The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation
of soil analysis report recommendations to the city with certificate of completion. (Ord. 1675, 11-
24-2015)
10-6-6: IRRIGATION DESIGN PLAN:
(A) This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require
temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an
irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers'
recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed
to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting
the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.
1. System:
(a) Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private
submeter shall be installed for all nonresidential irrigated landscapes of one thousand (1,000)
square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet (the level at which Water Code
535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or
greater. A landscape water meter may be either:
(1) A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor;
or
(2) A privately owned meter or submeter.
(b) Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data
utilizing nonvolatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 650/710
(c) If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified
irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the
dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure
range for optimal performance.
(1) If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation
system, pressure regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or
other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation
system.
(2) Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply
shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall
be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage,
the measurements shall be conducted at installation.
(d) Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation
operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as
appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing
weather or during rain.
(e) Manual shutoff valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as
close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case
of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.
(f) Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination
by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable city code (i.e., public
health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.
(g) Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are
required for all nonresidential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000)
square feet or larger.
(h) Master shutoff valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of
technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in
a system equipped with low pressure shut down features.
(i) The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or
other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent
property, nonirrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.
(j) Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate,
shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.
(k) The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design
plan.
(l) The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation
efficiency criteria as described in section 492.4 regarding the maximum applied water
allowance.
(m) It is highly recommended that the project applicant or city inquire with the local water
purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water
restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.
(n) All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National
Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society Of Agricultural And Biological
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 651/710
Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 landscape irrigation sprinkler
and emitter standard. All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a
distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC
802-2014.
(o) It is highly recommended that the project applicant or city inquire with the local water purveyor
about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that
may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.
(p) In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water
infiltration into the root zone.
(q) Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless
otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendations.
(r) Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to
achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations.
(s) Swing joints or other riser protection components are required on all risers subject to damage
that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turfgrass.
(t) Check valves or antidrain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point discharge
could occur.
(u) Areas less than ten feet (10') in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface
irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.
(v) Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty four inches (24") of any nonpermeable
surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from nonpermeable surfaces may include drip,
drip line, or other low flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or
unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These
restrictions may be modified if:
(1) The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or
(2) The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to
landscaping; or
(3) The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the
landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation
system design criteria in section 10-6-5 of this chapter. Prevention of overspray and runoff
must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.
(w) Slopes greater than twenty five percent (25%) shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system
with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inch per hour. This restriction may be modified if the
landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape
documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of
runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.
2. Hydrozone:
(a) Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions,
and plant materials with similar water use.
(b) Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for
the plant type within that hydrozone.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 652/710
(c) Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, ground covers, and turf
to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall
be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.
(d) Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high
water use, may be allowed if:
(1) The plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses
and their plant factor; or
(2) The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.
(e) Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.
(f) On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated
by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas
irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the
hydrozone information table (see section 10-6-18, appendix B of this chapter). This table can
also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.
3. Irrigation Design Plan: The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:
(a) Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;
(b) Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main
and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick
couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;
(c) Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;
(d) Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating
pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;
(e) Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in section 10-6-12 of this chapter;
(f) The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the regulations and applied them
accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and
(g) The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed
landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See
sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of
the Business And Professions Code, section 832.27 of title 16 of the California code of
regulations, and section 6721 of the Food And Agricultural Code.) (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-7: GRADING DESIGN PLAN:
(A) For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion,
runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation
package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other city permits satisfies
this requirement.
1. The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations
and elevations of the landscape area including:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 653/710
(a) Height of graded slopes;
(b) Drainage patterns;
(c) Pad elevations;
(d) Finish grade; and
(e) Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.
2. To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:
(a) Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain
on to nonpermeable hardscapes;
(b) Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and
(c) Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.
3. The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria
of the regulations and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design
plan" and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Ord. 1675, 11-
24-2015)
10-6-8: CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION:
(A) Prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy, a signed landscape certificate of completion shall be
submitted to the development services department on a form prescribed by the department that
shall include the following information and documentation:
1. Project information sheet that contains:
(a) Date;
(b) Project name;
(c) Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address;
(d) Project address and location; and
(e) Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;
2. Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design
plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the
approved landscape documentation package;
(a) Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these "as
built" or record drawings shall be included with the certification;
(b) A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller
for subsequent management purposes.
3. Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see section 10-6-9 of this chapter);
4. Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see section 10-6-9 of this chapter);
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 654/710
5. Irrigation audit report (see section 10-6-10 of this chapter); and
6. Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation
verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see section 10-6-5 of this chapter).
(B) The project applicant shall:
1. Submit the signed certificate of completion to the city (development services department) for
review;
2. Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water
purveyor and property owner or his or her designee.
(C) The city shall:
1. Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant;
2. Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the city
shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other
assistance. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-9: IRRIGATION SCHEDULING AND MAINTENANCE:
(A) Irrigation Scheduling: For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed,
managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health.
Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:
1. Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.
2. Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local
water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the
normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.
3. For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run
times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water
meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to
maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by
automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or
soil moisture sensor data.
4. Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the
following:
(a) The plant establishment period;
(b) The established landscape; and
(c) Temporarily irrigated areas.
5. Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 655/710
(a) Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);
(b) Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);
(c) Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;
(d) Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;
(e) Application rate setting;
(f) Root depth setting;
(g) Plant type setting;
(h) Soil type;
(i) Slope factor setting;
(j) Shade factor setting; and
(k) Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting.
(B) Landscape And Irrigation Maintenance:
1. Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule
shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.
2. A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing,
adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf
areas; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing
obstruction to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering
window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.
3. Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their
equivalents or with components with greater efficiency.
4. A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best
practices for all landscape maintenance activities. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-10: IRRIGATION WATER USE ANALYSIS AND MONITORING:
(A) All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a city landscape irrigation auditor or a third
party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person
who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.
(B) In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home
developments) an auditing rate of one in seven (7) lots or approximately fifteen percent (15%) will
satisfy this requirement.
(C) For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after December 1, 2015, as
described in section 10-6-3 of this chapter:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 656/710
1. The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the
city that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune up, system test with distribution
uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation
schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors,
slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming;
2. The city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use
analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water
allowance. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-11: IRRIGATION EFFICIENCY:
(A) For the purpose of determining estimate total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to
be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-12: RECYCLED WATER:
(A) The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of
recycled water.
(B) All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all
applicable local and state laws.
(C) Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment
factor for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord.
1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-13: GRAY WATER SYSTEMS:
(A) Gray water systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on site
landscape irrigation. All gray water systems shall conform to the California plumbing code (title 24,
part 5, chapter 16) and any applicable local regulations standards. Refer to section 490.1(d) for the
applicability of these regulations to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred (2,500)
square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by gray water. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-14: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND RAINWATER RETENTION:
(A) Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges
groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into
the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on site rainwater
retention and infiltration are encouraged.
(B) Project applicants shall refer to the city of Placerville "Design And Construction Standards Manual".
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 657/710
(C) All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and
infiltration. Refer to section 10-6-5 of this chapter.
(D) It is strongly recommended that all landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration
capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas)
from either: 1) the 1-inch, 24-hour rain event or 2) the 85th percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or
additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation. See the
city of Placerville design and construction standards for the required hydraulic sizing criteria that
apply to projects that create or replace more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of impervious
surfaces.
(E) It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on
site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and use:
1. Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.
2. Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways.
3. Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or
porous concrete) that minimize runoff.
4. Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to
maximize site water capture and reuse.
5. Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.
6. Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture stormwater and dry weather
runoff and increase percolation into the soil.
7. Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter
pollutants. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-15: PROVISIONS FOR EXISTING LANDSCAPES INSTALLED PRIOR TO
DECEMBER 1, 2015:
(A) This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015, and
are over one acre in size.
1. For all landscapes in this subsection (A) that have a water meter, the city shall administer
programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys,
and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce
landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for
existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be
calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62).
2. For all landscapes in this subsection (A), that do not have a meter, the city shall administer
programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to
evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.
(B) All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. (Ord.
1675, 11-24-2015)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 658/710
10-6-16: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
Violations of this chapter, unless otherwise excepted, are considered administrative violations of city
code, subject to enforcement procedures under section 1-4A-1 et seq., of this code. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-
2015)
10-6-17: SEVERABILITY:
(A) If any section, subsection, phrase, or clause of this chapter is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.
(B) The city council hereby declares that it would be passed this chapter and each section, subsection,
phrase or clause thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections,
phrases, or clauses be declared unconstitutional. (Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
10-6-18: APPENDICES:
(A) Appendix A:
Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table*
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Annual
ETo
Placerville
1.41
1.88
2.99
4.47
5.91
7.46
9.00
8.21
6.23
4.19
1.84
1.37
56.96
* The values in this table were derived from Table 2-1, (DWR Table 3) Climate Characteristics
of the 2005 Urban Water Management Plan for the City of Placerville.
(B) Appendix B:
Sample Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet.
Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo)
Hydrozone
#/Planting
Descriptiona
Plant
Factor
(PF)
Irrigation
Methodb
Irrigation
Efficiency
(IE)c
ETAF
(PF/IE)
Landscape
Area
(sq. ft.)
ETAF x
Area
Estimated
Total
Water
Use
(ETWU)d
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 659/710
Regular Landscape Areas
Totals (A) (B)
Special Landscape Areas
1
1
1
Totals (C) (D)
ETWU Total
Maximum Allowed Water Allowance
(MAWA)e
aHydrozone #/Planting Description
E.g
1.) front lawn
2.) low water use plantings
3.) medium water use planting
bIrrigation Method
overhead spray or drip
cIrrigation Efficiency
0.75 for spray head,
0.81 for drip
dETWU (Annual Gallons Required) = ETo x 0.62 x ETAF x Area
where 0.62 is a conversion factor that acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot
per year.
eMAWA (Annual Gallons Allowed) = (ETo) ( 0.62) [ (ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)]
where 0.62 is a conversion factor that acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot
per year, LA is the total landscape area in square feet, SLA is the total special landscape area
in square feet, and ETAF is .55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas.
ETAF Calculations
Regular Landscape Areas All Landscape Areas
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 660/710
Total ETAF x Area (B) Total ETAF x Area (B+D)
Total Area (A) Total Area (A+C)
Average ETAF B . A Average ETAF (B+D) . (A+C)
Average ETAF for Regular Landscape Areas must be 0.55 or below for residential areas, and
0.45 or below for nonresidential areas.
(C) Appendix C:
Sample Certificate of Completion.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION
This certificate is filled out by the project applicant upon completion of the landscape project.
PART 1. PROJECT INFORMATION SHEET
Date
Project Name
Name of Project Applicant Telephone No.
Fax No.
Title Email Address
Company Street Address
City State Zip Code
Project Address and Location:
Street Address Parcel, tract or lot number, if available.
City Latitude/Longitude (optional)
State Zip Code
Property Owner or his/her designee:
Name Telephone No.
Fax No.
Title Email Address
Company Street Address
City State Zip Code
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 661/710
Property Owner
"I/we certify that I/we have received copies of all the documents within the Landscape
Documentation Package and the Certificate of Completion and that it is our responsibility to see
that the project is maintained in accordance with the Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance
Schedule."
Property Owner SignatureDate
Please answer the questions below:
1.Date the Landscape Documentation Package was submitted to the City
2.Date the Landscape Documentation Package was approved by the City
3.Date that a copy of the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet (including the Water Budget
Calculation) was submitted to the local water purveyor
PART 2. CERTIFICATION OF INSTALLATION ACCORDING TO THE LANDSCAPE
DOCUMENTATION PACKAGE
"I/we certify that based upon periodic site observations, the work has been substantially completed in
accordance with the regulations and that the landscape planting and irrigation installation conform with
the criteria and specifications of the approved Landscape Documentation Package."
Signature* Date
Name (print) Telephone No.
Fax No.
Title Email Address
License No. or Certification No.
Company Street Address
City State Zip Code
*Signer of the landscape design plan, signer of the irrigation plan, or a licensed landscape
contractor.
PART 3. IRRIGATION SCHEDULING
Attach parameters for setting the irrigation schedule on controller per regulations Section 10-6-8.
PART 4. SCHEDULE OF LANDSCAPE AND IRRIGATION MAINTENANCE
Attach schedule of Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance per regulations Section 10-6-8.
PART 5. LANDSCAPE IRRIGATION AUDIT REPORT
Attach Landscape Irrigation Audit Report per regulations Section 10-6-9.
PART 6. SOIL MANAGEMENT REPORT
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 662/710
Attach soil analysis report, if not previously submitted with the Landscape Documentation Package per
regulations Section 10-6-5.
Attach documentation verifying implementation of recommendations from soil analysis report per
regulations Section 10-6-5.
(D) Appendix D:
Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet
Prescriptive Compliance Option
(a) This appendix contains prescriptive requirements which may be used as a compliance
option to the Model Water Efficient Landscape Regulations.
(b) Compliance with the following items is mandatory and must be documented on a landscape
plan in order to use the prescriptive compliance option:
(1) Submit a Landscape Documentation Package which includes the following elements:
(A) date
(B) project applicant
(C) project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s))
(D) total landscape area (square feet), including a breakdown of turf and plant material
(E) project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed)
(F) water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water
purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well
(G) contact information for the project applicant and property owner
(H) applicant signature and date with statement, "I agree to comply with the requirements
of the prescriptive compliance option to the MWELO".
(2) Incorporate compost at a rate of at least four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet to a depth
of six inches into landscape area (unless contra-indicated by a soil test);
(3) Plant material shall comply with all of the following:
(A) For residential areas, install climate adapted plants that require occasional, little or no
summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor 0.3) for 75% of the plant area excluding
edibles and areas using recycled water; For non-residential areas, install climate adapted
plants that require occasional, little or no summer water (average WUCOLS plant factor
0.3) for 100% of the plant area excluding edibles and areas using recycled water;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 663/710
(B) A minimum three inch (3") layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces
of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding
applications where mulch is contraindicated.
(4) Turf shall comply with all of the following:
(A) Turf shall not exceed 25% of the landscape area in residential areas, and there shall
be no turf in non-residential areas;
(B) Turf shall not be planted on sloped areas which exceed a slope of 1 foot vertical
elevation change for every 4 feet of horizontal length;
(C) Turf is prohibited in parkways less than 10 feet wide, unless the parkway is adjacent to
a parking strip and used to enter and exit vehicles. Any turf in parkways must be irrigated
by sub-surface irrigation or by other technology that creates no overspray or runoff.
(5) Irrigation systems shall comply with the following:
(A) Automatic irrigation controllers are required and must use evapotranspiration or soil
moisture sensor data.
(B) Irrigation controllers shall be of a type which does not lose programming date in the
event the primary power source is interrupted.
(C) Pressure regulators shall be installed on the irrigation system to ensure the dynamic
pressure of the system is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range.
(D) Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be
installed as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply.
(E) All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the ANSI standard,
ASABE/ICC 802-2014. "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard", All sprinkler
heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of
0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.
(c) At the time of final inspection, the permit applicant must provide the owner of the property
with a certificate of completion, certificate of installation, irrigation schedule and a schedule of
landscape and irrigation maintenance.
(Ord. 1675, 11-24-2015)
Chapter 7
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
10-7-1: PURPOSE:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 664/710
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth rules and regulations for the subdivision of real property, all in
conformance with the provisions of the subdivision map act, chapter 2, part 2 of division 4 of the
Business and Professions Code of the state, and amendments thereto. (Ord. 760, 5-17-1954)
10-7-2: TENTATIVE MAP; PREPARATION:
The subdivider shall cause the tentative map of the land proposed to be subdivided to be prepared by
a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. (Ord. 760, 5-17-1954)
10-7-3: SUBMISSION OF MAP TO ENGINEER:
All maps of subdivisions offered to the council for approval shall first be submitted to the engineer or to
such engineer or surveyor as the council may direct. (Ord. 760, 5-17-1954)
10-7-4: PROOF OF CLEAR TITLE; CERTIFICATE:
Proof shall be furnished to the council that the parties concerned and requesting the filing of the map
and making dedications to public use are all the parties necessary to give a clear title and the council
may in its discretion require a certificate of title by a competent title company or such other proof as the
council may in its discretion deem necessary. (Ord. 760, 5-17-1954)
10-7-5: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS:
Each subdivision shall be in conformity to the following standards:
(A) General:
1. No subdivision will be approved for recordation by the council in which the streets are not offered
for dedication and which the city has not accepted. (Ord. 760, 5-17-1954)
2. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the acceptance of any subdivision map and the recordation
thereof prior to the construction of any streets, roads, avenues, ways, lanes and sewers, water
mains and other required public improvements; providing, the subdivider shall post good and
acceptable security which security shall be one of the following, subject to the approval of the city
council:
(a) Bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate surety.
(b) A deposit, either with the city or a reasonable escrow agent or trust company, at the option of
the city, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public
monies.
(c) An instrument of credit from one or more financial institution subject to regulation by the state
or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement
are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such financial
institution. The amount of said security shall be as provided for in Government Code section
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 665/710
66499.3. If the required subdivision improvements are financed and installed pursuant to
special assessment proceedings, upon the furnishing by the contractor of the faithful
performance and labor and material bonds required by the special assessment act being used,
the improvement security of the subdivider may be reduced by an amount corresponding to the
amount of such bonds so furnished by the contractor. (Ord. 1494, 7-28-1992)
3. The width of all rights of way for streets shall be as follows:
(a) Primary access streets through subdivision: Fifty six feet (56').
(b) Secondary streets: Fifty feet (50').
(c) Dead end streets less than five hundred feet (500') in length: Forty four feet (44').
Not less than the following shall be allowed for pavement:
(d) Primary access streets through subdivision: Thirty two feet (32').
(e) Secondary streets: Twenty eight feet (28'). (Ord. 1179, 12-12-1978)
(f) Dead end streets less than five hundred feet (500') in length: Twenty four feet (24').
Every dead end street or road offered for dedication to the city upon the final map of a subdivision,
or otherwise, must be provided with a turnaround area at the end of the dead end street or road.
All such turnaround areas shall have a radius of at least forty feet (40').
Not less than four feet (4') shall be allowed on either side of the street for sidewalks. (Ord. 873,
12-21-1961)
4. Horizontal and vertical alignment of all streets shall be such as to meet the approval of the city,
and terminal points of all streets within or at the boundaries of a subdivision shall be such as to
meet the approval of the city.
5. All streets shall be pitched and crowned to drain.
6. Culverts and/or storm drains together with approved inlet and outlet structures and a means of
cleaning the system shall be provided when required by the city.
7. All streets and roads shall be provided with curbs and gutters in conformance with city standards.
8. All streets and roads shall be paved in accordance with city standards and all streets shall be
paved from gutter to gutter.
9. All streets and roads shall be accurately monumented at the centerline intersections in
conformance with city standards.
10. All streets and roads shall be provided with water mains of such size and such locations as
directed by the city.
11. All streets and roads shall be provided with sewers of such sizes and such locations as directed
by the city.
12. Should the city require sidewalks in certain areas or the subdivider or owner elect to construct
the same, the sidewalks shall be in conformance with city standards.
13. Plans and profiles of proposed streets and roads showing pavement type and sections, curb
and gutter sections and locations, storm drainage sections and locations, sewer and water pipe
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 666/710
sizes and locations, shall be presented to the city for approval, and any work performed or
materials used without prior approval of the city is so performed and are so used at the peril of
the parties to the act, and the city shall have the right to cause the removal of such materials,
structures, pavement, pipe, curb, monuments or other items which have not been approved and
the replacement of such disapproved materials, structures, pavement, pipe, curb, monuments or
other items, with approved types, quantities and qualities as the city deems proper. (Ord. 760, 5-
17-1954)
14. Each subdivider of real property in the city shall notify the superintendent of public works as to
the time and place that any street is to be constructed by the subdivider in any subdivision or
proposed subdivision in the city at least twenty four (24) hours before the construction is to
commence so that the superintendent of public works or his agent may be present for the
purpose of determining if the street is being properly constructed pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
15. The council shall not make any final acceptance of any street in any subdivision in the city until
at least ninety (90) days have elapsed after the completion of the construction, if the street has
been constructed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, and not until the street has
been used by the general public for a period of at least ninety (90) days. (Ord. 808, 6-19-1958)
16. When the centerline grade of a street exceeds ten percent (10%) and/or the natural slope of the
area exceeds fifteen percent (15%), the city may allow a modification in the street standards
specified in this section. The planning commission shall review any proposed modifications to the
adopted street standards and shall base their decision on the hillside street standards adopted by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 1292, 1-12-1982)
(B) Standard Monumentation:
1. Monuments shall be pipes with galvanized iron caps. The caps shall be securely screwed or
pinned to the pipe.
2. Street centerline intersection monuments shall be two inch (2") pipe, thirty inches (30") long. The
caps shall be center punched and the registration number of the registered engineer or licensed
surveyor who sets the monument or under whose direction the monuments are set shall be
stamped thereon together with the year in which the monument was set.
3. The top of street centerline monuments shall be set at least one foot (1') below the finished grade
of the street but not more than one and one-half feet (11/2') below the finished grade unless
otherwise authorized by the city.
4. The street centerline monuments shall be referred to as approved crosses cut or cast in the top
of the curb.
5. The references shall be so situated as to provide the greatest included angle between the
reference lines.
6. There shall be not less than three (3) references for each street centerline monument and where
practical there shall be references.
7. References shall be accurate to the nearest one-hundredth foot (0.01') measured level.
8. References shall be recorded in the office of the clerk.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 667/710
9. All lot corners of subdivisions shall be monumented with three-fourths inch (3/4") pipes not less
than twenty four inches (24") long. The caps shall be center punched and the registration number
of the registered engineer or licensed surveyor who set the monuments or under whose direction
monuments are set shall be stamped thereon.
(C) Lot Sizes And Setback Standards:
1. All lots in subdivisions shall be located with at least one boundary contiguous to a dedicated
street for a distance of not less than fifty two feet (52'); provided, however, this provision may be
waived by the council for specific cases of hardship.
2. Lot side lines shall be as nearly at right angles to the front street line as is practicable.
3. The minimum setback from the front lot line for any building shall be fifteen feet (15') and ten feet
(10') for any side or rear line abutting upon a street.
(D) Curb And Gutter Standards:
1. All curbs and gutters shall be monolithic concrete having not less than a two thousand five
hundred (2,500) pound standard twenty eight (28) day compressive strength.
2. The curb and gutters shall conform to one of the cross sections as shown and delineated in
sheets entitled "Standard Curbs And Gutters, City Of Placerville", and shall be of the specific
standard cross section for each of the several locations as designated by the city as applicable to
the specific location.
(E) Sidewalk Standards:
1. Sidewalk pavement shall not be less than three feet (3') in width not less than four inches (4") in
thickness, except through driveway sections where the minimum thickness shall be not less than
six inches (6").
2. All sidewalk pavement shall be standard Portland cement concrete having not less than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) pound standard twenty eight (28) day compressive strength.
3. Sidewalk pavement shall scope towards the gutter at a rate of not less than three-eighths inch
(3/8") nor more than one-half inch (1/2") per foot of width.
4. Sidewalk pavement shall be true to grade and shall contain no ridges, valleys or bumps in excess
on one-fourth inch (1/4") in ten feet (10').
5. Sidewalk pavement finish shall be wood float finished. (Ord. 760, 5-17-1954)
(F) Pavement, Base And Subgrade Standards:
1. General:
(a) A graded and compacted natural subgrade.
(b) An imported rock of gravel interlocked, bonded and compacted base.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 668/710
(c) A liquid asphalt prime coat.
(d) A plant mix.
(e) A liquid asphalt seal coat, covered with rock chips.
2. Subgrade:
(a) The subgrade will be considered as that portion of the roadbed surfaced upon which a layer of
base material is to be placed. In all cases the details of the operations of preparing subgrade
shall be under the direction of the city, and the city shall have authority at all times to stop the
operations, if in its opinion these specifications are not being complied with in a manner which
will result to the type of subgrade specified.
(b) The finished subgrade shall be true to grade and cross section, hard, uniform and smooth.
(c) Continued use of prepared subgrade for hauling, which will cut or deform it from the true cross
section, will not be permitted, The contractor shall at his own expense, repair any damage to
subgrade caused by his operation or use by public traffic. No material shall be placed until the
subgrade is in a condition satisfactory to the city.
(d) After the existing roadbed has been scarified and graded to the required elevation for
subgrade preparation and unless properly prepared in the judgment of the city, during a
preceding operation, all portions of the roadbed upon which the subgrade is to be prepared
shall be loosened, by plowing and scarifying or other means, to a depth of at least six inches
(6") below the final subgrade elevation, and all boulders, large lumps of earth, hard ribs or solid
rock removed and disposed of, as directed by the city, in such a manner as not to present an
unsightly appearance The loosened subgrade material shall be brought to as finely divided
condition as the material will permit.
(e) By means of proper equipment, properly handled, excess broken up subgrade material shall
be removed to that elevation above the finished subgrade cross section, so that the remaining
subgrade material will, after watering and rolling, compact to the required grade and cross
section.
(f) The broken up subgrade material shall then be watered in a uniform manner, the amount of
water used being such as to obtain, in the judgment of the city, the optimum moisture content
for compaction.
(g) It shall then be harrowed to mix the wet material with the dry underneath, until the whole
mass of loose material is at the proper state of moisture for maximum compaction. The
subgrade material shall then be rolled, with a power roller of approved type weighing not less
than ten (10) tons and with a compression on the rear wheels of not less than three hundred
twenty five (325) pounds per linear inch of tire widths until further compaction is not necessary
in the opinion of the city.
(h) After the subgrade has been prepared, the subgrade shall be watered in a sufficient amount,
in the judgment of the superintendent of public works, for proper working, and then cut, by
approved equipment, to the required grade and cross section, after which the subgrade shall
be again watered, rolled and compacted to grade and cross section.
(i) Where not controlled by adjacent structures or features, the finished subgrade may vary, but
not to exceed one-tenth (0.1) of a foot above or below the staked grade; providing, it is uniform
and free from sharp breaks. The cross section shall be free from ridges or valleys and shall be
within five-hundredths foot (0.05') above or below the theoretical section at any point on the
cross section. Subgrade that does not conform shall be watered, recut and thoroughly rolled.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 669/710
3. Crusher Run Base: The mineral aggregate for crusher run base shall consist of quarry waste,
broken stone, crushed gravel, or a combination thereof. The aggregate shall be free from adobe,
vegetable matter, loam and other deleterious substances, and shall be of such a quality that it will
compact thoroughly when watered and rolled, to form a firm, well bonded base. Unless otherwise
specifically specified or approved by the city, the mineral aggregate shall conform to the grading
specified for two inch (2") maximum aggregate.
When the mineral aggregate does not contain sufficient binder material to bond properly under
the action of watering and rolling, there shall be added to and incorporated in it, a binder material
consisting of rock dust, disintegrated granite or other cermentaceous material.
Crusher base shall be uniformly placed and spread to a proper crown and grade over the area to
a minimum depth of four inches (4") watered, rolled, puddled and worked as a graded water
bound macadam pavement. Should porous spots develop, fines shall be added to such places
and the rolling and puddling continued until the water will go ahead of the roller in a wave, rather
than penetrate the surface, and until the surface becomes hard and firm. The roller used for
compaction shall conform to the equipment specified under subsection (F)2 of this section.
The base shall then be allowed to dry and cure. Then plant mix or blacktop shall be applied to a
two inch (2") thickness, rolled to a uniform thickness to a smooth, firm, hard, well graded and
shaped base.
4. Prime And Seal Coat: The prime coat, and class D seal coat shall conform to sections 21, 23, 26,
65, 66 and 67 of the "Standard Specifications Of The State Of California Department Of Public
Works", dated April 1945. (Ord. 824, 5-21-1959)
5. Alternate Standards: The following standards may be substituted for a road base in a subdivision:
Lime treated base may be substituted for URB subject to tests performed to determine the
suitability of the material. The cost of testing shall be borne by the party requesting the
substitution of lime treated base, and all samples taken and tests made shall be as directed by
the road department and subject to acceptance by the road department. Tests shall be performed
by an accredited and certified laboratory, and all samples shall be taken by qualified personnel.
Thickness of lime treated base shall be as indicated to be necessary by the tests, but in no case
less than six inches (6") thick. The road department shall determine the acceptability of all
samples, test results, road design and construction procedures for lime treated base. (Ord. 842,
8-1-1960)
10-7-6: FEES:
Fees shall be paid as required by section 4-8-1 of this code to defray the costs incidental to the
processing of the tentative and final maps. (Ord. 1263, 5-26-1981)
10-7-7: NONCONFORMANCE; WHEN PERMITTED:
Whenever in the opinion of the council the land involved in any subdivision is of such size or shape or
is subject to such title limitations of record or is affected by such topographical location or conditions or
is to be devoted to such use that it is impossible or impracticable in the particular case for the
subdivider to conform fully to the regulations contained in this chapter, the council may make such
modification thereof as in its opinion is reasonably necessary or expedient and in conformity with the
spirit and purpose of the map act and of this chapter. (Ord. 760, 5-17-1954)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 670/710
Chapter 8
PARCEL MAPS
10-8-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
This chapter shall be known and cited as the CITY OF PLACERVILLE'S PARCEL MAP ORDINANCE.
(Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-2: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of implementing the subdivision map act. The Placerville city
council as the adoptive agency and authority, hereby assigns the duties outlined within this chapter to
the planning commission and the development services director. Further, the city council shall
hereinafter be called the final appeals board. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-3: SCOPE OF CHAPTER:
(A) This chapter shall govern the division of any and all land within the incorporated limits of the city of
Placerville where four (4) or fewer parcels, condominium units or community project apartments are
created except where each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty
(40) acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section.
(B) This chapter shall also govern the division of such land where five (5) or more parcels,
condominium units or community project apartments are created but only where:
1. The land before division contains less than five (5) acres, each parcel created by the division
abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are
required by the legislative body; or
2. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty (20) acres or more and has an
approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or
3. The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or
highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development
and which has the approval of the governing body as to street alignments and widths; or
4. Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty (40) acres or is not
less than a quarter of a quarter section.
(C) This chapter shall be applicable to:
1. Tentative and final maps required for all subdivisions creating five (5) or more parcels, five (5) or
more condominiums as defined in section 783 of the Civil Code, or a community apartment
project containing five (5) or more parcels;
2. The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within apartment
buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobilehome parks or trailer parks;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 671/710
3. Mineral, oil or gas leases;
4. Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state of
California;
5. A lot line adjustment between two (2) or more adjacent parcels where the land taken from one
parcel is added to an adjacent parcel, and where a greater number of parcels than originally
existed is not thereby created, provided the lot adjustment is approved by resolution of the local
agency;
6. The sale, lease, or financing of property if the property has been assigned a separate parcel
number on the county assessment roll as of March 4, 1972;
7. The conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity or public utility;
8. Agricultural leases as defined in section 66424 of the subdivision map act.
(D) It is further the purpose of the city council of the city of Placerville and of these regulations to
require the subdivider to dedicate rights of way, easements, and the construction of reasonable off
site and on site improvements for the parcels being created and to require the establishment of
open spaces and/or the development of recreational purposes within the city of Placerville prior to
the recordation of all parcel maps. The city council of the city of Placerville hereby finds that the
fulfillment of the construction requirements is a necessary prerequisite to the orderly development of
the city of Placerville and that said construction requirements are necessary in order to provide for
public health and safety for the residents of the city of Placerville. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-4: DEFINITIONS:
APPEALS BOARD: (A) The first appeals board means the planning commission of the city of
Placerville.
(B) The final appeals board means the city council of the city of Placerville.
APPROVED ACCESS: Approved access means that all lots shall have frontage to an improved
street meeting city standards. The improved street shall be the area contiguous to the lots.
BUILDING SITE: A parcel or lot of land containing not less than the prescribed minimum area
required by the Placerville zoning ordinance or other applicable local ordinance existing at the time
of the creation of the lot or parcel and occupied or intended to be occupied by buildings or
structures.
CUL-DE-SAC: A street open at one end only, and providing at the other end special facilities for the
turning around of vehicular traffic.
IMPROVEMENT: Refers to such street work and utilities to be installed or agreed to be installed by
the divider to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are
necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and
drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the parcel map thereof.
Improvement also refers to such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the
installation of which, either by the divider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity
approved by the local agency or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to ensure
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 672/710
conformity to or implementation of the general plan required by article 5 (commencing with section
65300) and article 8 (commencing with section 65450) of chapter 3 of division 1 of the Government
Code.
IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS: The standards adopted by the city of Placerville regulating the
development of land as a division.
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The relocation of the boundary or boundaries between two (2) or more
adjoining parcels of land and which does not create any additional parcels of land.
PARCEL MAP: Refers to a map prepared in accordance with the subdivision map act and this
chapter which map is designed to be filed in the office of the county recorder.
PARCEL SPLIT: The division of any real property improved or unimproved, or portion thereof,
shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units which are
divided for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, with the exception
of those land divisions defined in subsection 10-8-3(C) of this chapter. Property shall be considered
as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights of
way.
PUBLIC STREET: The full width of the right of way of any road, street, lane, alley or pedestrian
walkway used by or for the general public, whether or not those roads, streets, lanes, alleys, and
pedestrian walkways have been accepted as and declared to be part of the city system of public
streets, except streets forming a part of the state highway system.
REMAINDER: Shall be considered as areas fifty percent (50%) in excess of the smallest parcel
shown on the parcel map, but not less than five (5) acres and/or areas of contiguous ownership in
an adjoining section.
STREETS: Includes highways and refers to land primarily devoted to vehicular traffic use and
extending to the boundaries of the right of way of the adjoining owner whether designated as a
highway, freeway, throughway, thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, road, parkway, lane, alley, place,
court, circle, driveway, or other similar term.
SUBDIVIDER: A person, firm, corporation, partnership or association, who proposes to divide,
divides, or causes to be divided, real property into a division for himself or for others, except that
employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not subdividers.
TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP: Refers to a map made for the purpose of showing the design of a
proposed division or reversion to acreage and the existing conditions in and around it. Such map
need not be based upon an accurate or detailed field survey of the property. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-5: SUSPENSION OF REQUIREMENT; VARIANCE OF ADJUSTMENT:
In approving a tentative map, the commission or council may grant a suspension of any of the
subdivision requirements set forth or referred to in this chapter, except underground facilities which
may be waived only by the council; provided such suspensions are not inconsistent with state law. A
variance from the lot area, frontage, width, depth and front yard or setback requirements of the various
zones set forth in this code, may also be granted by the commission or the council. If such suspension
or variance is requested, a public hearing shall be conducted as provided in section 10-3-6 of this title.
The time limits established in section 10-8-9 of this chapter may be extended by mutual consent of the
subdivider and the commission or council as appropriate. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 673/710
10-8-6: TENTATIVE MAPS:
Prior to any division of lands as defined in section 10-8-3 of this chapter, the landowner or his agent
shall file for approval with the development services department an application on a form provided by
the department accompanied by a fee established by section 10-8-13 of this chapter. Eight (8) copies
of the tentative map depicting the following information shall be submitted: (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd.
Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(A) The tentative map shall be submitted on durable paper sheets eighteen inches by twenty six inches
(18" x 26") or larger, suggested size, and drawn to a scale of one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'),
one inch equals fifty feet (1" = 50'), one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), one inch equals
two hundred feet (1" = 200'), or one inch equals four hundred feet (1" = 400'), and which is sufficient
in size to allow all the details and required data to show clearly. Any number of sheets may be used,
providing each sheet specifies the total number of sheets and its relation to each adjoining sheet.
(B) The tentative map, attached sheets or accompanying reports, shall show clearly the following data
and information:
1. North point and scale;
2. The location, names and right of way width of adjacent streets, highways and alleys. Further,
show access easements to a connection with a public road, together with their deed or map
reference;
3. Contours at five foot (5') intervals;
4. Show the boundaries of the parcel;
5. Width and approximate location of all existing and proposed road easements for rights of way
and approximate grades, drainage, sewage and public utilities, both underground and overhead;
6. The approximate dimensions and area of proposed parcels;
7. All the names of adjacent subdivisions and adjacent parcel map references. All the names and
deed recording numbers of the adjacent landowners;
8. Current El Dorado County assessor's plot map and, if one exists, a copy of the preceding parcel
map showing the property to be divided;
9. The location of all existing structures of residential, commercial, industrial or recreational uses or
for which permits have been applied for and granted, but not yet constructed, within any existing
or proposed boundary;
10. Indicate the proposed source of potable water and the proposed method of sewage disposal;
11. A letter bearing the authorized agent or owner's signature certifying the engineer or surveyors
preparation of a parcel map and division of the property, when property owner is not preparing
tentative parcel map;
12. Building setback lines as required by the present land use zone;
13. Vicinity map;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 674/710
14. The following information to be listed on the tentative map in the following consecutive order:
(Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
TENTATIVE MAP
Owner of record: (name and address)
Name of applicant: (name and address)
Map prepared by: (name and address)
Scale:
Contour interval:
Source of Topography:
Section, Township and Range or lot and block:
Assessment parcel number(s):
Present zoning:
Total area:
Total number of parcels:
Minimum parcel area:
Water supply:
Sewage disposal:
Date:
Note: In the lower right hand corner of each map, a signature block should be shown giving
space for:
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR
DATE: APPROVAL:
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
DISAPPROVAL:
PLANNING COMMISSION
DATE: APPROVAL:
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
DISAPPROVAL:
CITY COUNCIL
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 675/710
DATE: APPROVAL:
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL:
DISAPPROVAL:
(Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-7: SUBMITTAL OF TENTATIVE MAP:
Any recommendation imposing a burden on the applicant, generated during the processing of a
tentative map by any city staff, prior to a hearing by the planning commission or city council, shall be in
writing and a copy shall be provided to the divider or agent at least three (3) days prior to said hearing
or action on the map by the commission or council. The subdivider shall provide ten (10) additional
copies of the tentative map for hearing before the planning commission and eight (8) additional copies
of the tentative map for hearing before the city council. The subdivider shall submit said copies to the
planning division at least ten (10) days prior to any hearings. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-8: REVIEW OF TENTATIVE MAP BY AGENCIES OTHER THAN CITY
DEPARTMENTS:
The review procedure shall be in accordance with sections 66453, 66455.5 and 66455.7 of the
Government Code. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-9: ACTION ON TENTATIVE MAP:
Upon receipt of the application, application fee, tentative map, radius map, and list of property owners
within three hundred feet (300'), the development services director shall approve or disapprove the
tentative map as to design, area, flood and drainage control, reasonable on site and off site
improvements, under the provisions of this chapter and section 66411 of the subdivision map act,
within fifty (50) days, or such time as reasonably necessary with the concurrence of the applicant,
when there has been no contest on environmental grounds. The criteria used shall be city standards. If
the development services director finds that the tentative map does not fulfill all of the criteria as
defined, the applicant will be so notified and such notice shall specifically enumerate the
nonconforming conditions. The development services director shall either approve, conditionally
approve, or deny the tentative map. The applicant may then either revise the map to so conform or
request a hearing before the planning commission. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-10: APPEAL TO FIRST APPEALS BOARD:
The planning commission, upon appeal from the applicant or any other interested person within three
hundred feet (300') of said property as per section 10-3-7 of this title, shall evaluate and approve,
conditionally approve or disapprove said map and may at its discretion, grant variances as per section
10-8-5 of this chapter. The planning commission shall take action within fifty (50) days of the filing of a
request for hearing or the map will be deemed as approved unless the applicant has agreed to an
extension of time. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-11: APPEAL TO FINAL APPEALS BOARD:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 676/710
The applicant or any interested person who is adversely affected by the decision on the map may file
an appeal to the action of the planning commission to the city council in accordance with section 10-3-7
of this title. Any appeal must be filed within fifteen (15) days after action of the planning commission.
The decision of the city council shall be final and shall be rendered within seven (7) days of the
conclusion of the hearing. The council may sustain, modify, reject or overrule any recommendations or
rulings of the planning commission or development services director and may make such findings as
are not inconsistent with the provisions of the subdivision map act or this chapter.
In any instance where a land division proposes to create five (5) or more parcels, the development
services director shall present the map to the planning commission and cause a legal notice to be
published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in El Dorado
County, not less than ten (10) days prior to any action being made upon said land division proposal.
Said notice shall generally describe the area and explain the pertinent aspects of the land division
proposal and shall give the time and place that the planning commission shall make the decision upon
the proposal. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-12: EXPIRATION OF TENTATIVE MAPS:
An approved tentative map shall expire twelve (12) months after its approval. Once expiration has
occurred, all proceedings shall be terminated and no parcel map shall be filed without processing a
new tentative map. A divider may apply for an extension of time in which to file a parcel map and such
an extension may be granted for one additional period of twelve (12) months. If the development
services director denies the divider's request, the divider may appeal the decision to the planning
commission within fifteen (15) days of said denial. If the divider is still dissatisfied, an appeal before the
city council may be filed as per section 10-3-7 of this title within fifteen (15) days of said decision. (Ord.
1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-13: TENTATIVE MAP PROCESSING FEE:
When a tentative map for a division of land is filed for approval, a fee shall be paid for the purpose of
defraying the costs incidental to the processing of such a tentative map as follows:
2 parcels $40.00
3 parcels 60.00
4 parcels 80.00
5 or more parcels (per parcel) 20.00
(Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-14: PREPARATION OF PARCEL MAPS:
The parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed
land surveyor, shall show the location of streets and property lines bounding the property, and shall
conform to all of the following provisions:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 677/710
(A) It shall be legibly drawn, in black drawing ink or by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in
black on tracing cloth or other material acceptable by the county recorder. Certificates may be
legibly stamped or printed upon the map with permanent black ink;
(B) The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty six inches (18" x 26"). A marginal line
shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely black margin of one inch (1"). The
scale of the map shall be large enough to show all details clearly. Any number of sheets may be
used to accomplish this providing each sheet specifies the total number of sheets and its relation to
each adjoining sheet;
(C) Each parcel shall be numbered or lettered;
(D) The exterior boundary of the land included within the division shall be indicated by heavy lines;
(E) The map shall show the location of each parcel and its relation to surrounding surveys. The location
of any remainder of the original parcel shall be shown, but need not be shown as a matter of survey,
but only by reference to the existing record boundaries of such remainder if such remainder has a
gross area of five (5) acres or more;
(F) A certificate or by separate instrument, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record
title interest in the real property divided, consenting to the preparation and filing of the parcel map is
required, except as otherwise provided by section 66436 of the subdivision map act; (Ord. 1152, 4-
25-1978)
(G) The scale of the final parcel map shall be one inch equals twenty feet (1" = 20'), one inch equals
fifty feet (1" = 50'), one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'), one inch equals two hundred feet
(1" = 200'), or one inch equals four hundred feet (1" = 400') or as approved by the development
services director; (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(H) The parcel map shall be labeled as a "parcel map" in the heading identifying section, township, and
range, and prior parcel map, if any, and/or lot and block; (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
(I) The existing assessor's parcel number and the tentative map number with the date approved by the
development services department shall be shown in the lower right hand corner; (Ord. 1152, 4-25-
1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(J) The location, nature and type and marking thereon of all monuments found shall be shown,
including all monuments required; (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
(K) Together with a fee as required by section 4-8-1 of this code to defray the costs incidental to the
processing of such final map. (Ord. 1263, 5-26-1981)
The map shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of prints of the map and copies of original traverse
sheets prepared by an engineer or surveyor showing mathematical closures and proof of the
accuracy. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 678/710
10-8-15: SURVEY:
The parcel map shall be based upon a field survey made in conformity with the land surveyors act.
(Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-16: LIMIT OF SURVEY ERROR:
A traverse of the exterior boundaries of the parcel map and of each parcel therein, when computed
from field measurements on the ground, must close within a limit of error of one foot (1') in three
thousand feet (3,000') on perimeter. The civil engineer or land surveyor must furnish the city engineer
at the time the parcel map is submitted to him for his certificate, the traverse sheets showing
mathematical closure, within the allowable limits of closure. On curves, closure shall be by chord
measurement. Other detail maps shall be furnished as may be required for accurate checking. (Ord.
1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-17: PLACEMENT OF MONUMENTS:
The civil engineer or land surveyor making a survey of a parcel map shall cause permanent corner
monuments as herein specified to be set. Said monuments shall be at least eighteen inches (18") long,
set firmly in the ground, and extending approximately three inches (3") above the surface of the ground
at all lot corners and witness corners, except that they should not be placed above the ground if to do
so would create a safety hazard.
(A) Monument Materials:
1. Preferred: Three-fourths inch (3/4") (inside diameter) or larger, galvanized (or cadmium plated)
capped iron pipe stamped on the top of the cap with either the notation "RCE" for registered civil
engineer or "LS" for the licensed land surveyor, together with the license number of the civil
engineer or land surveyor. The year date shall be stamped on the cap.
(B) Optional:
1. Steel reinforcing bar five-eighths inch (5/8") or three-fourths inch (3/4") diameter. The "RCE" or
"LS" numbered brass tag with year date to be brazed and riveted on. The use of wire to affix the
tag is not acceptable.
2. Drill steel seven-eighths inch (7/8") or larger in diameter stamped with the "RCE" or "LS" and the
license numbers and the year date.
3. Square or round steel bars three-fourths inch (3/4") or larger in diameter stamped with the
notations "RCE" or "LS" and the license numbers and the year date. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-18: U.S. GOVERNMENT LAND CORNERS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 679/710
(A) All full section corners, quarter corners and sixteenth corners that are a part of the parcel map, or
are required ties to the parcel map, shall be rehabilitated for preservation, if required, and complete
notations as to what was found or set at each of these U.S. government land survey corners, shall
be made upon the parcel map, as required by the state land surveyors act. Unless the U.S.
government corner is monumented by a one and one-half inch (11/2") (inside diameter) or larger,
galvanized capped iron pipe, it shall be replaced with a one and one-half inch (11/2") or larger,
galvanized capped iron pipe which shall be stamped appropriately in the manner specified in the
"Manual Of Surveying Instructions", U.S. bureau of land management, together with the notation of
either "RCE" or "LS" and the license numbers of the civil engineer or land surveyor. The annual
year date shall also be stamped thereon.
(B) If the found and accepted section, quarter and sixteenth corner is found adequately monumented
with a one and one-half inch (11/2") or larger, galvanized iron pipe, but not stamped, or only partly
stamped, the missing data shall be stamped thereon, including the notations of either "RCE" or "LS"
and the license numbers and the year date. A statement as to what was found, set or added shall
be placed on the parcel map. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-19: CERTIFICATES:
Certificates shall be as required as per sections 66449 and 66450 of the subdivision map act. (Ord.
1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-20: CERTIFICATION OF RECORDER:
The certification by the recorder shall be as set forth in sections 66464 and 66466 of the Government
Code and, in addition, the above required certificates shall be affixed in one of the following manners:
(A) Commencing at the lower left corner area and reading to the right across the bottom area of the
map, the surveyor's certificate shall be first, the city engineer's certificate shall be second, and the
recorder's certificate shall be third.
(B) Commencing at the upper right corner area and reading to the right across the bottom, the
surveyor's certificate shall be first, the city engineer's certificate shall be second, and the recorder's
certificate shall be third. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-21: FILING OF PARCEL MAP:
Within twelve (12) months after approval of the tentative map or extensions thereon, a parcel map may
be filed with the recorder. This map shall be filed prior to sale, lease or financing of such parcels.
Conveyances may be made of parcels shown on each map by number or letter. Upon application, an
extension of the approval of the tentative map may be granted by the development services director.
The development services director may require dedications or an offer of dedication by separate
instrument for street opening or widening or easements, and it shall be the responsibility of applicant to
pay all recording fees. Any improvements or other items to be completed within one year of the date of
filing of the parcel map in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and section 66411.1 of the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 680/710
subdivision map act shall have been satisfied, bonded for completion, or street frontage agreement
filed when recommended by the planning commission and accepted by the city council, prior to the
filing of the parcel map. Any improvements or other items not accomplished and so certified by a
registered civil engineer at the time of filing of the parcel map, shall be covered by a performance bond,
cash deposit or approved instrument of credit, the content and form of which shall be agreed upon by
the applicant and the city, based upon a cost estimate prepared by a registered civil engineer retained
by the applicant. If the improvements or other items required as a condition of approval of the tentative
map are not required to be completed within one year of the date of the filing of the parcel map, then
the applicant shall execute an instrument, the content and form of which shall be approved by the city,
which instrument shall give constructive notice of the requirements of construction of said
improvements as a condition precedent to the subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of
approval for the development of any or all of the parcels created. Said instrument shall be recorded
together with the filing of the parcel map. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-22: CORRECTION AND AMENDMENT OF PARCEL MAPS:
Amendment of parcel maps shall be as set forth in section 66469 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1152,
4-25-1978)
10-8-23: PREPARATION; REQUIREMENTS:
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared pursuant to section 66470 of the
Government Code, and shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-24: RESERVED:
10-8-25: FILING; INDEXING; EFFECT:
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be filed pursuant to section 66472 of the
Government Code. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-26: REQUIREMENTS FOR APPROVAL AND DISAPPROVAL; COMPLIANCE
WITH STATE LAW:
Maps failing to meet the requirements or conditions imposed by the subdivision map act (Government
Code sections 66473 et seq.) or this chapter shall not be approved. The provisions of law applicable at
the time of approval of the tentative map shall govern. However, a technical or inadvertent error may be
excused if it is found that it does not materially affect the validity of the map. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-27: COMPLIANCE WITH GENERAL AND SPECIFIC PLANS:
A determination of whether the tentative map complies with general and specific plans shall be made
pursuant to section 66473.5 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 681/710
10-8-28: FINDINGS JUSTIFYING DISAPPROVAL:
Findings justifying disapproval shall be based on section 66474 of the Government Code together with
the following findings:
(A) That one or more parcels of less than five (5) acres is proposed to be created without the property
being supplied with:
1. Domestic water supplied by a public entity; or
2. Sewer service supplied by a public entity.
(B) That the design of the division or the improvements are not suitable to allow for compliance of the
requirements of section 4291 of the California Public Resources Code. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-29: APPROVAL OF PARCEL MAP FOR LAND PROJECT:
Approval of parcel map for land project shall be pursuant to section 66474.5 of the Government Code.
(Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-30: PROPOSED WASTE DISCHARGE VIOLATING WATER QUALITY:
A determination of whether the proposed waste discharge would violate water quality will be based on
section 66474.6 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-31: DEDICATION AND ABANDONMENT PROCEDURES:
(A) Public Easements: Either a dedication or irrevocable offer of dedication of real property within the
division for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility
easements and other public easements may be required for the expansion of the existing city road
system. Such irrevocable offers may be terminated as provided in subdivisions (a), (b), (c), (d), and
(e) of section 66477.2 of the subdivision map act.
(B) Waiver Of Direct Access Rights: There may be imposed a requirement that dedications or offers of
dedication of streets include a waiver of direct access rights to any such street from any property
shown on a parcel map as abutting thereon, and if the dedication is accepted, any such waiver shall
become effective in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-32: ACCEPTANCE OR REJECTION:
If a dedication is made on a parcel map, or by separate instrument, the development services director
or city engineer shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject any offer of dedication. The city
clerk shall certify on the map the actions by the development services director or city engineer, or attest
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 682/710
to the action of the development services director or city engineer on a separate certificate when the
dedication occurs by separate instrument. (Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-33: OFFER OF DEDICATION; CONTINUATION AFTER REJECTION;
TERMINATION:
(A) Streets, Paths, Alleys, Storm Drainage Easements: If at the time the parcel map is approved, any
streets, paths, alleys, storm drainage easements, public utilities and other public easements are
rejected, the offer of dedication shall remain open, and the city council may, by resolution at any
later date, and without further action by the divider, rescind its action and accept and open the
streets, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be
recorded in the office of the county recorder.
(B) Termination And Abandonment; Procedure: Offers of dedication which are covered by subsection
(A) of this section may be terminated and abandoned in the same manner as prescribed for the
abandonment or vacation of streets by part 3 (commencing with section 8800) of division 9, or
chapter 2 (commencing with section 940) of division 2 of the Streets And Highways Code,
whichever is applicable. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-34: TIME OF PASSING TITLE:
Time of passing title shall be pursuant to section 66477.3 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-
1978)
10-8-35: DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
(A) All design criteria and improvements, made or installed in connection with the approval of a
tentative parcel map shall conform to the city standards and specifications;
(B) All land divisions shall establish parcels consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the
area where the parcels are located, all parcels created to have an approved access, and shall be
consistent with applicable general and specific plans;
(C) Drainage preservation areas shall be established so as to preserve and protect the natural
drainageways. The natural drainage courses shall be maintained in the original channel or in a
constructed channel designed to accept flows normal to a 50-year storm;
(D) Utility easements shall be established and be continuations of existing utility easements;
(E) Land divisions shall be designed so as to protect existing wells and septic systems except for those
facilities to be abandoned;
(F) Obtain an encroachment permit from the city's engineering department or the state of California
department of transportation for easements servicing parcels which front upon a publicly maintained
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 683/710
road or highway;
(G) Access to each parcel created must be shown;
(H) All lots or parcels created by the division of land shall have frontage to an improved street meeting
city standards;
(I) Common driveway, or access easements shall not normally be permitted. However, if the
commission determines that the most logical development of the land requires that lots be created
which cannot easily be served by a public street, a private access may be approved. The subdivider
shall submit a development plan showing the alignment, width, grade and material specifications of
all private improvements, the topography and means of access to each lot, drainage and sewerage
of the lots served by such private improvements and a plan satisfactory to the city for ownership
and maintenance of said access and the liability for taxes thereon. Construction of these
improvements as approved by the city shall be completed prior to occupancy of any buildings on
lots served by a private access;
(J) Flag shaped lots shall not be approved;
(K) Street rights of way in conformance with subsection 10-7-5(A)3 of this title shall be provided to
serve all parcels within the land division;
(L) Grades, curves and sight distances shall be subject to approval by the city engineer, to ensure
proper drainage and/or safety for vehicles and pedestrians. Grades of streets shall be not less than
four-tenths percent (0.4%), nor more than seven percent (7%) on arterial roads, twelve and one-half
percent (121/2%) on residential collector streets, and fifteen percent (15%) on residential streets.
Any grade segment in excess of twelve percent (12%) may not exceed five hundred feet (500') in
length. At street intersections, property lines at each block shall be rounded by an arc, the radius of
which shall not be less than ten feet (10') and shall be concentric with the curb return wherever
possible. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-36: IMPROVEMENTS:
Any subdivider shall improve, or agree to improve, all streets, highways, alleys, ways, or easements
within or adjacent to the proposed division of land as a condition precedent to acceptance thereof and
approval of the parcel. Such improvements shall be installed at lines and grades and in accordance
with specifications approved by the city engineer; such improvements shall include:
(A) Grading and drainage, including storm drains and culverts, necessary for proper use and public
safety and designed to conform to sound engineering practices as stated in title 8, chapter 7 of this
code; (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
(B) Concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks; such improvements shall apply to C; R-1, 6,000; R-1,
10,000; BP and R-2 zones. In lieu of concrete curbs, gutters and sidewalks, a minimum of four feet
(4') in width of asphaltic paving shall be provided to serve pedestrian movement and a positive
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 684/710
means of drainage control shall be provided as per subsection (A) of this section for RE, R-1A, and
R-1, 20,000 zones. Location and alignment shall be subject to approval of the development
services director; (Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
(C) Street roadway structural section to be per city standards adopted by the city council;
(D) Sanitary sewers and public utilities for each lot which shall be made available for each lot in such
manner as will alleviate the necessity for disturbing the street pavement, gutter, curb, and sidewalk
when service connections are made;
(E) Streetlights as required by city standards as adopted by the city council;
(F) Location and construction of fire hydrants as per fire department requirements;
(G) In addition to the minimum improvements required by this section, the planning commission may
recommend, and the council may require, such additional improvements and facilities or such
modifications in the standards of minimum improvements as special conditions may cause these
bodies to make a special finding of need;
(H) Before commencing the construction of any improvement required by this section or the recordation
of any map the subdivider shall have plans, profiles, and cross sections prepared by a registered
civil engineer, where required by the city engineer. Such plans, profiles, and cross sections shall be
drawn in conformity with standards prescribed by, and to the satisfaction and approval of the city
engineer. After such plans, profiles, and cross sections have been approved and signed by the city
engineer, the subdivider shall file one set of original transparencies with the city engineer;
(I) No parcel map shall be presented for approval until the subdivider either completes the required
improvements or enters into a contract agreement with the city to complete such improvements
within a specified reasonable time after the approval and recordation of the map, such contract
agreement to be secured, in such amount as the city engineer shall estimate and determine will be
necessary to complete all the improvements required to be done by the subdivider. If subdivider is
required to install improvements which contain supplemental size, capacity or number for the
benefit of property not within the proposed division of land or reversion to acreage as a condition
precedent to the approval of a map, and thereafter to dedicate such improvements to the public, the
subdivider shall be reimbursed, by the terms of the contract agreement that portion of the cost of
such improvements equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to
install such improvements to serve the proposed division of land only, and the actual cost of such
improvements. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-37: SECURITIES:
Securities shall be required by the provisions of the subdivision map act of the state of California,
section 66499(a) of the Government Code. (Ord. 1236, 10-9-1979)
Each improvement security shall be subject to approval and acceptance by the city attorney and city
engineer.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 685/710
When a portion of an improvement has been fully completed, the city engineer may in his discretion
authorize a reduction in an improvement security given for faithful performance equal to the estimated
cost of the completed portion of the improvement.
Upon the failure of a subdivider to complete an improvement within the time specified in an agreement,
the city council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten (10) days served upon the person, firm
or corporation signing the contract or upon notice in writing of not less than twenty (20) days served by
registered mail, addressed to the last known address of the person, firm or corporation signing the
contract, determine that the improvement work or any part thereof is incomplete and may cause to be
forfeited to the city the portion of the sum of money or bonds given for the faithful performance of the
work or any cash savings and loan certificates or shares deposited and assigned to assure the faithful
performance of the work to complete the improvement work. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
10-8-38: PROHIBITIONS AND PENALTY:
Prohibitions and penalty shall be pursuant to section 66499.30 of the Government Code. (Ord. 1152, 4-
25-1978)
10-8-39: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS:
Section 66412 of the subdivision map act exempts boundary line adjustments from the procedures set
forth in this chapter; however, the city of Placerville must approve the lot line adjustment by resolution.
Therefore, the city council of the city of Placerville hereby sets forth the following procedures for
processing and approving lot line adjustments: (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
(A) In the event that the owners of two (2) or more adjoining parcels desire to modify the location of a
common boundary between the two (2) or more parcels in such a manner that no additional parcels
are created, the applicant shall only be required to process a lot line adjustment map. The
development services director is authorized to review, approve and process the map for recording
without further action by the planning commission or city council. The applicant shall pay only the
fees for processing a tentative parcel map; all other fees required by this chapter shall be waived.
The development services director shall approve the lot line adjustment provided that the proposed
parcels of land meet all city requirements as to: 1) area, width and depth; 2) setback requirements;
3) if legal setbacks are existing no lot line adjustments shall be approved which create substandard
setbacks. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-40: ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE:
The development services director shall prepare a certificate of compliance for said lot line adjustment
and one copy shall be sent to each property owner; one copy to the county assessor, and file one copy
with the tentative map. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978; amd. Ord. 1654, 6-25-2013)
10-8-41: LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT MAP, INFORMATION REQUIRED:
(A) North point;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 686/710
(B) Scale;
(C) The location, name and right of way width of adjacent streets, highways and alleys;
(D) Show present and future boundaries of the parcels;
(E) Location of all existing structures;
(F) Legal description of each adjusted parcel;
(G) Size of map, eighteen inches by twenty six inches (18" x 26");
(H) Information as required by subsection 10-8-6(B)14 of this chapter, tentative maps with the
exception of contour intervals, source of topography, water supply, sewage disposal. (Ord. 1152, 4-
25-1978)
10-8-42: VIOLATIONS; OFFENSE:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1152, 4-
25-1978)
10-8-43: REVERSION TO ACREAGE:
Reversion to acreage petitions shall be processed in compliance with chapter 6 of the subdivision map
act. Fees to be charged for the processing of said petition shall comply with section 10-8-13 and
subsection 10-8-14(K) of this chapter. (Ord. 1152, 4-25-1978)
Chapter 9
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES REGULATED
10-9-1: PURPOSE:
In adopting this chapter, it is recognized that certain types of adult related establishments possess
certain objectionable operational characteristics which will have adverse effects upon the character of
the areas in which they do business and adjacent neighborhoods. It is further recognized that locating
adult related establishments in close proximity to facilities frequented by minors will cause the exposure
of minors to adult material which may adversely affect such minors. In addition, it is recognized that
substantial numbers of citizens of the city are offended by the public display of sexually oriented
material. Special regulation of adult related uses is, therefore, necessary to ensure that these adverse
effects of adult related uses will not contribute to the blighting or downgrading of zones in which they
are permitted or of surrounding neighborhoods; will not adversely affect minors; and will not offend the
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 687/710
citizens of the city who do not wish to be exposed to sexually oriented material. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-
1986)
10-9-2: EFFECT:
All applicable provisions of this title shall apply to the regulation of adult related establishments unless
in conflict with the provisions of this chapter.
This chapter does not and shall not be interpreted as legalizing or condoning the production,
presentation, sale, advertisement, dissemination or distribution of matter which is obscene as defined
and regulated by applicable state and local laws; nor shall this chapter be interpreted as legalizing or
condoning participation in management, production, presentation or exhibition of obscene live conduct
in any public place or any place exposed to the public view as defined and regulated by applicable
state and local law. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-1986)
10-9-3: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the terms identified by this section shall be ascribed the meanings indicated.
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment whose primary business is to offer for sale any one or more of
the following:
(A) Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion picture,
videocassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis
upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas",
or
(B) Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with "specified
sexual activities". This definition does not include a bona fide pharmacy.
ADULT HOTEL OR MOTEL: A hotel or motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations,
for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by
an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical
areas".
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown and in which
any portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is characterized
by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas".
ADULT RELATED ESTABLISHMENT: A bathhouse, escort bureau, introductory service, massage
establishment, outcall massage service, modeling studio or sexual encounter center, as defined by this
chapter. "Adult related establishment" shall also include adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult motion
picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult theater or cabaret or any other business or establishment
which has available or offers any patron, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward,
services or entertainment or activities which involve the display "specified anatomical areas", or in
which "specified sexual activity" occurs.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 688/710
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any form of
consideration, features live performances which are characterized by the exposure of "specified
anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
BATHHOUSE: An establishment whose primary business is to provide, for pecuniary compensation,
consideration, hire or reward, access to any kind of bath facility, including, but not limited to, showers,
saunas and hot tubs.
CABARET: An establishment that serves food and/or alcoholic beverages and features live
entertainment depicting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ESCORT SERVICES: In relation to escort services, the following terms shall be ascribed the following
meanings:
Escort: A person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, either escorts or
accompanies others to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or keeps
company with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters.
Escort Bureau: An establishment which, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts.
ESTABLISHMENT: The "establishment" of an adult related establishment shall mean and include any
of the following:
(A) The opening or commencement of any such establishment as a new business;
(B) The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult related establishment, or any of
the adult related establishments defined herein;
(C) The addition of any of the adult related establishments defined herein to any other existing adult
related establishment; and
(D) The relocation of any such establishment.
INTRODUCTORY SERVICE: A business which, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or
reward helps persons to meet or become acquainted with others for social purposes. For purposes of
this section, "others" include personnel of the introductory service.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment where massage, alcoholic rub, fomentation, electric
or magnetic treatment or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered in
exchange for any form of consideration for the purpose of providing any service during which time
"specified anatomical areas" are displayed or "specified sexual activity" occurs.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN: Any person who for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward,
engages in the practice of massage.
MODELING SERVICES: In relation to modeling services, the following terms shall be ascribed the
following meanings:
Figure Model: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, poses to
be observed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise depicted.
Modeling Studio: An establishment which provides for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or
reward, figure models who display "specific anatomical areas" to be observed, sketched,
photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons who pay such consideration.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 689/710
OUTCALL SERVICE ACTIVITY: Any establishment or business which provides an outcall service
which consists of individuals leaving the premises upon request or by appointment to visit other
premises for a period of time for the purpose of providing any service during which time "specified
anatomical areas" are displayed or "specified sexual activity" occurs.
PERSON: Includes any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of
any kind.
PUBLIC PARK: A park, playground, swimming pool or athletic field within the city which is under the
control, operation or management of the city parks and recreation department.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building which is used primarily for religious worship and related
religious activities.
SCHOOL: An institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in
those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to
standards set by the state board of education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten,
elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or a special institution of learning under the
jurisdiction of the state department of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional
institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or
university.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER: An establishment which provides two (2) or more persons, for
pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, with a place to assemble for the purpose of
engaging in "specified sexual activities" or displaying specified anatomical areas". "Sexual encounter
center" does not include hotels or motels.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: Includes:
(A) Less than completely and opaquely covered: 1) human genitals or pubic regions; 2) buttocks; or
3) female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
(B) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Includes the following:
(A) Actual or simulated intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality,
direct physical or stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship.
(B) Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, as arousal or tumescence; or
(C) Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or ejaculation; or
(D) Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts; or
(E) Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or
(F) Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or
(G) Human excretion, urination, menstruation or vaginal or anal irrigation.
(H) Any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: necrophilia, pederasty,
pedophilia or zooerastia. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-1986)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 690/710
10-9-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to or include the following:
(A) Hospital, nursing homes, sanitariums, or persons working in any such establishments:
(B) Any licensed or certificated medical practitioner, chiropractor, massage therapist, massage
technician, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person licensed or certificated by
the state of California including those persons who have completed a course of study and hold a
certificate of completion from a state approved school which teaches the theory, ethics, practices,
profession and work of massage.
(C) Barbers or cosmetologists lawfully carrying out their particular occupation or business, and holding
a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the state of California;
(D) Modeling schools or classes maintained pursuant to standards established by the state board of
education of the state of California; or
(E) Any recognized school of massage which: 1) teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession and
work of massage; and 2) requires a residence course of study to be given before the student is
furnished with a diploma or certificate of learning or completion; and 3) has been approved pursuant
to section 94311(d) of the Education Code, or, if said school is not located in California, has
complied with the standards commensurate with those specified in said section 94311(d). A
"recognized school of massage" as those terms are used above, shall not include a school or
institution of learning offering or allowing correspondence course credit not requiring actual
attendance at class, or courses of massage technician not approved by the California state
department of education. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-1986)
10-9-5: HOME OCCUPATIONS:
No "adult related establishment" as defined in this chapter shall be permitted as a home occupation
under any zoning classification. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-1986)
10-9-6: ZONES FOR ADULT RELATED ESTABLISHMENTS:
Adult related establishments are permitted only in areas with a C zoning classification. No such
establishment shall be permitted to be established in any area outside such zoning classification. (Ord.
1408, 11-25-1986)
10-9-7: LOCATION OF ADULT RELATED ESTABLISHMENTS WITHIN C ZONES:
Within the zones in which adult related establishments are permitted, no such business shall be
established in the following locations:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 691/710
(A) Within five hundred feet (500') of any area zoned for residential use;
(B) Within five hundred feet (500') of any other adult entertainment business;
(C) Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any public park, religious institution or school. (Ord. 1408, 11-
25-1986)
10-9-8: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE:
The distance between any two (2) adult related establishments shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures, from the closest exterior structural wall of each business. The
distance between any adult related establishment and any residential zone, religious institution, school
or public park shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the
closest property line of the residential zone, religious institution, school or public park to the closest
exterior structural wall of such adult related establishment. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-1986)
10-9-9: VARIANCES:
(A) Any property owner or his authorized agent may apply to the planning commission for a variance
from section 10-9-7 of this chapter. The planning commission, after a hearing, may issue a variance
permit if the following findings are made:
1. That the applicant has met the conditions required for variances from zoning ordinance pursuant
to Government Code section 65906 and section 10-3-6 of this code.
2. That the proposed use will not be contrary to the public interest or injurious to nearby properties,
and that the spirit and intent of this chapter will be observed.
3. That the establishment of an adult related establishment in the area will not be contrary to the
city's general plan or any program of neighborhood conservation, nor will it interfere with any
program of redevelopment.
4. That all applicable provisions of state and local law will be observed.
(B) The procedure for obtaining and receiving a variance permit shall be the same as that provided in
section 10-3-6 of this title with, among other matters, the same notice requirements, the same right
of appeal to the city council, and the same fees payable by the applicant. However, notice of such
variance request shall be given to all property owners on the assessment rolls within a radius of five
hundred feet (500') or one thousand feet (1,000') of such requested location as appropriate
pursuant to section 10-9-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-1986)
10-9-10: APPLICABILITY OF THIS CHAPTER AND DISCONTINUANCE OF
NONCONFORMING BUSINESSES:
This chapter shall apply to the establishment of all adult related establishments upon the effective date
of the adoption of this chapter by the city council. Adult related establishments which are in existence
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 692/710
prior to the effective date hereof and are made nonconforming by reason of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to the following regulations:
(A) Such adult related establishments shall not be enlarged, increased or extended to occupy a greater
area.
(B) Upon the substantial destruction of the building, or portion of the building, in which such adult
related establishment exists, the business shall be considered terminated and may not be resumed.
For the purposes of this subsection, "substantial destruction" means damage by fire or water or
other causes to the extent of more than fifty percent (50%) of the building's assessed value.
(C) If such business is discontinued for a continuous period of more than six (6) months for any reason,
said adult related establishment shall be considered terminated and may not be reestablished.
(D) Such adult related establishment shall be terminated within two (2) years from the effective date of
this chapter. A variance from this provision may be obtained if such business continues to be in
noncompliance with the requirements of this chapter, upon the finding that the business is obligated
by written lease entered into before the effective date of this chapter for a period exceeding two (2)
years from such effective date, or that the activity involves investment of money in a leasehold or
improvements such that a longer period is necessary to prevent undue financial hardship. For the
purpose of this subsection, an option to renew a lease shall not be evidence that a business is
obligated by a written lease for a period beyond the current term of the lease. The variance
procedure and fees shall be the same as provided in section 10-9-9 of this chapter and section 10-
3-6 of this title.
(E) Nonconforming adult related establishments shall, within thirty (30) days from the effective date of
this chapter, comply with all other applicable provisions of this code. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-1986)
10-9-11: PUBLIC DISPLAY OF CERTAIN MATTER PROHIBITED:
Any material which has as its primary or dominant theme matter depicting, illustrating, describing or
relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this chapter shall
be located, covered or screened in such a manner as to prevent a view by the public. Further, such
businesses may not have signs, graphics or window displays which in any way present, depict,
illustrate or describe such material when such material has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal,
gratification or affront. (Ord. 1408, 11-25-1986)
Chapter 10
MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS1
(Rep. by Ord. 1693, 10-9-2018)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 693/710
Chapter 11
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
10-11-1: CITATION AND AUTHORITY:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by the state of California subdivision map act,
division 2 subdivisions, of title 7, chapter 4.5, development rights of the Government Code,
commencing with section 66498.1 (hereinafter referred to as the vesting tentative map statute). (Ord.
1626, 7-8-2008)
10-11-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the vesting
tentative map statute, and to supplement the provisions of the subdivision map act and of this title.
Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this code shall apply to
vesting tentative maps.
To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for
the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly
growth and development. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-2008)
10-11-3: CONSISTENCY:
No land shall be subdivided and developed pursuant to a vesting tentative map which is inconsistent
with the city of Placerville general plan, or is inconsistent with the applicable zoning ordinance or other
applicable provisions of this code unless specifically so allowed for in this chapter. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-
2008)
10-11-4: DEFINITIONS:
(A) "Vesting tentative map" shall mean a "tentative map" or "tentative parcel map" for a residential,
commercial, or industrial subdivision, as defined in this code, that shall have printed conspicuously
on its face the words "vesting tentative map" at the time it is filed, and is thereafter processed in
accordance with the provisions hereof.
(B) All other definitions set forth in this code are applicable. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-2008)
10-11-5: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to residential, commercial and industrial developments. Whenever a provision
of the subdivision map act, as implemented and supplemented by the subdivision ordinance, requires
the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map for development, a vesting tentative map may
instead be filed in accordance with the provisions hereof. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-2008)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 694/710
10-11-6: REQUIRED SUBMITTAL DATA; COMPLETION OF APPLICATION:
(A) Upon applying for approval of a vesting tentative map, the following maps, data, reports and
information shall be submitted. If any of the following documentation is not submitted, the
application shall be deemed incomplete pursuant to Government Code section 65943.
1. The words "vesting tentative map" printed conspicuously on the map;
2. Four (4) copies of a drainage plan, which in addition to the requirements of the land capability
study, shall include an analysis of upstream, on site and downstream facilities and details, and
detail of off site drainage facilities where needed;
3. Four (4) copies of a preliminary grading plan as defined by title 8, chapter 7 of this code. The
preliminary grading plan shall show all cut and fill slopes and the proposed elevations of
driveways and roads at one hundred foot (100') stations, proposed building pad elevations, and at
all lot corners around the periphery of the project. The preliminary grading plan shall be prepared
to a plus or minus one foot (±1') tolerance;
4. Four (4) copies of a tree canopy retention plan and a woodland alteration permit (if required) in
accordance with title 8, chapter 13 of this code (woodland and forest conservation plan);
5. An archeological survey noting the existence, if any, of any historical or cultural sites, and
appropriate mitigation measures;
6. Fuel modification program when the proposed site is heavily vegetated with trees or brush
covering fifty percent (50%) or more of the site;
7. In those circumstances where a development plan review is required by this code, such review
application and all exhibits necessary for the review;
8. In those circumstances where the project requires concurrent discretionary approval (i.e., general
plan amendment, zoning amendment, etc.), all exhibits necessary for such application;
9. A complete site plan showing all buildings and structures intended to be constructed on the lots
proposed to be created. Those buildings, structures or improvements not shown on the site plan
shall have no vested development rights hereunder and shall be subject to such ordinances,
policies and standards in effect at the time of building permit issuance. Such site plan shall be of
suitable scale (1 inch equals 50 feet or greater) and sufficient detail to determine whether the
proposed development conforms to existing ordinances, policies and standards and shall show
the following:
(a) Lot dimensions,
(b) All buildings and structures; location (setback area), height and proposed use (number of
dwelling units),
(c) Walls and fences: location and height,
(d) Off street parking: location, number of spaces and dimensions,
(e) Access: pedestrian and vehicular,
(f) Signs: location, size and height,
(g) Drainage: natural drainage and any proposed drainage systems,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 695/710
(h) Landscaping,
(i) Building colors, roofing type, and building architecture,
(j) Lighting;
10. Approved septic area for each lot if public sewer service is not proposed;
11. Building envelopes shall be noted on any proposed lot where average cross slopes exceed a
ten percent (10%) grade. The building envelope area shall not exceed five thousand (5,000)
square feet in area on class I subdivisions (less than 2 acre lots) or twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet in rural divisions (2 acre or larger lots);
12. Application form completed and signed;
13. Deed restriction certificate signed;
14. Letter of authorization from property owner, if applicable, authorizing the agent to act as
applicant;
15. A copy of official assessor's map, showing the property outlined in red;
16. Proof of ownership (grant deed), if the property has changed title since the last tax roll;
17. Completed and signed environmental assessment form;
18. If sewer or water service is proposed to be provided by a public agency, proof of availability and
ability to serve the proposed development must be provided;
19. Required maps:
(a) Fifteen (15) copies of the vesting tentative map, folded to fit in an eight and one-half by eleven
inch (81/2 x 11") folder, with signature block showing:
(1) Four (4) copies of slope map noting the following slope range categories; zero percent (0%)
to ten percent (10%), eleven percent (11%) to twenty percent (20%), twenty one percent
(21%) to twenty nine percent (29%), thirty percent (30%) and over;
(2) One copy of the reduced vesting tentative map, eight and one-half inches by eleven inches
(81/2" x 11"), or eight and one-half inches by fourteen inches (81/2" x 14"), may be on two (2)
or more pages if necessary;
20. The vesting tentative map shall further include the following information with items in
subsections (A)20(a) through (A)20(p) of this section shown on map in sequence noted:
(a) Proposed subdivision name,
(b) Owner of record (name and address),
(c) Map prepared by (name and address),
(d) Scale,
(e) Contour interval,
(f) Source of topography,
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 696/710
(g) Section, township, and range,
(h) Assessor's parcel number,
(i) Present zoning,
(j) Total area (acres),
(k) Total number of parcels,
(l) Minimum parcel area,
(m) Water supply,
(n) Sewage disposal,
(o) Proposed structural fire protection,
(p) Date of preparation,
(q) North point located anywhere on map,
(r) Project boundary with dimensions,
(s) A vicinity map showing the location of the project in relation to major roads, including
township, range and section,
(t) Approximate dimension and area of all lots, and area of lots larger than one acre,
(u) Names of adjacent subdivisions and property owners for parcels that have not been
subdivided,
(v) Approximate radii of centerline of all street curves,
(w) Grades and width of proposed and existing roads of road easements with typical
improvement cross section,
(x) All existing structures, buildings, utility, transmission lines and dirt roads,
(y) Fire hydrant location, existing and/or proposed,
(z) Existing water and sewer line locations,
(1) Contours of not more than five foot (5') intervals, based on aerial photogrammetry or on site
survey (USGS interpolation, not acceptable),
(2) Phasing if proposed,
(3) The location, if present, of rock outcroppings, lava caps, drainage courses, canals,
reservoirs, streams, spring areas subject to inundations, wetlands, and respective one
hundred foot (100') and fifty foot (50') septic system setbacks when a septic system is
proposed,
(4) Flood areas on perennial streams or creeks (100-year).
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 697/710
(B) If as a result of the process of review by the city of the vesting tentative map it becomes necessary
for the applicant: 1) to make a material change in the vesting tentative map; or 2) to submit
additional data; or 3) to revise any aspect of the data that has been previously submitted pursuant
to the subdivision map act and this code; then the application shall be deemed incomplete pursuant
to Government Code section 65943 until such new or additional or revised maps, data, reports and
information shall be submitted. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-2008)
10-11-7: PROCESSING:
(A) A vesting tentative map shall be processed in the same manner as required for tentative maps in
chapter 7 of this title, or for tentative parcel maps in chapter 8 of this title; provided, however, on
vesting tentative subdivision maps, the planning commission shall only make a recommendation to
the city council, and the map shall then be set for hearing before the city council, jointly with a zone
change or development plan when applicable, within thirty (30) days of the planning commission
action.
The decision on a vesting tentative subdivision map is not final until the city council has acted on
the matter as noted herein.
(B) A vesting tentative map shall not be approved unless it is found to be consistent with the general
plan for the property proposed to be subdivided. A vesting tentative map application, which is
consistent with the then current general plan at the time of its initial submittal, shall be deemed
incomplete.
(C) A vesting tentative map shall not be approved unless it is consistent with the zoning of the property
proposed to be subdivided. A vesting tentative map, which is inconsistent with the then current
zoning at the time of submittal, shall be deemed incomplete unless an application for a change in
zoning, and any other discretionary approval as may be required, is submitted concurrently with the
vesting tentative map. If a change in the zoning, or any other discretionary approval as may be
required, is obtained concurrently with the approval or conditional approval of the vesting tentative
map, the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative maps shall confer the vested right to
proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change so obtained. Vesting
tentative maps shall not be approved with a condition that other discretionary approvals be
subsequently secured. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-2008)
10-11-8: FEES:
Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall pay the fees as adopted by the city from time
to time for the filing and processing of vesting tentative maps or tentative parcel maps. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-
2008)
10-11-9: EXPIRATION:
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire twenty four (24) months
after the date of the city council's action on said map, and shall be subject to the same extensions
established by this code for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map or
tentative parcel map. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-2008)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 698/710
10-11-10: VESTING RIGHTS:
(A) Subject to the provisions of this section, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative
map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the
ordinances, policies, and standards described in Government Code section 66474.2. However, if
section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval or conditional approval of a
vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial
compliance with the ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative
map is approved or conditionally approved.
(B) Determination of when an application for a vesting tentative map is complete shall be made
pursuant to procedures set forth herein and pursuant to Government Code section 65943.
(C) Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be
made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:
1. A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or
both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both;
2. The condition or denial is required, in order to comply with state or federal law.
(D) The rights referred to herein shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the
vesting tentative map as provided in section 10-11-9 of this chapter. If the final map is approved,
these rights shall last for the following periods of time:
1. An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a
project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each
phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.
2. If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time
specified in subsection (D)1 of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue until the
expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 1626, 7-8-2008)
Chapter 12
AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS
10-12-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide incentives or concessions to developers for the production of
housing units affordable to very low, lower, and moderate income households and to senior citizens.
This chapter implements within the city the state density bonus law1, as may be amended from time to
time. In the event that any provision in this chapter conflicts with state law, state law shall control. (Ord.
1653, 3-12-2013)
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 699/710
10-12-2: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are applicable in all residential zoning districts. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-3: DEFINITIONS:
AFFORDABLE RENT: Is defined by section 50053 of the Health And Safety Code and means the
monthly rent which, together with utility allowance, does not exceed the following:
(A) For very low income household density bonus units: Fifty percent (50%) of the area median
income for El Dorado County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty percent (30%) and
divided by twelve (12).
(B) For lower income household density bonus units: Sixty percent (60%) of the area median
income for El Dorado County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty percent (30%) and
divided by twelve (12).
(C) For moderate income households density bonus units: One hundred ten percent (110%) of the
area median income for El Dorado County, adjusted for household size, multiplied by thirty
percent (30%) and divided by twelve (12).
AFFORDABLE SALES PRICE: A sales price at which very low, lower or moderate income households
can qualify for the purchase of qualifying units.
BASE UNITS: The number of units allowed under the land use and zoning designation that are
included within a housing development.
CHILDCARE FACILITY: A facility, other than a daycare home, licensed by the state of California to
provide nonmedical care to children under eighteen (18) years of age in need of personal services,
supervision or assistance on less than a twenty four (24) hour basis.
CITY: City of Placerville.
DENSITY BONUS: An increase in density over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density
under the applicable zoning ordinance and general plan land use designation taking into account all
applicable limitations.
DENSITY BONUS HOUSING AGREEMENT: A legally binding agreement between the city and an
applicant, governing how the applicant shall comply with this chapter.
HOUSEHOLD: One or more individuals who occupy one dwelling unit.
HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: A project providing residential units including a subdivision, a planned unit
development, multi-family dwellings, or condominium project. Housing developments consist of
development of residential units or creation of unimproved residential lots and also include either a
project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the
substantial rehabilitation of an existing multi-family dwelling, where the result of the rehabilitation would
be a net increase in available residential units.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 700/710
INCENTIVE: Enticements for providing affordable housing proposed by the developer or the city that
result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions for a qualified housing
development.
LOWER INCOME HOUSEHOLD: A household whose income does not exceed eighty percent (80%) of
the area median income for El Dorado County adjusted for family size, as published and periodically
updated by the state department of housing and community development. See Health And Safety
Code section 50079.5.
LOWER INCOME UNIT: A qualifying unit reserved for occupancy by lower income households at an
affordable rent or sales price.
MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE RESIDENTIAL DENSITY: The density allowed under the general plan, or if a
range of density is permitted, means the maximum allowable density for the specific zoning range
applicable to the project. Maximum allowable residential density takes into account limitations to
density pursuant to general plan policies and zoning ordinance regulations.
MODERATE INCOME HOUSEHOLD: A household that does not exceed one hundred twenty percent
(120%) of area median income for El Dorado County, adjusted for family size, as published and
periodically updated by the state department of housing and community development. See Health And
Safety Code section 50093.
MODERATE INCOME UNIT: A qualifying unit reserved for occupancy by moderate income households
at an affordable rent or sales price.
QUALIFYING UNITS: A dwelling or dwellings designated for occupancy by very low, lower, or
moderate income households within a housing development in connection with a request for a density
bonus.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSEHOLDS: Households headed by a person sixty two (62) years of age or
older.
SENIOR CITIZEN HOUSING DEVELOPMENT: A residential development developed, substantially
rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizen households that has at least thirty five (35)
dwelling units.
VERY LOW INCOME HOUSEHOLD: A household that earns less than fifty percent (50%) of the area
median income for El Dorado County adjusted for family size, as published and periodically updated by
the state department of housing and community development. See Health And Safety Code section
50105. This term includes extremely low income households earning less than thirty percent (30%) of
the area median income for El Dorado County, adjusted for family size and updated annually.
VERY LOW INCOME UNIT: A qualifying unit reserved for occupancy by very low income households at
an affordable rent or sales price. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-4: ELIGIBILITY FOR DENSITY BONUS:
A development containing five (5) or more units shall qualify for a density bonus and at least one other
incentive as provided by this chapter if the applicant does one of the following:
(A) Agrees to construct and maintain at least five percent (5%) of the base units for very low income
households;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 701/710
(B) Agrees to construct and maintain at least ten percent (10%) of the base units for lower income
households;
(C) Agrees to construct and maintain at least ten percent (10%) of the base units in a common interest
development as defined in Civil Code section 1351 and after January 1, 2014, Civil Code section
4100 dedicated to moderate income households, provided that all units in the development are
offered to the public for purchase;
(D) Agrees to construct and maintain a senior citizen housing development;
(E) Donates land to the city for the construction of very low income units pursuant to the provisions of
section 10-12-8 of this chapter; or
(F) Includes a qualifying childcare facility pursuant to the provisions of section 10-12-7 of this chapter,
in addition to providing housing described in subsection (A), (B), or (C) of this section. (Ord. 1653,
3-12-2013)
10-12-5: DENSITY BONUS CALCULATIONS:
(A) The granting of a density bonus or the granting of a density bonus together with an incentive(s)
shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, specific plan
amendment, rezone, or other discretionary approval.
(B) An applicant must choose a density bonus from only one applicable affordability category of this
chapter and may not combine categories, with the exception of a childcare facility or land donation,
which may be combined with an affordable housing development for an additional density bonus up
to a combined maximum of thirty five percent (35%).
(C) The calculation of qualifying units shall be based on the number of base units. In no event shall a
density bonus exceed thirty five percent (35%) of base units. A housing development that satisfies
all applicable provisions of this chapter shall be allowed the following applicable density bonuses:
1. The density bonus for very low income units shall be calculated as follows:
VERY LOW INCOME UNITS
Percentage Very
Low Income Units
Percentage
Density Bonus
5 20
6 22.5
7 25
8 27.5
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 702/710
9 30
10 32.5
11 35
15 35
2. The density bonus for lower income units shall be calculated as follows:
LOWER INCOME UNITS
Percentage Lower
Income Units
Percentage
Density Bonus
10 20
11 21.5
12 23
13 24.5
14 26
15 27.5
16 29
17 30.5
18 32
19 33.5
20 35
30 35
3. The density bonus for moderate income units shall be calculated as follows:
MODERATE INCOME UNITS
Percentage Moderate
Income Units
Percentage
Density Bonus
10 5
11 6
12 7
13 8
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 703/710
14 9
15 10
16 11
17 12
18 13
19 14
20 15
21 16
22 17
23 18
24 19
25 20
26 21
27 22
28 23
29 24
30 25
31 26
32 27
33 28
34 29
35 30
36 31
37 32
38 33
39 34
40 35
4. A senior citizen housing development qualifies for a twenty percent (20%) density bonus.
5. Apartment conversions to condominium projects that provide at least thirty three percent (33%) of
the total units of the condominium project to persons and families of low or moderate income, as
defined in section 50093 of the Health And Safety Code, or fifteen percent (15%) of the total units
of the project to lower income households, as defined in section 50079.5 of the Health And Safety
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 704/710
Code, and agrees to pay for the reasonable necessary administrative costs incurred by the city,
qualify for a twenty five percent (25%) density bonus or other incentives of equivalent financial
value.
An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives if the apartments proposed
for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives
were provided under the other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-6: ELIGIBILITY AND APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR INCENTIVES:
(A) A housing development qualifying for a density bonus is entitled to at least one incentive in addition
to the density bonus. Incentives are available for qualifying housing developments as follows:
1. One incentive for a housing development project that includes at least:
(a) Five percent (5%) of base units for very low income households;
(b) Ten percent (10%) of base units for lower income households; or
(c) Ten percent (10%) of base units for moderate income households within a condominium
project or a planned unit development.
2. Two (2) incentives for a housing development that includes at least:
(a) Ten percent (10%) of the base units for very low income households;
(b) Twenty percent (20%) of the base units for lower income households; or
(c) Twenty percent (20%) of the base units for moderate income households within a
condominium project or a planned unit development.
3. Three (3) incentives for a housing development that includes at least:
(a) Fifteen percent (15%) of base units for very low income households;
(b) Thirty percent (30%) of base units for lower income households; or
(c) Thirty percent (30%) of base units for moderate income households within a condominium
project or a planned unit development.
(B) The city shall grant the incentive unless the city makes a written finding, based upon substantial
evidence, of any of the following:
1. That the incentive is not necessary in order to provide for affordable housing costs as defined in
Health And Safety Code section 50052.5; or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified
in Health And Safety Code section 50053; or
2. That the incentive would result in specific adverse impacts, as defined in Government Code
section 65589.5(d)(2), upon the public health and safety, the physical environment or any real
property that is listed in the California register of historical resources and to which there is no
feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering
the development unaffordable to very low, lower, and moderate income households; or
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 705/710
3. That the incentive would be contrary to state or federal law.
(C) Where a housing development qualifies for incentives pursuant to this chapter the applicant may
request any of the following incentives:
1. A reduction in site development standards such as:
(a) Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions;
(b) Reduced minimum setbacks;
(c) Increased lot coverage;
(d) Increased maximum building heights; or
(e) Reduced on site parking requirements;
2. Approval of a mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing development if commercial,
office, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial,
office or other land uses are compatible with the housing development and the existing or
planned development in the area where the proposed housing development will be located; or
3. Other regulatory incentives proposed by the developer or the city, which result in identifiable,
financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.
4. In addition to the requested incentives above and not counting toward the eligible number of
incentives, any applicant qualifying for a density bonus may request, inclusive of handicapped
and guest parking, the following parking ratios:
(a) 0 to 1 bedroom 1 on site parking space
(b) 2 to 3 bedrooms 2 on site parking spaces
(c) 4 or more bedrooms 21/2 parking spaces
If the total number of parking spaces for the development is other than a whole number the number
shall be rounded up to the next whole number. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-7: CHILDCARE FACILITIES:
(A) When an applicant proposes a housing development that is eligible for a density bonus under this
chapter and includes a childcare facility on the premises or adjacent to the housing development,
the applicant shall receive an additional density bonus that is in an amount of square feet of
residential space that is equal to the square footage of the childcare facility; or the applicant may
receive another incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction
of the childcare facility, provided that, in both cases, the following conditions are incorporated in the
conditions of approval for the housing development:
1. The childcare facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer
than the period of time during which the affordable units are required to remain affordable
pursuant to the terms of the affordable housing agreement required by this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 706/710
2. Attendance of children at the childcare facility shall have an equal percentage or greater of
children from very low, lower, and moderate income households than the percentage of affordable
units in the housing development.
(B) The city may deny the request for a density bonus or incentive for a childcare facility if the city finds,
based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate childcare facilities without the
facilities being considered as part of the subject housing development. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-8: DONATION OF LAND:
(A) When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map or other residential development
donates land to the city, the applicant shall be entitled to a density bonus above the maximum
allowable residential density, up to a maximum of thirty five percent (35%) depending on the amount
of land donated. This increase shall be in addition to any increase in density permitted by this
chapter up to a maximum combined density increase of thirty five percent (35%). A density bonus
for donation of land shall only be considered if all of the following conditions are met:
1. The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final
subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application.
2. The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to
permit construction of units affordable to very low income households in an amount not less than
ten percent (10%) of the residential units in the proposed housing development seeking the
density bonus.
3. The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at
least forty (40) units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned for
development as affordable housing, and is, or will be, served by adequate public facilities and
infrastructure. The transferred land shall have appropriate zoning and development standards to
make the development of the affordable units feasible. No later than the date of approval of the
final subdivision map, parcel map or of the residential development the transferred land shall
have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development
of the very low income units on the transferred land, including site plan review (section 10-4-9 of
this title).
4. The transferred land and the units constructed on said land shall be subject to a deed restriction
ensuring continued affordability of the units for a period of at least thirty (30) years and subject to
restrictions consistent with California Government Code section 65915 (c)(1) and (2).
5. The land is transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city.
6. The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the city
determines appropriate, within one-fourth (1/4) mile of the boundary of the proposed
development.
7. A proposed source of funding for the very low income units shall be identified prior to the
approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential housing development application.
(Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-9: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFYING UNITS:
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 707/710
(A) Location: Units shall be considered as part of the housing development for which the density bonus
is being considered. To the greatest extent feasible, the qualifying units shall be located throughout
the housing development that also includes market rate units. Qualifying units may be clustered or
located off site subject to the approval of the city, if such clustering or off site location furthers
affordable housing opportunities.
(B) Exterior Appearance: The exterior appearance and quality of the qualifying units shall generally be
similar to the market rate units, with exterior materials and improvements similar to, and
architecturally compatible with, the market rate units in the development.
(C) Construction Timing And Phasing: The qualifying units shall be constructed concurrently with or
prior to construction of the market rate units. If a project is to be phased, the qualifying units shall be
phased in the same proportion as the market rate units or phased in another sequence acceptable
to the city. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-10: DENSITY BONUS APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
At the option of the applicant, the applicant may request a preapplication conference to meet with
development services department (department) staff to discuss the density bonus and incentive
requests, including any request for a waiver or reduction of development standards.
Each application for a density bonus and/or approval of incentives for the development of affordable
housing units shall be accompanied by the following information. Applications shall be submitted to the
department for processing. Department staff shall determine the number of copies of application
submittal materials required from the applicant.
(A) A site plan that identifies all units in the project including the location of all base units and qualifying
units.
(B) A narrative briefly describing the project, to include:
1. Number Of Base Units: The number of base units permitted under the general plan and zoning;
2. Number Of Qualifying Units: The number of qualifying units based on density bonus criteria of
this chapter;
3. Income Groups: The household income group targeted for the qualifying units; a calculation of
the affordable sales price for units to be sold, or a calculation of the affordable rent for units
rented to the targeted income group;
4. Total Number Of Units: The total number of units proposed in the project (base units plus density
bonus units);
5. Phasing Plan: A phasing plan (if applicable) that provides for the timely development of the
qualifying units proportionate to each proposed phase of development;
6. Explanation Of Requested Incentive: Any requested incentives including an explanation as to
why the incentive(s) is required for the housing development;
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 708/710
7. Land Donation: If a density bonus is requested for a land donation meeting the requirements of
section 10-12-8 of this chapter, the application shall show the following information regarding the
land to be donated:
(a) Location;
(b) Size in acres;
(c) General plan and zoning designations;
(d) Location of public utilities in relation to site; and
(e) Access, pedestrian and vehicular;
8. Childcare Facility: If a density bonus is requested for construction of a childcare facility meeting
the requirements of section 10-12-7 of this chapter, the application shall show the location and
square footage of the proposed facility.
(C) Additional information as may be requested by the director of development services to evaluate the
request for a density bonus or incentive(s). (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-11: APPLICATION REVIEW:
An application for a housing development with requested density bonus shall be processed
concurrently with all other applications required for a building permit or discretionary permit required by
the zoning ordinance (i.e., site plan review, conditional use permit, tentative parcel map, tentative
subdivision map), along with applicable environmental documents set forth in the California
environmental quality act.
(A) Action By The Development Services Department: The department shall review the density bonus
application for completeness and consistency with this chapter, and for compatibility with the
Placerville Airport land use compatibility plan (ALUCP), if the housing development is located within
the ALUCP influence area. An application that is deemed complete by the development services
department shall be submitted to the planning commission for consideration.
(B) Public Hearing Before Planning Commission: At the time and place set for a public hearing before
the planning commission, the commission shall consider the density bonus application,
recommendations of the development services department, the appropriate environmental
documentation, and any other information available. The planning commission shall then take one
of the following actions:
1. Recommend approval to the city council;
2. Refer the proposed application back to the developer with recommendations as to amending the
application, or
3. Recommend that city council deny the request.
The planning commission's recommendation(s) shall be supported by substantial evidence in the
record.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 709/710
(C) Action By City Council: At the time and place set for public hearing on the density bonus
application, the city council shall consider the recommendation of the planning commission,
appropriate environmental documentation and public comments, and then take one of the following
actions:
1. Approve the housing development and adopt the proposed density bonus application, or
2. Continue the public hearing to a date certain, referring the application back to the applicant with
recommendations to amend said application, or
3. Disapprove the application.
The city council's action shall be supported by substantial evidence in the record. (Ord. 1653, 3-
12-2013)
10-12-12: DENSITY BONUS HOUSING AGREEMENT REQUIRED:
The applicant shall submit a density bonus housing agreement (housing agreement) for city council
approval for an approved housing development subject to this chapter. The form of the housing
agreement will vary, depending on the manner in which the provisions of this chapter are satisfied for a
particular development. The form and content of the housing agreement shall be subject to the review
of the city attorney.
The housing agreement shall be recorded as a title restriction on the parcel or parcels on which the
affordable housing units will be constructed. The cost of recording any title restriction(s) shall be borne
by the applicant. The approval and recordation of the housing agreement shall take place prior to any
final map being recorded or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of a building
permit(s) for such parcel or units. The housing agreement shall be binding on all future owners and
successors in interest.
The following specific items shall be addressed in the housing agreement:
(A) Continued Affordability Of Qualifying Units: The housing agreement shall include the procedures
and mechanisms proposed by the developer to maintain the continued affordability of all affordable
housing units, whether rental or ownership units. An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall
ensure, continued affordability of all very low and low income units that qualified the applicant for
the award of the density bonus for a minimum of thirty (30) years.
(B) Rental Units: Rents for the low income and moderate income qualifying units shall be set at an
"affordable rent" as defined in section 10-12-3 of this chapter. The housing agreement shall contain
procedures for establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, maintaining the units for eligible
tenants, verifying household incomes, and providing annual reports necessary to demonstrate
compliance with this section.
(C) Owner Occupied Units: Owner occupied qualifying units shall be available at an affordable housing
sales price as defined in section 10-12-3 of this chapter.
6/3/2019 Sterling Codifiers, Inc.
https://www.sterlingcodifiers.com/codebook/index.php?book_id=509 710/710
(D) Very Low Income/Lower Income Units: Units shall be sold to very low or lower income households
who shall occupy the units as their principal residence. The purchaser of each affordable housing
unit shall execute an instrument or agreement approved by the city and to be recorded against the
property, restricting the sale of the affordable housing units to very low and lower income
households for a minimum of thirty (30) years.
(E) Moderate Income Units (Condominium Development): The initial sale of a unit within an affordable
condominium development, as defined in section 1351 of the California Civil Code, shall be
restricted to moderate income households. The owner shall occupy the unit and shall execute an
instrument or agreement to be recorded against the property, which provides for equity sharing as
set forth in Government Code section 65915 when and if the unit is sold. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-13: VIOLATION OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING COST REQUIREMENTS:
In the event it is determined that rents in excess of those allowed by operation of this chapter have
been charged to a tenant residing in an affordable rental unit, the city may take the appropriate legal
action to recover, and the rental unit owner shall be obligated to pay to the tenant (or to the city in the
event the tenant cannot be located), any excess rent charges. In the event it is determined that a sales
price in excess of that allowed by operation of this chapter has been charged to an income eligible
household purchasing an affordable ownership unit, the city may take the appropriate legal action to
recover, and the affordable residential unit seller shall be obligated to pay to the purchaser (or to the
city in the event the purchaser cannot be located), any sales proceeds determined to be in excess of
the affordable price. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)
10-12-14: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, or clause of this chapter is declared unlawful, the remaining provisions shall
remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1653, 3-12-2013)