
Title 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapters:

1.01    Code Adoption

1.04    General Provisions

1.06    Adoption of Ordinances

1.08    Arrest Procedure

1.12    Penalty Provisions

1.16    Enforcement

1.20    Administrative Citations

Chapter 1.01
CODE ADOPTION
Sections:

1.01.010    Adoption.

1.01.020    Title – Citation – Reference.

1.01.030    Codification authority.

1.01.040    Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.

1.01.050    Reference applies to all amendments.

1.01.060    Title, chapter and section headings.

1.01.070    Reference to specific ordinances.

1.01.080    Effect of code on past actions and obligations.

1.01.090    Effective date.

1.01.100    Constitutionality.

1.01.010 Adoption.
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code there is adopted the “Palmdale Municipal Code” as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the “Palmdale Municipal Code.” (Ord. 489 § l, 1983)

1.01.020 Title – Citation – Reference.
This code shall be known as the “Palmdale Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “Palmdale Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an amendment to, correction or repeal of the “Palmdale Municipal Code.” Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “Palmdale Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 489 § 2, 1983)

1.01.030 Codification authority.
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the City of Palmdale, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 489 § 3, 1983)

1.01.040 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of code.
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 471, passed June 10, 1982. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 471, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinances 472, 473, 474, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 481, 482, 483, 485 and 486. (Ord. 489 § 4, 1983)

1.01.050 Reference applies to all amendments.
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Palmdale Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the City of Palmdale, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 489 § 5, 1983)

1.01.060 Title, chapter and section headings.
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 489 § 6, 1983)

1.01.070 Reference to specific ordinances.
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 489 § 7, 1983)

1.01.080 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment hereby of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the City shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at said effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee, or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 489 § 8, 1983)

1.01.090 Effective date.
This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Palmdale Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 489 § 9, 1983)

1.01.100 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The Council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 489 § 10, 1983)

Chapter 1.04
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.04.010    Definitions.

1.04.020    Title of office.

1.04.030    Interpretation of language.

1.04.040    Grammatical interpretation.

1.04.050    Acts by agents.

1.04.060    Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.

1.04.070    Computation of time.

1.04.080    Construction.

1.04.090    Repeal not to revive an ordinance.

1.04.100    Photographic identification.

1.04.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the City of Palmdale, California, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases:

(A) “City” means the City of Palmdale, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Palmdale, California, and such territory outside of the City of Palmdale, California, over which the City of Palmdale, California, has jurisdiction or control by virtue of a constitutional or statutory provision.

(B) “Council” means the City Council of the City of Palmdale, California. “All its members” or “all Councilmembers” means the total number of Councilmembers holding office.

(C) “County” means the County of Los Angeles.

(D) “Director of Human Resources” means the Director of Human Resources or the employee designated by the City Manager to act as the Director of Human Resources.

(E) “Director of Parks and Recreation” means the Director of Parks and Recreation or the employee designated by the City Manager to act as the Director of Parks and Recreation.

(F) “Director of Planning” or “Planning Director” means the Director of Planning or the employee designated by the City Manager to act as the Director of Planning.

(G) “Law” denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the City of Palmdale, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

(H) “May” is permissive.

(I) “Month” means a calendar month.

(J) “Must” and “shall” are each mandatory.

(K) “Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, lent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

(L) “Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, or tenant by the entirety of the whole or a part of such building or land.

(M) “Person” includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them.

(N) “Personal property” includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt.

(O) “Preceding” and “following” mean next before and next after, respectively.

(P) “Property” includes real and personal property.

(Q) “Real property” includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.

(R) “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

(S) “Senior Code Enforcement Officer” means the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or the employee designated by the City Manager to act as the Senior Code Enforcement Officer.

(T) “State” means the state of California.

(U) “Street” includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs, or other public ways in this City which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state.

(V) “Tenant” and “occupant,” applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

(X) “Written” includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed, or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form.

(Y) “Year” means a calendar year. (Ord. 1409 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1299 § 1, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 1, 2006; Ord. 471 § 1, 1982)

1.04.020 Title of office.
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the City. (Ord. 471 § 2, 1982)

1.04.030 Interpretation of language.
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. (Ord. 471 § 3, 1982)

1.04.040 Grammatical interpretation.
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the City, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended:

(A) Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders.

(B) Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular.

(C) Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. (Ord. 471 § 4, 1982)

1.04.050 Acts by agents.
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. (Ord. 471 § 5, 1982)

1.04.060 Prohibited acts include causing and permitting.
Whenever in the ordinances of the City any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering, or concealing the fact of such act or omission. (Ord. 471 § 6, 1982)

1.04.070 Computation of time.
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. (Ord. 471 § 7, 1982)

1.04.080 Construction.
The provisions of the ordinances of the City, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. (Ord. 471 § 8, 1982)

1.04.090 Repeal not to revive an ordinance.
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. (Ord. 471 § 9, 1982)

1.04.100 Photographic identification.
Whenever proof of identity is required by this Municipal Code or any other policy or procedure of the City, an individual must proffer acceptable photographic identification. The following shall be considered acceptable forms of photographic identification:

(A) A current and valid driver’s license issued by the state of California or any other state or territory of the United States;

(B) A current and valid passport issued by the United States;

(C) A current and valid identification card issued by any branch of the armed forces of the United States;

(D) A current and valid identification card issued by the state of California or any other state or territory of the United States; and

(E) Any other form of photographic identification deemed to be acceptable by the City Attorney. (Ord. 1315 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 1.06
ADOPTION OF ORDINANCES
Sections:

1.06.010    Preparation of ordinances.

1.06.020    Enacting clause.

1.06.030    Signature and attestation.

1.06.040    Publication and notice of ordinances.

1.06.050    Reading of ordinances and resolutions.

1.06.060    Ordinances – Adoption.

1.06.070    Effective date.

1.06.080    Correction of documents.

1.06.010 Preparation of ordinances.
All ordinances shall be prepared by the City Attorney. No ordinance shall be prepared for presentation to the Council unless requested by a Councilmember, the Mayor, City Manager, or prepared by the City Attorney on his own initiative. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 2010)

1.06.020 Enacting clause.
The enacting clause of ordinances shall be: “The City Council of the City of Palmdale does ordain as follows:”. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 2010)

1.06.030 Signature and attestation.
Ordinances shall be signed by the Mayor and attested by the City Clerk. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 2010)

1.06.040 Publication and notice of ordinances.
(A) Prior to Adoption. The full text of proposed ordinances may be published on the City of Palmdale website and available for review in the office of the City Clerk, five days prior to adoption by the City Council. A notice of the public hearing at which an ordinance will be considered by the City Council together with a summary of the proposed ordinance may be posted at least 72 hours prior to said public hearing at the same three public places at which the City Council agenda is posted.

(B) The requirements of California Government Code Section 36933 also apply. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 2010)

1.06.050 Reading of ordinances and resolutions.
At the time of introduction or adoption of an ordinance or adoption of a resolution, the same shall not be read in full unless, after the reading of the title, further reading is requested by a member of the City Council. If any Councilmember so requests, the ordinance or resolution shall be read in full. Unless a Councilmember requests reading in full, the City Council shall be deemed to have voted, by majority vote, to waive such reading. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 2010)

1.06.060 Ordinances – Adoption.
An ordinance shall be introduced by motion after a reading of the title. If the motion to introduce is passed, public comment shall be received and after such public comment period is closed, such ordinance may be adopted at that same meeting, by a majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 2010)

1.06.070 Effective date.
Ordinances take effect 30 days after their adoption by the City Council. An ordinance takes effect immediately, if it is an ordinance:

(A) Relating to an election.

(B) For the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety, containing a declaration of the facts constituting the urgency, and is passed by a four-fifths vote of the City Council.

(C) Relating to street improvement proceedings.

(D) Relating to taxes for the usual and current expenses of the City.

(E) Covered by particular provisions of law prescribing a different effective date. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 2010)

1.06.080 Correction of documents.
Upon occasion, ordinances or other documents are submitted in draft form, or on the spot amendments occur, or typographical or other technical errors are found which necessitate retyping of the document; such redraft, when properly executed, shall become the original document, to be effective and to be retained in the files of the City Clerk. (Ord. 1394 § 2, 2010)

Chapter 1.08
ARREST PROCEDURE
Sections:

1.08.010    Notice to appear in court.

1.08.020    Time to appear.

1.08.030    Place to appear.

1.08.040    Signature of notice required.

1.08.050    Bail forfeiture.

1.08.060    Warrant issued when.

1.08.070    Failure to appear – Penalty.

1.08.080    Failure to appear – Warrant issuance.

1.08.010 Notice to appear in court.
If any person is arrested for the violation of any ordinance of this City and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, as is more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. (Ord. 83 § 1, 1965)

1.08.020 Time to appear.
The time specified in the notice to appear, unless waived, shall be at least 10 days after the arrest. (Ord. 470 § 1, 1982)

1.08.030 Place to appear.
The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either:

(A) Before a judge of a justice court, or municipal court judge within this County who has jurisdiction of the offense and who is nearest and most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest is made; or

(B) Upon demand of the person arrested, before a judge of the municipal court of the Los Angeles Judicial District, or before a judge of a justice court, or municipal court in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or

(C) Before an officer authorized to receive a deposit of bail. (Ord. 83 § 3, 1965)

1.08.040 Signature of notice required.
The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person and the arrested person, in order to secure a release, must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. (Ord. 83 § 4, 1965)

1.08.050 Bail forfeiture.
The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file a duplicate notice with the magistrate specified in the notice. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail set by the magistrate. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant does not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited and may at his discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. Upon the making of such order that no further proceedings be had, all sums deposited as bail shall forthwith be paid into the County Treasury. (Ord. 83 § 5, 1965)

1.08.060 Warrant issued when.
A warrant shall not issue on such charge for the arrest of a person who pursuant to the provisions of this chapter has given such written promise to appear in court unless and until he has violated such promise, or has failed to deposit bail, to appear for arraignment, trial or judgment, or to comply with the terms and provisions of the judgment as required by law. (Ord. 83 § 6, 1965)

1.08.070 Failure to appear – Penalty.
Every person wilfully violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. (Ord. 83 § 7, 1965)

1.08.080 Failure to appear – Warrant issuance.
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in PMC 1.08.050, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within 20 days after his failure to appear as promised. If a person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, then within 20 days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest. When the person violates his promise to appear before an officer authorized to receive bail other than a magistrate, the officer shall immediately deliver to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense charged the written promise to appear and the complaint, if any, filed by the arresting officer. (Ord. 83 § 8, 1965)

Chapter 1.12
PENALTY PROVISIONS
Sections:

1.12.010    Misdemeanors – Infractions – Administrative citations.

1.12.020    Punishment.

1.12.030    Continuing violations.

1.12.040    Public nuisances.

1.12.050    Principals.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 83, 470 and 502.

1.12.010 Misdemeanors – Infractions – Administrative citations.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor unless:

(A) The violation is classified as an infraction by the State Vehicle Code or this code in which case the person shall be guilty of an infraction; or

(B) The public prosecutor files a complaint charging the offense as an infraction; or

(C) A public officer or employee designated in or pursuant to PMC 1.16.010 issues a citation charging the offense as an infraction; or

(D) A public officer or employee designated in or pursuant to PMC 1.20.020 issues an administrative citation charging the offense as an administrative violation subject to administrative penalties in accordance with Chapter 1.20 PMC. (Ord. 1306 § 1, 2007; Ord. 854 § 1, 1990)

1.12.020 Punishment.
(A) Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable upon a first conviction by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(B) Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code, unless provision is otherwise herein made, shall be punishable upon a first conviction by a fine of not more than $100.00, and for a second conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $200.00, and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year by a fine of not more than $500.00.

(C) Any person found responsible for an administrative violation under the provisions of Chapter 1.20 PMC shall be subject to the administrative penalties set forth therein. (Ord. 1306 § 2, 2007; Ord. 854 § 1, 1990)

1.12.030 Continuing violations.
It shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision or requirement of this code is committed, continued, or permitted by any person, and such person shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 854 § 1, 1990)

1.12.040 Public nuisances.
In addition to other penalties provided by law, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be summarily abated as such by the City, and each day such condition continues shall constitute a new and separate offense. (Ord. 854 § 1, 1990)

1.12.050 Principals.
All persons concerned in the commission of any offense, whether it be misdemeanor, infraction or administrative violation subject to administrative penalties and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, or aid and abet in its commission, or, not being present, have advised and encouraged its commission, or knowingly allowed its commission, on property owned by such person, and all persons counseling, advising, or encouraging children under the age of 16 years, or mentally impaired persons, to commit any offense, or who, by fraud, contrivance, or force, occasion the drunkenness of another for the purpose of causing him to commit any offense, or who, by threats, menaces, command, or coercion, compel another to commit any offense, are principals in any offense so committed and are guilty of and responsible for any offense so committed. (Ord. 1313 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 1.16
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

1.16.010    Issuance of citations by designated employees.

1.16.020    Procedures and rules concerning issuance of citations.

1.16.010 Issuance of citations by designated employees.
(A) The Senior Code Enforcement Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, Community Service Officer, Building Official, Supervising Building Inspector, Senior Building Inspector, Building Inspector, City Engineer, Supervising Public Works Inspector, Parking Enforcement Supervisor, Parking Enforcement Officer, Public Security Officer, Senior Public Security Officer and Supervising Public Security Officer classifications of employees of the City as may hereafter be specifically designated by ordinance shall have the power, authority and immunity, as set forth in Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code, to make arrest without warrant whenever such officers or employees have reasonable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed a violation in their presence of an ordinance or statute which such officers or employees have the duty to enforce.

(B) In any case in which a person is arrested pursuant to this authority and the person arrested does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the officer or employee making the arrest shall prepare a written notice to appear and release the person on his promise to appear, as prescribed by Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5) of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 1408 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1378 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1301 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1201 § 4, 2002; Ord. U-1201 § 4, 2002; Ord. 1088 § 1, 1996; Ord. 854 § 2, 1990)

1.16.020 Procedures and rules concerning issuance of citations.
The City Manager may, by administrative instruction, establish procedures and rules governing the conduct of officers and employees designated in or pursuant to PMC 1.16.010, and may specify what ordinances such officers and employees shall have the duty to enforce if other than all ordinances of the City. (Ord. 854 § 2, 1990)

Chapter 1.20
ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Sections:

1.20.010    Applicability.

1.20.020    Definitions.

1.20.030    Scope.

1.20.040    Issuance of administrative citation – Contents.

1.20.050    Service of citation.

1.20.060    Payment of administrative penalties, late charges – Interest.

1.20.070    Administrative penalties, late charges – Collection of fees and costs.

1.20.080    Right to an administrative hearing.

1.20.090    Hardship waiver of advance deposit of fine.

1.20.100    Administrative hearing – Procedures.

1.20.110    Hearing decision – Right of appeal.

1.20.120    Failure to comply constitutes misdemeanor.

1.20.010 Applicability.
(A) Use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the City and is one remedy that the City has to address violations of the Palmdale Municipal Code. By adopting this chapter, the City does not intend to limit its discretion or ability to utilize any criminal, civil or other remedies, or any combination thereof, to address any violations of the City’s laws.

(B) This chapter makes any violation of the provisions of the Palmdale Municipal Code subject to administrative penalties.

(C) This chapter establishes the administrative procedures for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of administrative penalties pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4.

(D) An administrative penalty in the amount adopted by resolution of the City Council is hereby imposed on all persons found to have violated any provision of the Palmdale Municipal Code.

(E) City of Palmdale Enforcement Officers and other persons designated by the City Manager are hereby authorized to issue administrative citations in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(F) Administrative penalties shall be paid directly to the Finance Office of the City of Palmdale. Payment of the penalty shall not excuse failure to correct or abate a violation, nor shall it bar concurrent or further enforcement actions by the City.

(G) The City Attorney/designee may review and dismiss all or any part of any citation at any time if the City Attorney/designee determines that the citation or any part of it was issued in error, in which event the corresponding penalty paid shall be refunded. Notice of such dismissal shall be given to the citee in writing.

(H) The City Manager/designee is authorized to promulgate procedural rules and regulations governing the implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words are defined as follows:

(A) “Citation” means an administrative citation that is issued to a responsible person pursuant to this chapter.

(B) “Citee” means a responsible person to whom a citation is issued.

(C) “Code” shall include: (1) the entire Palmdale Municipal Code and all Los Angeles County and other codes incorporated therein by adoption or reference, (2) any uncodified ordinance adopted by the Palmdale City Council.

(D) “Enforcement Officer” (also referred to as “Officer”) shall mean any City employee with obligations to enforce the Palmdale Municipal Code, including the following: Senior Code Enforcement Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, Community Service Officer, Building Official, Supervising Building Inspector, Senior Building Inspector, Building Inspector, City Engineer, Supervising Public Works Inspector, Parking Enforcement Supervisor, Supervising Public Security Officer, Senior Public Security Officer and Public Security Officer classifications of employees. The City Manager may designate additional persons to act as Officers for purposes of implementing the provisions of this chapter.

(E) “Hearing Officer” means the person, private entity, organization, association, public official, or duly constituted reviewing authority or commission, designated or appointed by the City Manager.

(F) “Owner” means and includes any person having legal title to, or who leases, rents, occupies or has charge, control or possession of, or responsibility for, any real property in the City, including all persons identified as owners on the last equalized assessment roll of the Los Angeles County Assessor’s Office. An owner of personal property or animals shall be any person who has legal title, charge, control or possession of, or responsibility for, personal property. An owner may include an agent, manager or representative thereof.

(G) “Property” or “premises” means any real property, or improvements thereon, or portions thereof, as the case may be. “Property” includes any parkway or unimproved public easement abutting such real property. “Property” shall also include all forms of personal property or animals, where applicable.

(H) “Responsible person” means any person who violates any provision of the code or who allows, causes, creates, maintains or permits a violation of the code to exist or continue, by any act or omission to act, and includes any owner, tenant, renter, lessor, lessee, manager, agent, lienholder or any fiduciary or person with power of attorney or other person who is occupying or having charge, possession or control of the premises or has the authority and ability to act on behalf of, or in the interest of, the owner of property where a violation exists. When property is held in common by more than one owner, each owner is a responsible person, even when a homeowner’s association has been formed to manage and maintain such commonly owned property. Such a homeowner’s association shall also be a responsible person.

(I) “Violation” shall mean an act or omission of any act, or use or condition that constitutes an offense of the code, as well as a breach or violation of any condition of a permit, approval or license issued pursuant to the code. A “transient” violation is one that is brief or spontaneous in its commission, or that is not typically confined to a fixed location. A “nontransient” violation is continuing in nature and generally present at one location. (Ord. 1408 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1378 § 2, 2009; Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.030 Scope.
This chapter imposes an administrative penalty pursuant to an administrative citation for any violation of the code, as well as for a breach or violation of any condition of a permit, approval or license issued pursuant to the code. This remedy may be utilized in place of, or in addition to, any other remedy allowed by the code or state law. The City Manager/designee shall have sole discretion to utilize any remedy or remedies as authorized by law. This administrative citation remedy may be utilized notwithstanding the fact that a violation of any specific code section is designated therein to be a misdemeanor or infraction. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.040 Issuance of administrative citation – Contents.
(A) Whenever an Officer determines that a violation of the code has occurred, the Officer may issue an administrative citation on a City-approved form listing the code violation(s) and the amount of the administrative penalties required to be paid by the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

(B) When the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical or other similar structural or zoning issues that creates an immediate danger to health or safety, a citation may be issued forthwith together with a notice to abate in accordance with PMC Title 8. In the absence of an immediate danger, a citation for such a violation shall not be issued pursuant to this chapter unless the responsible person has first been provided with notice to abate and a reasonable period, as determined by the Officer, in which to abate or correct the violations.

(C) An Officer may issue an amended administrative citation when the Officer determines that the original administrative citation contained errors or did not accurately reflect prior citations or convictions.

(D) Each citation shall contain the following information:

(1) Name and mailing address of the responsible person;

(2) The address or description of the location of the violation;

(3) The date of the citation;

(4) The code or ordinance section(s) violated;

(5) A description of the violation(s);

(6) Amount of the administrative penalty for each violation, the procedure and place to pay the penalties, and any late and interest charge(s), if not timely paid, and notice that if the City is required to take action to collect such penalties, the responsible person may be charged costs and attorney fees;

(7) When appropriate, the action(s) required to correct the violation(s), and, if applicable, any deadlines or time limitations for commencing and completing such action(s);

(8) A description of the administrative citation review process and the manner by which a hearing on a citation may be requested (including the form to be used, how to obtain the form, and the period within which a request must be made in order to be timely);

(9) The name and signature of the Officer, and the signature of the citee, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of its issuance. The refusal of a citee to sign a citation shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceeding, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person is responsible for a violation of the code;

(10) Any other information deemed necessary by the City Manager. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.050 Service of citation.
(A) A citation including any amended citation may be served in any manner provided for service of summons by the California Code of Civil Procedure and also may be served by certified mail through the United States Postal Service. The date of service shall constitute the issuance date of a citation.

(B) If served by certified mail, the citation shall be sealed in an envelope with postage prepaid and addressed to the citee at the address shown on the most current tax roll of the County or, if more current information is contained in City records, at that address. The date a citation is deposited with the United States Postal Service shall: (1) constitute its issuance date, and (2) the date that service by certified mail shall be deemed to have been completed. If this is the method of service, a courtesy copy of the citation shall also be sent to the responsible person in a sealed envelope by first class mail to the same location.

(C) If an agent, manager or representative of a responsible person is personally served with a citation, a copy thereof shall also be served by certified mail to the responsible person at his or her last-known business or residence address as the same appears in public records of the City. In such instances, the date a copy of the citation is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the issuance date of a citation.

(D) Any notice or order given pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be served in the manner provided for in this section, unless otherwise stated.

(E) Failure of a citee to receive a citation or notice shall not invalidate any penalty, late charge, action or proceeding that is imposed or brought pursuant to this chapter, if service was given in a manner stated in this section. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.060 Payment of administrative penalties, late charges – Interest.
(A) A citee shall pay the administrative penalties listed on the citation to the City within 20 calendar days from the issuance date of the citation. For penalties not paid in full within that time, a late charge in the amount set forth by resolution of the City Council is hereby imposed and must be paid to the City by the citee. Penalties not paid within the time established by resolution of the City Council shall accrue interest at the rate set forth therein.

(B) Administrative penalties and any late charges and interest due shall be paid to the City at such location or address as stated in the citation, or as may otherwise be designated by the City Manager.

(C) Upon confirmation of a citation or when the citation is deemed confirmed, all unpaid administrative penalties shall constitute a judgment which may be collected in any manner allowed by law for collection of judgments including but not limited to recordation to create a lien on any real property owned by the responsible person. The City shall be entitled to recover its attorney fees and costs incurred in collecting any administrative penalty, late charges and/or interest.

(D) Payment of the administrative penalty shall not excuse or discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code.

(E) Abatement of a violation shall not excuse the obligation of a citee to pay an administrative penalty, and any late charge or interest. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.070 Administrative penalties, late charges – Collection of fees and costs.
(A) The City Council shall establish the amounts of administrative penalties, late charges and interest in a schedule of penalties adopted by resolution of the City Council. The City Council may, by resolution, also impose escalating penalties in amounts it deems appropriate for repeat offenses within the time periods listed in the resolution.

(B) The City Council may, by resolution, also establish and impose a daily interest charge on penalties and the commencement of its accrual. Interest shall not be imposed on a late charge. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.080 Right to an administrative hearing.
(A) Any citee may contest the violation(s), or that he or she is a responsible person, by filing a request for an administrative hearing on a City-approved form with the Office of the City Clerk, 38300 Sierra Highway, Palmdale, CA 93550, within 20 calendar days from the issuance date of a citation. If the Office of the City Clerk does not receive the request in the required period, the citee shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed confirmed and final.

(B) No fee shall be charged for the filing of a request for a hearing.

(C) Citees must deposit the full amount of the penalty listed on the citation on or before the request for a hearing is filed unless a request for waiver of advance deposit, as described herein below, is filed before or with the request for hearing. Failure to deposit the full amount of all penalties within the required time period, or the tender of a nonnegotiable check, shall render a request for an administrative hearing incomplete and untimely, unless a waiver of advance deposit is granted as set forth below. Penalties that are deposited with the City shall not accrue interest. Penalties deposited shall be returned to the person who deposited them if the citation is overturned.

(D) A request for a hearing shall contain the following:

(1) The citation number.

(2) The name, address, telephone and any facsimile numbers, of each person contesting the citation.

(3) A statement of the reason(s) why a citation is being contested.

(4) The date and signature of the citee(s).

(E) The City will notify all persons who filed a request for a hearing in writing by first class mail of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Service of this notice is deemed complete at time of mailing. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, City action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

(F) The hearing will be conducted within 60 days of the date a timely and complete request is received by the Office of the City Clerk.

(G) If the Officer submits an additional written report concerning the citation to the Office of the City Clerk for consideration at the hearing, the Officer shall also serve a copy of such report by first class mail on the person requesting an administrative hearing no less than three calendar days prior to the date set for hearing. Failure to receive said report shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, City action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

(H) A timely request for a hearing shall not excuse a citee from the duty to immediately abate or correct a violation of the code, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of the code. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.090 Hardship waiver of advance deposit of fine.
(A) A citee who is financially unable to deposit the administrative penalty with his or her request for a hearing may request a waiver of this requirement by completing and submitting the City-approved application form for an advance deposit hardship waiver (hereafter the “hardship waiver”). This form and all required accompanying records must be submitted before or together with the request for a hearing, to the Office of the City Clerk, 38300 Sierra Highway, Palmdale, CA 93550.

(B) To be considered for a hardship waiver, the application form must be complete, signed, and must be accompanied by documents that enable the City to reasonably determine the citee’s present inability to deposit the penalty. Documents suitable for consideration may include, without limitation, accurate, complete and legible copies of state and federal income tax returns and all schedules for the preceding tax year; financial statements, loan applications, bank account records, income and expense records for 12 months preceding submittal of the waiver form, as well as other documentation demonstrating the citee’s financial hardship. The City will, after a citation is final or confirmed, destroy the documents submitted by a citee for a hardship waiver without prior notice to the citee.

(C) The City will issue a written decision specifying the reasons for issuing or not issuing the hardship waiver. This decision is final and nonappealable. The decision shall be served upon the person requesting the hardship waiver by first class mail.

(D) Approval of a hardship waiver shall result in the City setting a hearing pursuant to PMC 1.20.100.

(E) If the City determines that the citee is not entitled to a hardship waiver, the citee shall deposit the full amount of the administrative penalties with the Office of the City Clerk within seven calendar days of the date the decision is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service. In the event the City Clerk does not receive the full amount of the penalties within the required period: (1) a late charge shall be imposed; (2) the request for a hearing shall be considered incomplete and untimely; and (3) the citee shall have waived the right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed confirmed and final. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.100 Administrative hearing – Procedures.
(A) The Hearing Officer designated or appointed by the City Manager shall hear all requests for administrative hearings of administrative citations in accordance with the procedures established herein.

(B) Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The City bears the burden of proof to establish a violation and responsibility therefor by a preponderance of evidence. The citation is prima facie evidence of the violation, however, and the Officer who issued the citation is not required to attend or participate at the hearing. The citee(s), and Officer, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. A citee may bring an interpreter to the hearing provided there is no expense to the City therefor. The Hearing Officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing.

(C) A citee may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the Office of the City Clerk at least three City business days prior to the hearing. If the citee fails to attend the scheduled hearing, or does not submit a written declaration in a timely manner, he or she shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. In such an instance, the Hearing Officer shall cancel the hearing and not render a decision. In such instances, the citation shall be deemed confirmed.

(D) Hearings may be continued once at the request of a citee or the Officer who issued the citation. The Hearing Officer may also continue the hearing for cause. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.110 Hearing decision – Right of appeal.
(A) After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or overturn the citation and shall state the reasons therefor. If the citation is upheld and the violation has not been fully abated or corrected on or before the date of the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall order abatement and/or correction thereof in the decision and specify deadline(s) by which the abatement and/or correction must be completed.

(B) The Hearing Officer shall serve citee(s) by first class mail with a copy of the written decision. The date the decision is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, City action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter.

(C) Decisions of the Hearing Officer may be appealed, in accordance with Government Code Section 53069.4(b), to the superior court within 20 days after the date of their service. Each decision shall contain a statement advising the citee(s) of this appeal right and the procedures and court filing fee for its exercise. A citee shall serve a copy of the court-filed notice of appeal on the Office of the City Clerk, 38300 Sierra Highway, Palmdale, CA 93550, by personal service or first class mail within five calendar days of filing the original thereof.

(D) If a Hearing Officer’s decision is not appealed in a timely manner, the decision shall be deemed confirmed.

(E) The superior court is the sole reviewing authority and an appeal from a Hearing Officer’s decision is not appealable to the City Council. If a responsible person prevails on appeal, the City shall reimburse his or her filing fee, as well as the fine deposit in accordance with the court judgment. These moneys shall be mailed to the responsible person within 30 calendar days of the City’s receipt of a notice of judgment or ruling from the superior court clerk. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

1.20.120 Failure to comply constitutes misdemeanor.
Failure of a citee to comply with a corrective action stated in any uncontested citation, or with regard to a correction order in any Hearing Officer decision that is deemed confirmed and not appealed to the superior court, shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1303 § 2, 2007)

Title 2
ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapters:

2.04    City Manager

2.06    City Attorney

2.08    City Council

2.10    City Clerk

2.12    Assessor and Tax Collector

2.16    Bonds

2.20    Repealed

2.24    Community Redevelopment Agency

2.25    Industrial Development Authority

2.26    Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board

2.27    Repealed

2.28    Civil Defense and Disasters

2.32    Public Library

2.40    Palmdale Fee Resolution

2.42    Repealed

2.44    Repealed

2.46    Planning Commission

2.48    Repealed

2.50    Repealed

2.52    Palmdale Airport

Chapter 2.04
CITY MANAGER
Sections:

2.04.010    Office created.

2.04.020    Eligibility.

2.04.030    Bond.

2.04.040    Performance of duties during absence or disability.

2.04.050    Compensation.

2.04.060    Powers and duties.

2.04.070    Membership on boards and commissions.

2.04.080    Cooperation and assistance.

2.04.090    Orders and directions.

2.04.100    Removal – Procedure.

2.04.110    Removal – After election.

2.04.120    Inconsistent nomenclature.

2.04.130    Severability of provisions.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 38, 88 and 179.

2.04.010 Office created.
The office of the City Manager is established. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications and abilities, and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.020 Eligibility.
(A) Residence in the City at the time of appointment shall not be required as a condition of appointment.

(B) No person elected to the City Council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as City Manager until one year has elapsed after such person has ceased to be a member of the City Council. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.030 Bond.
The City Manager may be required to furnish a corporate surety bond in an amount to be determined by the City Council, which surety bond shall be conditioned on the faithful performance of the duties imposed on the City Manager as herein prescribed. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City. (Ord. 1366 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.040 Performance of duties during absence or disability.
(A) The Assistant City Manager shall serve as City Manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the City Manager. In the event that both the City Manager and the Assistant City Manager are temporarily absent, disabled or unable to fulfill the duties of this office, then the Deputy City Manager shall serve as the City Manager pro tempore.

(B) In the case of the permanent absence or disability of the City Manager, the Assistant City Manager (or in the case of the permanent absence or disability of both the City Manager and the Assistant City Manager, then the Deputy City Manager) shall serve as City Manager pro tempore until the City Council designates the Assistant City Manager or any other duly qualified person to act as the interim City Manager to perform the duties of the City Manager until a new City Manager is appointed by the City Council. The City Council may require said interim City Manager to furnish a corporate surety bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties required to be performed.

(C) In the event that both the Assistant City Manager and Deputy City Manager positions are vacant, the City Manager shall designate, in writing, individual department heads to serve as City Manager pro tempore during any short-term absence or temporary disability of the City Manager. In no event shall a department head occupy the designated position as City Manager pro tempore for more than 30 days without the consent of the City Council. No bond shall be required of any department head so designated. (Ord. 1437 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1366 § 2, 2008; Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.050 Compensation.
The City Manager of the City shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall from time to time determine and fix, and said compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.060 Powers and duties.
The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government under the direction and control of the City Council, except as otherwise provided in this code. The City Manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the City which are under the control of the City Manager. In addition to general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be the City Manager’s duty, and the City Manager shall have the power:

(A) To ensure, in cooperation with the City Attorney, that all laws of the state pertaining to the City, and all laws and ordinances of the City, are duty enforced, and that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the City are faithfully observed and performed;

(B) To control, order and give directions to all heads of departments, subordinate officers and employees of the City, except the City Attorney, City Clerk and the City Treasurer; to transfer employees from one department to another; and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under the City Manager’s direction;

(C) To appoint, promote, discipline, demote and remove any officers or employees of the City, except the City Attorney, City Clerk and the City Treasurer;

(D) To exercise control over and to supervise in general all departments and divisions of the City, and all appointive officers and employees thereof, except the City Attorney, City Clerk and the City Treasurer;

(E) To attend all meetings of the City Council and its committees unless excused therefrom by the City Council, unless the City Manager’s removal is under consideration by the City Council;

(F) To recommend to the City Council for adoption such measures, actions, resolutions and ordinances as may be deemed necessary or expedient;

(G) To keep the City Council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City;

(H) To prepare and submit to the City Council the annual budget and to administer it after adoption;

(I) To purchase or cause to be purchased all equipment, services, materials and supplies for all departments or divisions of the City;

(J) To make investigations into the affairs of the City, and any department or division thereof, and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligation running to the City;

(K) To investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the City government, and the services provided by public utilities in the City;

(L) To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets, and other public properties which are under the control and jurisdiction of the City Council;

(M) To devote fully to the duties of this office and the interests of the City;

(N) To make reports and recommendations as may be desirable or as requested by the City Council;

(O) To serve in any appointed office, or as head of any department within the City government to which the City Manager may be qualified when appointed thereto by the City Council, and to hold and perform the duties thereof at the pleasure of the City Council;

(P) To provide leadership for civic activities designed to benefit the residents of the City when so authorized by the City Council;

(Q) To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to the City Manager from time to time by ordinance, resolution or motion of the City Council; and

(R) To review all mail or other written communications addressed to the City Council and to give it immediate attention to the end that all administrative matters requiring Council action may be acted upon between City Council meetings. Such correspondence may be copied for administrative purposes and shall be delivered to Councilmembers in a timely manner. Correspondence addressed to an individual Councilmember shall not be duplicated, reproduced or otherwise copied, and the contents thereof shall not be divulged to any other person, unless written consent from the addressee has been obtained. Any correspondence addressed to individual Councilmembers which is marked “PERSONAL,” “PRIVATE,” “CONFIDENTIAL” or with other similar words or phrases on the envelope, wrapper or cover which would indicate the sender intended the contents to be seen only by the eyes of the addressed Councilmember shall not be opened by the City Manager except by written consent of the addressee and shall be delivered to that Councilmember in a timely manner.

(S) The authority to approve and execute on behalf of the City compromise and settlement agreements and/or releases for disputes, claims and/or lawsuits up to a maximum value of $50,000 exclusive of City costs and attorney fees, with the advise and consent of the City Attorney and as per State and local law. The City Manager shall annually compile a confidential report in cooperation with the City Attorney on all such agreements or releases, including the name(s) of the opposing party, significant terms, settlement amount and date. The City Attorney shall provide such confidential report to the City Council under seal of the attorney-client and attorney work-product privileges if he or she deems such necessary. (Ord. 1439 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1424 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1399 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1299 §§ 2, 3, 2007; Ord. U-1299 §§ 2, 3, 2006; Ord. 1202 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.070 Membership on boards and commissions.
The City Manager shall be an ex officio member of all boards and commissions appointed by the Mayor or the City Council pursuant to law, with a right to participate in all deliberations or actions but without vote. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.080 Cooperation and assistance.
It shall be the duty of the City Attorney, City Clerk, City Treasurer and all subordinate officers to cooperate with and assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City most efficiently, economically and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with their duties as prescribed by law and the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 1202 § 2, 2002; Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.090 Orders and directions.
The City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the City only through the City Manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the City Council nor any members thereof shall give orders to any subordinates of the City Manager. No member of the City Council shall demand the appointment or removal of any person by the City Manager. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.100 Removal – Procedure.
(A) The removal of the City Manager shall be only on a majority vote of the whole City Council, subject, however, to the provisions of PMC 2.04.110. In case of intended removal by the City Council, the City Manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating that the City Council’s intention is to remove the City Manager and the reasons therefor at least 30 days before the effective date of any such removal.

(B) Within seven days after delivery to the City Manager of such notice, the City Manager may, by written notification to the Mayor, request a public hearing before the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council shall fix a time for a public hearing, which shall be held at its usual meeting place, but before the expiration of the 30-day period, and at which time the City Manager shall have the opportunity to appear and be heard.

(C) After furnishing the City Manager with written notice of intended removal, the City Council may suspend the City Manager from duty, but compensation shall continue until removal of the City Manager by resolution of the City Council adopted subsequent to the aforesaid public hearing.

(D) In removing the City Manager, the City Council shall have absolute discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing. The purpose of the hearing is to allow the City Manager to publicly present to the City Council any and all grounds for opposition to removal prior to its action. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.110 Removal – After election.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, the City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of 90 days next succeeding any general municipal election, at which election a member of the City Council is elected. The purpose of this provision is to allow any new-elected member of the City Council, or a reorganized City Council, to observe the actions and abilities of the City Manager in the performance of the powers and duties of this office. After the expiration of said 90-day period, the provisions of PMC 2.04.100 relating to the removal of the City Manager shall be applicable. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.120 Inconsistent nomenclature.
Wherever it appears in this code, or in any ordinance or resolution previously adopted by the City Council or by any of the City’s boards or commissions, the term “City Administrator” shall be construed to mean “City Manager.” (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

2.04.130 Severability of provisions.
If any part of this chapter is found to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the provision(s) found to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional shall be severed and all the other provision(s) shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1058 § 1, 1995)

Chapter 2.06
CITY ATTORNEY
Sections:

2.06.010    Office created.

2.06.020    Appointment and qualifications.

2.06.030    Removal of the City Attorney.

2.06.040    Bond.

2.06.050    Performance of duties during absence or disability.

2.06.060    Powers and duties.

2.06.070    Attendance at meetings.

2.06.080    Compensation.

2.06.090    Severability of provisions.

2.06.010 Office created.
(A) The office of City Attorney of the City is established. The office shall consist of the City Attorney, and such attorneys and other employees as the City Council may provide for in the budget. The City Attorney shall be head of the office and be responsible for the successful performance of its functions. It shall be the duty of the City Attorney to assist the City Manager in administering the affairs of the City efficiently, economically, and harmoniously so far as may be consistent with the duties of the City Attorney as prescribed by law and the ethical rules and standards applicable to the practice of law and of the State Bar of the state of California.

(B) The City Attorney may appoint such assistant City Attorneys, deputy City Attorneys, and other employees as may be required to carry out the functions of the office of the City Attorney and they shall have such duties as may from time to time be assigned to them by the City Attorney. Any such assistants, deputies, and employees shall be members of the classified service of the City and shall be paid a salary commensurate with their classification. (Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

2.06.020 Appointment and qualifications.
(A) The City Council shall appoint the City Attorney who shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council.

(B) No person shall be eligible to be appointed City Attorney unless he or she shall have been admitted to practice before the supreme court of the state of California and shall have been engaged in the practice of law in the state of California for at least five years prior to his or her appointment.

(C) Residence in the City shall not be required as a condition of employment or appointment of the City Attorney.

(D) No person elected to the City Council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for employment or appointment as City Attorney until one year has elapsed after such person’s term on the City Council has ended. (Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

2.06.030 Removal of the City Attorney.
The removal of the City Attorney shall only be upon a majority vote of the full City Council, seated in a regular Council meeting. (Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

2.06.040 Bond.
The City Attorney may be required to furnish a corporate surety bond in an amount to be determined by the City Council, which bond shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties herein imposed upon the City Attorney. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the City. (Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

2.06.050 Performance of duties during absence or disability.
Upon any absence or disability of the City Attorney which precludes the performance of the duties specified herein, an assistant City Attorney or deputy City Attorney may be appointed by the City Council as the interim acting City Attorney. In the event of a vacancy in the office of City Attorney, the City Council shall appoint an interim acting City Attorney until such time as the vacancy is filled. Such interim appointment may be conditioned upon that person obtaining a corporate surety bond to ensure the faithful performance of the duties required to be performed as set forth herein. (Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

2.06.060 Powers and duties.
The City Attorney shall have the following powers and duties:

(A) To be the sole and exclusive legal adviser of the City, the City Council and all City agencies, authorities, boards, commissions, committees, officers, and departments pertaining to all of their functions, powers, and duties under this code, and under federal and state law. The City Attorney may retain outside counsel to attend to cases or other legal matters as the need may arise or as the City Council may direct;

(B) To initiate all proceedings in law or equity for the criminal or civil enforcement of all City ordinances and for the defense of the City in all legal actions;

(C) To attend to all civil actions and other proceedings in which the City, any officer or employee or former officer or employee is concerned or is a party by reason of an act or omission in the scope of his or her duties or in which the interests of the City may be affected. The City Attorney may reject claims against the City and may commence any action or settle any claim or action of a gross amount of $10,000 or less, exclusive of court costs. No action or claim of more than a gross amount of $10,000, exclusive of court costs, shall be commenced or settled without the prior approval of the City Council;

(D) To establish a system of claims administration to review and respond to claims against the City and to delegate authority to reject claims to a claims administrator appointed by the City Attorney;

(E) To prepare, or approve, or both, all ordinances, resolutions, agreements, bonds, deeds and other legal instruments as may be required for the proper conduct of the business of the City; and

(F) To perform such other legal services as may be required from time to time by the City Council, or requested by the City Manager or other subordinate officers, or as may be necessary to perform the foregoing functions or duties of the legal advisor of the City. (Ord. 1338 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

2.06.070 Attendance at meetings.
The City Attorney, or the City Attorney’s designee, shall attend all meetings of the City Council planning commission, and of all City agencies, authorities, boards, commissions, and committees as the City Council shall direct. (Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

2.06.080 Compensation.
The City Attorney, assistant City Attorney, deputy City Attorney and employees of the office of the City Attorney shall receive such compensation as the City Council shall from time to time authorize in the budget. Said compensation shall be a proper charge against such funds of the City as the City Council shall designate. (Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

2.06.090 Severability of provisions.
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 1202 § 3, 2002)

Chapter 2.08
CITY COUNCIL
Sections:

2.08.010    Elected Mayor.

2.08.020    City Council.

2.08.025    Nomination requirements.

2.08.030    Mayor to make appointments.

2.08.040    Regular meeting day, time and place.

2.08.050    Compensation.

2.08.060    Additional compensation for elected Mayor.

2.08.070    Vehicle expenses.

2.08.080    Use of City seal and other City marks by City Councilmembers.

2.08.010 Elected Mayor.
The office of the Mayor of the City shall be an elective office which shall have a term of two years. The Mayor shall be elected by a citywide election. (Ord. 1471 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1357 § 1, 2008)

2.08.020 City Council.
The Mayor shall be elected on a Citywide basis and the four Councilmembers shall be elected from four geographic districts in which each resides by a vote of the electors in each respective district. (Ord. 1471 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1357 § 1, 2008)

2.08.025 Nomination requirements.
(A) City Council Candidate Residency. No person shall be eligible to hold office as a member of the City Council unless:

(1) He or she is a registered elector of the Council district from which he or she is nominated or appointed;

(2) He or she is a current resident of the Council district from which he or she is nominated or appointed; and

(3) He or she has been a resident of the Council district from which he or she is nominated or appointed for at least 30 days immediately preceding the commencement of the nomination filing period or their appointment to the City Council.

(B) Mayoral Candidate Residency. No person shall be eligible to hold the office of Mayor unless:

(1) He or she is a registered elector of the City;

(2) He or she is a current resident of the City; and

(3) He or she has been a resident of the City for at least 30 days immediately preceding the commencement of the nomination filing period.

(C) Nomination Papers.

(1) A City Council candidate’s nomination papers must be signed by at least 20, but not more than 30, voters registered in the Council district from which he or she is nominated.

(2) A mayoral candidate’s nomination papers must be signed by at least 20, but not more than 30, voters registered in the City. (Ord. 1483 § 1, 2016)

2.08.030 Mayor to make appointments.
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall make all appointments to boards, commissions and committees of the City as follows:

(A) All board and commission vacancies shall be advertised, seeking volunteers willing and desiring to be appointed to fill such vacancies. Any person seeking to be so appointed must complete and submit the city volunteer application, together with any other information requested by the Mayor as appropriate for a specific board or commission.

(B) All such applications shall be provided to the Mayor for review, who shall, at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting, nominate, from among such applicants, the persons whom the Mayor desires to appoint by making a motion, which need not be seconded, for each such appointment.

(C) If the nomination by the Mayor is approved by a majority vote of the City Council, the Mayor may then proceed to appoint the person to the board or commission under consideration.

(D) If the nomination by the Mayor is not approved by a majority vote of the City Council, the Mayor will nominate, by motion, a different candidate until someone is approved by majority vote of the City Council for the position under consideration.

(E) Persons so appointed shall serve the term of office set by ordinance for such board or commission and may only be removed by a majority vote of the City Council; provided, however, for those boards or commissions for which residency in the City of Palmdale is a requirement, the appointment will automatically terminate if the person ceases to be a resident of the City.

(F) This section is not applicable to appointments to the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1505 § 3, 2017; Ord. 1357 § 1, 2008)

2.08.040 Regular meeting day, time and place.
Regular meetings of the City Council will be held on the first Tuesday of each month except in January and July where regular meetings will be held on the second Tuesday of those months. Meetings of the City Council shall be held at 38300 Sierra Highway, Suite B, Palmdale, California, at 7:00 p.m. If all matters on the agenda for any regular meeting have not been considered by the City Council by the hour of 10:30 p.m., or such earlier or later time as may be fixed by a majority vote of the City Council, then the regular meeting may be adjourned to the next succeeding Tuesday, at the same time and at the same location, unless a different day, time or location is specified in the order of adjournment. When so adjourned, each adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all purposes. Notice of all meetings of the City Council, whether regular, adjourned, special or emergency, will be given in the manner required by statute. When a regular Tuesday meeting of the City Council falls on a national or State holiday and City offices are scheduled to be closed, then such meeting shall not be held and will be deemed adjourned for all purposes with no further action required by the City Council or the City Clerk except such written notices of adjournment as may be required by law. The ordinance codified in this section shall commence with the April 4, 2017, meeting of the City Council. (Ord. 1494 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1380 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1357 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1270 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1239 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1192 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1178 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1161 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1133 § 1, 1998; Ord. U-1098 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1094 § 1, 1996; Ord. U-1018 § 1, 1993; Ord. U-1002 § 1, 1992; Ord. U-776 § 1, 1988; Ord. 373 § 1, 1980. Formerly 2.08.010.)

2.08.050 Compensation.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 36516, each member of the City Council shall receive, as compensation for services, a salary in the amount of $759.00 per month. (Ord. 1357 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1300 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1194 § 2, 2002; Ord. 936 § 1, 1991; Ord. 794 § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.08.020.)

2.08.060 Additional compensation for elected Mayor.
During such period of time as the office of Mayor is an elective office, the Mayor shall receive, in addition to the compensation set forth in PMC 2.08.020, such further amount as shall cause the total compensation for services to equal $1,265 per month. (Ord. 1357 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1300 § 3, 2007; Ord. 1194 § 3, 2002; Ord. 956 § 1, 1991. Formerly 2.08.025.)

2.08.070 Vehicle expenses.
(A) The City Council has determined that efficiency would be served by receiving reimbursement for vehicle expenses at the end of each calendar month without the necessity of presentation of an itemized accounting, receipts, vouchers or other documentation, and that costs associated with use of a personal vehicle, such as fuel, maintenance, and insurance, periodically increase.

(B) The City Council shall receive a vehicle allowance, at the end of each calendar month, without the necessity of presentation of an itemized accounting, receipts, vouchers or other documentation in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. The amount of the vehicle allowance established by the City Council shall be reasonably related to what is required for the performance of the City Councilmembers’ public duties. (Ord. 1422 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1357 § 1, 2008; Ord. 829 § 1, 1989. Formerly 2.08.030.)

2.08.080 Use of City seal and other City marks by City Councilmembers.
(A) The City seal and any emblem, symbol, slogan, logotype, or other distinctive mark of the City shall be used solely for City purposes, unless otherwise authorized by the City Council. Private, commercial, noncommercial, or political use of the official seal or any emblem, symbol, slogan, logotype or other distinctive mark of the City, in whole or in part, by a City Councilmember is prohibited.

(B) City letterhead that includes the City seal or any emblem, symbol, slogan, logotype, or other distinctive mark of the City, in whole or in part, shall be used solely for official City purposes. Use of City letterhead that includes the official seal or any emblem, symbol, slogan, logotype or other distinctive mark of the City, in whole or in part, by a City Councilmember for any private, commercial, noncommercial, or political purpose, without the prior authorization of the City Council, is prohibited. (Ord. 1357 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1341 § 1, 2008. Formerly 2.08.040.)

Chapter 2.10
CITY CLERK
Sections:

2.10.010    Appointment of City Clerk by City Manager.

2.10.020    Appointment of Deputy City Clerk by City Clerk.

2.10.030    Powers, duties and responsibilities of City Clerk.

2.10.010 Appointment of City Clerk by City Manager.
The City Manager shall appoint the City Clerk who shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Manager. The City Clerk shall not be required to be a resident or an elector in the City. (Ord. 1407 § 1, 2010; Ord. 855 § 2, 1990)

2.10.020 Appointment of Deputy City Clerk by City Clerk.
The City Clerk may appoint one or more Deputy City Clerks who, during the absence of the City Clerk, shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the City Clerk. (Ord. 1407 § 1, 2010; Ord. 855 § 2, 1990)

2.10.030 Powers, duties and responsibilities of City Clerk.
The City Clerk shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the City Clerk as prescribed by the laws of the state, the City Charter, the ordinances of the City, and the City’s classification plan for this position. (Ord. 1407 § 1, 2010; Ord. 855 § 2, 1990)

Chapter 2.12
ASSESSOR AND TAX COLLECTOR
Sections:

2.12.010    Duties transferred to County.

2.12.020    Offices abolished.

2.12.030    Duties transferred to other City officers.

2.12.010 Duties transferred to County.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the City Assessor and Tax Collector are transferred to the Assessor and Tax Collector of the County. (Ord. 19 § 1, 1962)

2.12.020 Offices abolished.
The offices of City Assessor and Tax Collector are abolished. (Ord. 19 § 2, 1962)

2.12.030 Duties transferred to other City officers.
Pursuant to that authority granted by Section 51507 of the Government Code, the duties of the City Assessor, other than the assessment of City property, and the duties of the Tax Collector, other than the collection of taxes, are transferred to and shall be performed by the City Clerk, or such officer of the County as may by contract with the City be designated and authorized to perform such duties. (Ord. 19 § 3, 1962)

Chapter 2.16
BONDS
Sections:

2.16.010    Amounts designated.

2.16.020    Premium payment.

2.16.010 Amounts designated.
(A) In accordance with Section 36518 of the Government Code, bonds shall be required of City officers and employees in penal sums as follows:

(1) City Clerk, $5,000;

(2) City Treasurer, $5,000;

(3) All other officers and employees of this City, including deputies of the City Clerk and City Treasurer, shall be covered by an honesty position bond, issued by a surety company authorized to do business in this state, for the faithful performance of the duties of their respective offices or employment, in the aggregate penal sum of $20,000 for all such employees.

(B) If any person fills two or more of the above-described offices, then only one bond shall be required for such person in an amount equal to the greatest sum required for any of such offices held. (Ord. 1366 § 3, 2008; Ord. 16 § 1, 1962)

2.16.020 Premium payment.
The premiums for such bonds shall be paid from the City’s general fund. (Ord. 16 § 2, 1962)

Chapter 2.20
REPEALED
(Repealed by Ord. 1102)

    Chapter 2.20 PMC derived from Ord. 189; repealed by Ord. 738 § 1, 1988; mistakenly re-instated by Ord. 1091 § 6, 1996; and repealed by Ord. 1102 § 2, 1997.

Chapter 2.24
COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY*
Sections:

2.24.010    Authority.

2.24.020    Title.

2.24.030    Copy filed.

2.24.040    Designated.

*  Code reviser’s note: Ord. 1421 authorizes the continuation of the Community Redevelopment Agency and participation in the alternative voluntary redevelopment program. Contact the city for more information.

2.24.010 Authority.
It is found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of said law to function in the City and the agency is authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the Community Redevelopment Law. (Ord. 255 § 1, 1975)

2.24.020 Title.
The aforementioned redevelopment agency shall be known as the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City. (Ord. 255 § 2, 1975)

2.24.030 Copy filed.
The City Clerk shall cause a certified copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter to be filed in the office of the Secretary of State. (Ord. 255 § 3, 1975)

2.24.040 Designated.
(A) The City Council has, by PMC 2.24.010 through 2.24.030, declared the need for a redevelopment agency to function in the City, now declares itself to be the redevelopment agency provided in this section and that all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law in such agency shall be, and are, vested in the Council.

(B) This action is taken pursuant to the authority granted by Section 33200 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 257 §§ 1, 2, 1975)

Chapter 2.25
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
Sections:

2.25.010    Established – Board of Directors.

2.25.020    Board of Directors – Compensation.

2.25.030    Officers appointed.

2.25.010 Established – Board of Directors.
(A) The City Council declares that there is a need for an industrial development authority within the City and that the Industrial Development Authority of the City (hereinafter “the Industrial Development Authority”) shall function forthwith pursuant to by-laws to be approved by the Board of Directors of the Industrial Development Authority.

(B) The City Council declares itself to be the Board of Directors of the Industrial Development Authority, pursuant to Government Code Section 91523. (Ord. 1061 §§ 2, 3, 1995)

2.25.020 Board of Directors – Compensation.
The City Council determines that the sum of $30.00 per meeting shall be paid to each Director for each meeting of the Industrial Development Authority, as compensation for serving on this additional governmental body. (Ord. 1061 § 4, 1995)

2.25.030 Officers appointed.
The City Council appoints the Mayor as chairman of the Board of Directors; the Mayor pro tempore as vice chairman of the Board of Directors, to perform the duties of the chairman during his absence or disability; and the terms to be served by the Directors of the Industrial Development Authority shall correspond to the terms so served as members of the City Council. (Ord. 1061 § 5, 1995)

Chapter 2.26
BUILDING REHABILITATION APPEALS BOARD
Sections:

2.26.010    Created.

2.26.020    Composition.

2.26.030    Appointment of members.

2.26.040    Rules and regulations.

2.26.050    City Engineer to be ex officio member.

2.26.010 Created.
In order to hear appeals provided for by the building code of the City, there is created a Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board. (Ord. 480 § 1, 1982)

2.26.020 Composition.
The Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board shall consist of five members who are qualified to pass on matters pertaining to substandard buildings and property. (Ord. 480 § 2, 1982)

2.26.030 Appointment of members.
The members of the Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council in accordance with PMC 2.08.030 and shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council of the City. (Ord. 1357 § 2, 2008; Ord. 480 § 3, 1982)

2.26.040 Rules and regulations.
The Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations. (Ord. 480 § 4, 1982)

2.26.050 City Engineer to be ex officio member.
The City Engineer of the City, or his designee, shall be an ex officio nonvoting member of the board and shall act as secretary. He shall keep a record of all proceedings and notify all parties concerned of the findings and determinations of the Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board. (Ord. 480 § 5, 1982)

Chapter 2.27
AVIATION AND AEROSPACE COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. 1379)

Chapter 2.28
CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTERS
Sections:

2.28.010    Purposes.

2.28.020    Definition.

2.28.030    Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.

2.28.040    Powers and duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.

2.28.050    Emergency organizations.

2.28.060    Emergency plan.

2.28.070    Expenditures.

2.28.080    Punishment for violations.

2.28.010 Purposes.
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this City in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this City with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 1375 § 2, 2009)

2.28.020 Definition.
As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of and conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this City caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this City, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 1375 § 2, 2009)

2.28.030 Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
(A) There is created the position of Director of Emergency Services. The City Manager shall be the Director of Emergency Services.

(B) There is created the position of Assistant Director of Emergency Services, who shall be appointed by the Director of Emergency Services. (Ord. 1375 § 2, 2009)

2.28.040 Powers and duties of the Director and Assistant Director of Emergency Services.
(A) The Director of Emergency Services is empowered to:

(1) Request the City Council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the City Council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the City Council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the Director of Emergency Services, the City Council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

(2) Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the Director of Emergency Services, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

(3) Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this City for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

(4) Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this City, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

(5) Represent this City in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter;

(6) In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the Director of Emergency Services is empowered:

(a) To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the City Council;

(b) To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the City for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

(c) To require emergency services of any City officer or employee and, in the event of a state of emergency in the County in which this City is located or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers;

(d) To requisition necessary personnel or material of any City department or agency; and

(e) To execute all of his ordinary power as City Manager conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan adopted pursuant to this chapter by the City Council, and by any other lawful authority.

(B) The Director of Emergency Services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the Director of Emergency Services is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the City Council.

(C) The Assistant Director of Emergency Services shall, under the supervision of the Director of Emergency Services and with the assistance of City staff, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this City, and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the Director of Emergency Services. (Ord. 1375 § 2, 2009)

2.28.050 Emergency organizations.
All officers and employees of this City, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of PMC 2.28.040(A)(6)(c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this City during such emergency, constitute the emergency organization of the City. (Ord. 1375 § 2, 2009)

2.28.060 Emergency plan.
(A) The Director of Emergency Services shall be responsible for the development of the City emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this City, both public and private, to meet a condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency, and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the City Council.

(B) The Director of Emergency Services shall be responsible for the development of any and all mutual aid plans, which shall provide for the effective mobilization of the resources of this City and other agencies, both public and private, to meet a condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency.

(C) The Director of Emergency Services shall be responsible for the preparation of any and all agreements, resolutions, ordinances, rules and regulations, or any other documents necessary to implement such emergency and mutual aid plans. (Ord. 1375 § 2, 2009)

2.28.070 Expenditures.
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the City. (Ord. 1375 § 2, 2009)

2.28.080 Punishment for violations.
Upon proclamation or declaration by the City, Los Angeles County, state or federal officials of a state of emergency within or including the City of Palmdale, and for a period of 30 days after the date the emergency is declared terminated, it is unlawful for any person to do any of the following:

(A) Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

(B) Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil lives or property of inhabitants of this City, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

(C) Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state;

(D) To sell or offer for sale any consumer product or service, including, but not limited to, clothes, food, water, furniture, building or construction materials, emergency or medical supplies, or gasoline for an amount which exceeds 10 percent above the price regularly and customarily charged by the person for the goods or services on the day immediately before the proclamation or declaration of the emergency. It shall be a defense to prosecution if such person can prove:

(1) That an increase in price of greater than 10 percent was unavoidable and directly attributable to either: (a) additional costs imposed on the person by the supplier of the products or goods, or (b) additional costs for labor and materials used to provide the service, and

(2) That without a greater than 10 percent increase the person would not be able to earn a fair rate of return in his, her or its entire business;

(E) In addition to the criminal penalties set forth in Chapter 1.12 PMC, the City Attorney or any resident may prosecute a civil action to enforce this section and in any action obtain such legal and equitable relief, including the recovery of actual and punitive damages and reasonable attorney fees, as may be imposed by law. (Ord. 1375 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 2.32
PUBLIC LIBRARY
Sections:

2.32.010    Established.

2.32.020    Trustees – Appointment.

2.32.030    Trustees – Term.

2.32.040    Trustees – Vacancy filling.

2.32.050    Trustees – Meetings.

2.32.060    Trustees – Powers and duties.

2.32.010 Established.
Pursuant to Section 18900 of the Education Code there is established in and for the City a public library. (Ord. 470 § 9, 1982)

2.32.020 Trustees – Appointment.
The public library shall be managed by a Board of Library Trustees, consisting of five members, to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council in accordance with PMC 2.08.030. (Ord. 1357 § 4, 2008; Ord. 300 § 2, 1977)

2.32.030 Trustees – Term.
The trustees of the public library shall hold office for terms of three years. The members of the first board appointed shall so classify themselves by lot that one of their number shall go out of office at the end of the current fiscal year, two at the end of one year thereafter, and two at the end of two years thereafter. (Ord. 300 § 3, 1977)

2.32.040 Trustees – Vacancy filling.
Vacancies on the Board of Library Trustees shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointments are made. (Ord. 300 § 4, 1977)

2.32.050 Trustees – Meetings.
The Board of Library Trustees shall meet at least once per month at such time and place as the board may fix by resolution. Meetings of the Board of Library Trustees shall be governed by the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.). (Ord. 300 § 5, 1977)

2.32.060 Trustees – Powers and duties.
The Board of Library Trustees shall have all of the powers and duties enumerated in Sections 18910 through 18927 of the Education Code. (Ord. 470 § 10, 1982)

Chapter 2.40
PALMDALE FEE RESOLUTION
Sections:

2.40.010    Established.

2.40.010 Established.
Except as otherwise provided in this code, all fees, penalties, refunds, reimbursements and charges of any kind collected by the City shall be designated in the Palmdale fee resolution, as amended by the City Council from time to time. Whenever applicable throughout this code, reference shall be made to the Palmdale fee resolution in lieu of any reference to specific fee amounts. (Ord. 770 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 2.42
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY FOR MONEY OR DAMAGES
(Repealed by Ord. 1337)

Chapter 2.44
SENIOR CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMISSION
(Repealed by Ord. 1379)

Chapter 2.46
PLANNING COMMISSION
Sections:

2.46.010    Commission established.

2.46.020    Creation of Planning Commission districts.

2.46.030    Composition and appointment of Commissioners.

2.46.040    Terms of office – Vacancies.

2.46.050    Compensation of members.

2.46.060    Organization.

2.46.070    Meetings – Time and place.

2.46.080    Notification of unexcused absences.

2.46.090    Duties of the Commission.

2.46.010 Commission established.
The Planning Commission of the City of Palmdale is established pursuant to Government Code Section 65100 et seq. (Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

2.46.020 Creation of Planning Commission districts.
The boundaries of the Planning Commission districts shall be congruent with the boundaries of the electoral districts of the City Council as identified in PMC 4.10.010. The Planning Commission districts shall use the same numerical designations as the electoral districts of the City Council. (Ord. 1484 § 1, 2016; Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

2.46.030 Composition and appointment of Commissioners.
(A) The Planning Commission shall consist of five commissioners, four of whom shall be appointed from Planning Commission districts and one who shall be appointed at large. All Commissioners shall be voting members of the Planning Commission. No Commissioner shall be a member of the City Council. The four district Commissioners must be residents of the districts from which they are appointed. If a district Commissioner ceases to be a resident of the district from which he or she is appointed, that Commissioner’s appointment will automatically terminate. The at-large Commissioner must be a resident of the City. If the at-large Commissioner ceases to be a resident of the City, that Commissioner’s appointment will automatically terminate. Commissioners serve at the pleasure of the City Council and may be removed prior to the expiration of their term by a vote of a majority of the members of the City Council.

(B) The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint the at-large Planning Commissioner as follows:

(1) The at-large Planning Commissioner position shall be advertised, seeking volunteers willing and desiring to be appointed to the Planning Commission. Any person seeking to be so appointed must complete and submit the City volunteer application, together with any other information requested by the Mayor.

(2) All such applications shall be provided to the City Council for review. The Mayor shall, at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting, nominate, from among such applicants, the person whom the Mayor desires to appoint to the Planning Commission.

(3) If the nomination by the Mayor is approved by a majority vote of the City Council, the Mayor may then proceed to appoint the person to the Planning Commission.

(4) If the nomination by the Mayor is not approved by a majority vote of the City Council, the Mayor will nominate a different candidate until someone is approved by majority vote of the City Council.

(C) A City Councilmember, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint the Planning Commissioner for their corresponding district as follows:

(1) The district Planning Commissioner position shall be advertised, seeking volunteers willing and desiring to be appointed to the Planning Commission. Any person seeking to be so appointed must complete and submit the City volunteer application, together with any other information requested by the Councilmember.

(2) All such applications shall be provided to the City Council for review. The City Councilmember for the corresponding district shall, at a regularly scheduled City Council meeting, nominate, from among such applicants, the person whom the city councilmember desires to appoint to the Planning Commission.

(3) If the nomination by the City Councilmember is approved by a majority vote of the City Council, the City Councilmember may then proceed to appoint the person to the Planning Commission.

(4) If the nomination by the City Councilmember is not approved by a majority vote of the City Council, the City Councilmember will nominate a different candidate until someone is approved by majority vote of the City Council. (Ord. 1505 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1357 § 6, 2008; Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

2.46.040 Terms of office – Vacancies.
(A) The terms for districts 1, 2 and 4 expire on June 30th of every even-numbered year. The terms for district 3 and the at large commissioner expire on June 30th of every odd-numbered year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, all Commissioners will hold office until their successors are qualified and take office.

(B) All vacancies will be filled in accordance with PMC 2.46.030 to fill the unexpired term of the vacated seat. (Ord. 1505 § 2, 2017; Ord. 1484 § 2, 2016; Ord. 1357 § 7, 2008; Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

2.46.050 Compensation of members.
Planning Commissioners shall be compensated at a rate set by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

2.46.060 Organization.
The members of the Planning Commission will select a chairperson and vice chairperson each of whom will serve for a term of one year. (Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

2.46.070 Meetings – Time and place.
Meetings of the Planning Commission shall be held on such days and at such time and location as may be established by the Commission for conduct of its business and ratified by the City Council. Notice of the meetings must be given as required by law and the Ralph M. Brown Act is applicable to all meetings of the Commission. (Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

2.46.080 Notification of unexcused absences.
If any Commissioner has three consecutive unexcused absences from regular meetings of the Commission, the chairperson must give written notice of those absences to the City Council. (Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

2.46.090 Duties of the Commission.
The Commission will discharge the duties and responsibilities set forth in zoning ordinance Section 12.01 and in Government Code Section 65100 et seq. (Ord. 1236 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 2.48
PALMDALE NEIGHBORHOOD PARTNERS
(Repealed by Ord. 1379)

Chapter 2.50
HIRING PRACTICES
(Repealed by Ord. 1465)

Chapter 2.52
PALMDALE AIRPORT
Sections:

2.52.010    Palmdale Airport Authority established.

2.52.020    Department of Aviation established.

2.52.030    Executive Director of the Palmdale Airport Authority – Powers and duties.

2.52.010 Palmdale Airport Authority established.
(A) The Palmdale Airport Authority is hereby established and authorized to carry out and oversee all of the functions and responsibilities of the Palmdale Airport and all other related or necessary actions.

(B) The City Council declares itself to be the Palmdale Airport Authority and appoints the Mayor as chair of the Palmdale Airport Authority; the Mayor pro tempore as vice chair of the authority, to perform the duties of the chair during his or her absence or disability; and the terms to be served by the Authority members shall correspond to the terms so served as members of the City Council.

(C) The City Manager is hereby appointed as the Executive Director of the Palmdale Airport Authority.

(D) The City Attorney is hereby appointed as the Attorney for the Palmdale Airport Authority. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 2009)

2.52.020 Department of Aviation established.
The Palmdale Department of Aviation is hereby established. The Department shall consist of the Director of Aviation, who shall be the Executive Director of the Palmdale Airport Authority, or his or her designee, and such other employees to ensure the operation and management of the Palmdale Airport as the City Council may provide for in the City’s budget. The Department shall be under the direction and control of the City Manager/Executive Director. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 2009)

2.52.030 Executive Director of the Palmdale Airport Authority – Powers and duties.
The Executive Director/designee shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the Palmdale Airport and Palmdale Airport Authority under the direction and control of the Palmdale Airport Authority. The Executive Director and his or her designees shall have the following powers and duties:

(A) Develop, implement and enforce policies and procedures of the Authority;

(B) Plan, organize, direct and control the activities, services and operations of the Authority;

(C) Train, supervise and evaluate the performance of assigned Authority and Department personnel;

(D) Develop and monitor a budget for the Palmdale Airport and Airport Authority;

(E) Prepare and maintain records, reports, and real property documents related to the Palmdale Airport Authority;

(F) Plan and direct the operation and use of the Palmdale Airport;

(G) Interact with the Federal Aviation Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation and other federal and state agencies regarding Palmdale Airport operations, inspections, security and facility use and regarding the Palmdale Airport Authority;

(H) Apply for and maintain an airport operating certificate for the Palmdale Airport;

(I) Recommend to the Palmdale Airport Authority for adoption an airport certification manual for the Palmdale Airport;

(J) Coordinate airport development and operating programs with state and federal agencies;

(K) Prepare applications for and review, monitor and manage state and federal grants;

(L) Enforce airport rules and regulations;

(M) Perform and ensure safety and security airport inspections are conducted in a timely manner;

(N) Develop and deliver presentations, recommendations and responses to the Palmdale Airport Authority as required;

(O) Conduct studies and research policies and performance standards with respect to airport users and concessionaires;

(P) Conduct negotiations with airlines, concessionaires and other prospective users of airport facilities and property, make recommendations on award of contracts, and execute contracts within the purchasing authority of the City Manager as such authority may be amended from time to time by the City Council;

(Q) Establish and maintain coordination and cooperation with other City departments and divisions, and with various airport users;

(R) Direct the maintenance of operational and other records as required and direct the preparation of required records and reports;

(S) Supervise improvements, repairs and construction on Palmdale Airport property;

(T) Administer Palmdale Airport related, owned or leased property including right-of-way easements, encroachments and other real property interests;

(U) Prepare reports and recommendations regarding the disposition of Palmdale Airport related property including, but not limited to, rental agreements and real property leased from others;

(V) Direct appraisals and cost estimates for lease, rent, purchase or other purposes related to the Palmdale Airport and maintain current records regarding status of properties under the control of the Palmdale Airport, including leases, rents and other transactions;

(W) Prepare, assemble and process documents regarding property transfers or real property transactions, including maps and drawings, and secure, examine and interpret title reports and other documents required for real property transactions in cooperation with the Authority Attorney/City Attorney;

(X) Approve and execute on behalf of the Palmdale Airport Authority such documents as the City Manager is authorized to execute by Resolution CC 2007-250, as that authority may be amended from time to time by the City Council; and

(Y) All other duties and tasks as delegated by the Palmdale Airport Authority. (Ord. 1377 § 1, 2009)

Title 3
REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapters:

3.02    Office of Finance – Office of Director of Finance

3.04    Budget Adoption Procedures

3.05    Audit Committee

3.08    Purchasing

3.10    City of Palmdale Economic Opportunities Program

3.12    Claims Against the City

3.14    Procedures for Ratification and Approval of Warrants

3.16    Real Property Transfer Tax

3.20    Sales and Use Tax

3.22    Redevelopment Project Sales and Use Taxes

3.24    Transient Occupancy Tax

3.28    Publicity and Advertising Fund

3.32    Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund

3.33    Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund

3.34    Parkland Dedication

3.36    Redevelopment Agency Fee

3.38    Drainage Fee Requirements

3.40    Traffic Impact Fee Requirements

3.42    Fire Facilities Impact Fee Requirements

3.43    Deferred Payment of Development Impact Fees

3.44    Business License Tax

3.45    Public Facility Development Impact Fee Requirements

3.46    Palmdale Special Tax District Financing Code

Chapter 3.02
OFFICE OF FINANCE – OFFICE OF DIRECTOR OF FINANCE
Sections:

3.02.010    Office of Finance created.

3.02.020    Office of Director of Finance created.

3.02.030    Appointment – Assistants.

3.02.040    Powers and duties.

3.02.050    Posting bonds.

3.02.060    Reports.

3.02.010 Office of Finance created.
The office of Finance of the City is created and established. (Ord. 726 § 1, 1988)

3.02.020 Office of Director of Finance created.
The office of Director of Finance of the City is created and established. (Ord. 726 § 1, 1988)

3.02.030 Appointment – Assistants.
The City Manager may appoint a Director of Finance and one or more assistant Directors of Finance, who, during the absence of the Director of Finance, shall have all the powers, duties and responsibilities of the Director of Finance. (Ord. 726 § 1, 1988)

3.02.040 Powers and duties.
The office of Finance shall be directed by the Director of Finance. The Director of Finance shall have the following powers and duties:

(A) To supervise the Department of Finance;

(B) To cooperate with the City Treasurer and other officials of the City in establishing and maintaining sufficient and satisfactory procedures and controls over municipal revenues and expenditures in all departments, divisions, and services of the City in accordance with modern municipal accounting practices;

(C) In accordance with the provisions of Sections 40805.5 and 37209 of the Government Code of the state, the financial and accounting duties imposed upon the City Clerk pursuant to the provisions of Sections 40802, 40805 and 37201 through 37210 of the Government Code are transferred to the Director of Finance; and

(D) To perform other duties as prescribed by the classification plan for the office of the Director of Finance of the City. (Ord. 726 § 1, 1988)

3.02.050 Posting bonds.
The Director of Finance shall post a bond in the amount of $1,000,000 as required by Government Code Sections 37209 and 36518. (Ord. 726 § 1, 1988)

3.02.060 Reports.
The Director of Finance shall prepare and present to the Council, in sufficient detail to show the exact financial condition of the City, the following reports:

(A) A monthly, or more frequently as may be desired, statement of all receipts, disbursements, and balances of the City;

(B) An annual statement of report of the financial condition of the City; and

(C) Such other financial reports as may be required, including reports required by Government Code Section 53646. (Ord. 726 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 3.04
BUDGET ADOPTION PROCEDURES
Sections:

3.04.010    Adoption date.

3.04.020    Proposal.

3.04.030    Hearing.

3.04.010 Adoption date.
The City Council shall adopt a budget prescribing the spending policy of the City for the ensuing fiscal year on or before the thirtieth day of June of each year. (Ord. 208, 1972)

3.04.020 Proposal.
The City Manager shall submit a proposed budget to the City Council no later than May 31st of each year. (Ord. 883 § 1, 1990; Ord. 208, 1972)

3.04.030 Hearing.
The City Council shall conduct a public hearing on the proposed budget before adoption. (Ord. 208, 1972)

Chapter 3.05
AUDIT COMMITTEE
Sections:

3.05.010    Audit Committee established.

3.05.020    Purpose.

3.05.030    Composition, qualifications, and compensation.

3.05.040    Responsibilities and duties.

3.05.050    Audit Committee rules.

3.05.060    Meetings.

3.05.010 Audit Committee established.
The City of Palmdale Audit Committee is hereby established. (Ord. 1434 § 1, 2012)

3.05.020 Purpose.
The Audit Committee shall have the purpose of providing a direct link between the auditor of the City’s financial statements and the City Council to facilitate communication between the City Council, auditors and City management staff. The Audit Committee shall maintain the public’s confidence in the City’s finance functions, enhance the accessibility of the City’s financial matters to its citizens, and promote the transparency of the City’s finances. (Ord. 1434 § 1, 2012)

3.05.030 Composition, qualifications, and compensation.
(A) The City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall consist of five members, comprised as follows:

(1) Two members from the City Council;

(2) The City Manager;

(3) The Director of Finance; and

(4) One member from the public.

(B) The public member of the City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the City Council.

(C) The public member shall have some expertise in accounting, auditing, financial reporting, and internal controls. Ideally, the public member would be a certified public accountant. Residency within the city of Palmdale is desired but not required.

(D) Members of the City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall not receive compensation nor be eligible for reimbursement. (Ord. 1434 § 1, 2012)

3.05.040 Responsibilities and duties.
(A) The City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall be responsible for monitoring and overseeing the City’s financial reporting.

(B) The City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall recommend to the City Council the retention of the City Auditor and, when appropriate, the removal of such individual or firm.

(C) The City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall recommend the annual compensation of the City Auditor to the City Council and shall be responsible for an annual performance review of the City Auditor.

(D) The City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall be responsible for directing and reviewing, both individually and as a body, the work of the City Auditor, and the City Auditor shall report directly to the Audit Committee.

(E) The City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall monitor the engagement of the City Auditor and resolve all disputes between City management and the City Auditor with regard to City’s annual financial reports. (Ord. 1434 § 1, 2012)

3.05.050 Audit Committee rules.
To the extent the City of Palmdale Audit Committee deems it appropriate, it may adopt bylaws, rules and regulations not inconsistent with any provisions of the City Charter, ordinances or other laws. Copies of any such bylaws, rules and regulations shall be filed with the City Clerk. (Ord. 1434 § 1, 2012)

3.05.060 Meetings.
The City of Palmdale Audit Committee shall meet at least semi-annually (once prior to the annual on-site audit and once to receive the annual audit) and at such other times as may be necessary. Notice of the meetings of the City of Palmdale Audit Committee must be given as required by law and the Ralph M. Brown Act is applicable to all meetings of the City of Palmdale Audit Committee. (Ord. 1434 § 1, 2012)

Chapter 3.08
PURCHASING
Sections:

3.08.010    Title and purpose.

3.08.020    Policy of competitive procurement.

3.08.030    Definitions.

3.08.040    Adoption of centralized purchasing system.

3.08.050    Chief Procurement Officer.

3.08.060    Delegation to other departments.

3.08.070    Requisitions.

3.08.080    Exceptions to competitive procurement requirements.

3.08.090    Cooperative purchasing authorized.

3.08.100    Types of contracts.

3.08.110    Use of City forces.

3.08.120    Vendors list.

3.08.130    Local preference.

3.08.140    Award of contracts.

3.08.150    Contract provisions.

3.08.160    Negotiated contract procurement – Direct select.

3.08.170    Open market procurement (informal bidding).

3.08.180    Procurement by formal solicitation.

3.08.190    Written contracts required.

3.08.200    Funding of purchases.

3.08.210    Approval of purchase orders or contracts.

3.08.220    Approval of change orders by City Manager.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 415 § 1, 779, 805, 837, 991, 1121, 1309 and 1310.

3.08.010 Title and purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the City of Palmdale purchasing ordinance. The provisions of this chapter shall prevail over any conflicting state law. The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures and policies for the procurement of goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services, including, but not limited to, construction of public works projects and professional services. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

3.08.020 Policy of competitive procurement.
It is the policy of the City of Palmdale to utilize competitive procurement processes to obtain the best quality and prices for needed goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services except as specifically provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

3.08.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates:

(A) “Bid” means a response to a procurement solicitation, including a bid, a proposal and a statement of qualifications and experience.

(B) “Bidder” means a person or company that submits a bid or any response to a procurement solicitation.

(C) “Competitive procurement process” means a selection process where contractors and vendors who supply goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services to the City are selected through a formal or informal process that allows full, fair and open competition for all qualified vendors with selection based on specified criteria established to best meet the needs of the City. Invitations for bids, requests for proposals, and requests for qualifications and experience are examples of competitive procurement processes.

(D) “Contract” means a written agreement between the City and a vendor, including a purchase order issued to a vendor.

(E) “Chief Procurement Officer” means the person appointed by the Director of Finance to manage the City’s Central Purchasing Office to procure goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services for the City.

(F) “Eligible local provider” shall mean a local provider who is an otherwise responsible bidder and responsive to the City’s procurement solicitation.

(G) “Local provider Palmdale” shall mean a manufacturer, supplier or provider of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services which has an established place of business within the City of Palmdale, which has complied with City of Palmdale business license requirements, which has paid all currently due business license fees and taxes, and which began doing business within the City of Palmdale at least one year prior to the City’s procurement solicitation for the respective purchase.

(H) “Local provider Antelope Valley” shall mean a manufacturer, supplier or provider of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services which has an established place of business within the Antelope Valley as that area is defined in Chapter 3.10 PMC, which has complied with City of Palmdale business license requirements, which has paid all currently due business license fees and taxes, and which began doing business within the City of Palmdale at least one year prior to the City’s procurement solicitation for the respective purchase.

(I) “Local provider employer” shall mean a manufacturer, supplier or provider of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services for which at least 50 percent of its employees are residents of the Antelope Valley as defined in Chapter 3.10 PMC, or, if the business has no employees, shall be at least 50 percent owned by one or more persons whose primary residence(s) is located within Antelope Valley.

(J) “Using department” means any office, department, commission, board or other agency of the City using goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.020)

3.08.040 Adoption of centralized purchasing system.
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services, to secure for the City goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services at the lowest possible cost, commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority of the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a centralized purchasing system is adopted. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.010)

3.08.050 Chief Procurement Officer.
The Chief Procurement Officer shall be appointed by the Director of Finance, who may combine those duties with the duties of any other office or position. Except as specifically exempted herein, the Chief Procurement Officer shall have authority to:

(A) Procure, purchase and contract for all goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services required by any using department in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the Chief Procurement Officer shall adopt, and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the Director of Finance or the City Manager;

(B) Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services;

(C) Act to procure for the City the needed quality in goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services at least expense to the City;

(D) Discourage collusive bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

(E) Prepare and recommend to the Director of Finance rules governing purchasing, maintaining an inventory, and warehousing of goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services of the City;

(F) Keep informed of current developments in the fields of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

(G) Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

(H) Be responsible for the inspection of all goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services purchased to ensure conformance with specifications, and, where necessary, to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries to determine their quality and conformance with specifications;

(I) Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between City departments as needed and the sale or other disposition of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any using department or which have become obsolete or otherwise unsuitable for City use;

(J) Maintain a vendors list of qualified vendors and contractors;

(K) Perform such other duties and functions as may be assigned by the Director of Finance. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.030)

3.08.060 Delegation to other departments.
(A) The Chief Procurement Officer, with approval of the Director of Finance, may authorize, in writing, any using department to purchase and contract for specified goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services independently of the Central Purchasing Office; but the Chief Procurement Officer shall require that such purchases and contracts be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the using department on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization.

(B) Contracts to implement the capital improvement program and for construction services for public projects shall be procured by the Director of Public Works/designee in cooperation with the Chief Procurement Officer and in compliance with the requirements of this chapter and the Palmdale Charter. For contracts to be procured by the Public Works Department, the references in this chapter to Chief Procurement Officer shall mean the Director of Public Works/designee, unless, by mutual agreement between the departments, the Chief Procurement Officer agrees to perform such tasks. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.040)

3.08.070 Requisitions.
Using departments shall submit requests for services, supplies and equipment to the Chief Procurement Officer using standard purchase requisition forms. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.050)

3.08.080 Exceptions to competitive procurement requirements.
(A) Specified Professional Services. The procurement of services from the following specified professional classifications, without regard to the dollar amount of the contract, is exempt from the competitive process, but shall be selected based on qualifications: financial services, actuaries, psychologists, medical doctors, entertainers and performers, claims consultants, insurance brokers, attorneys-at-law and consultants and experts used during the ongoing course of litigation in which the City, the Redevelopment Agency or any of the boards, commissions, officers or employees are involved.

(B) Sole Source. A purchase may be made or contract awarded without competition when the Director of Finance determines that there is only one reasonable and practicable source for the required goods, materials, equipment, supplies or service because of its uniqueness, quality, durability, availability, compatibility with existing City programs, equipment or systems or fitness for a particular use.

(C) City’s Best Interest. Except where competitive bidding is required by federal law or by reason of the source of funding for the project, goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services may be procured by negotiated contract and without competition, when the Director of Finance determines that, due to the nature of the supplies or equipment, bidding is not likely to serve the best interests of the City or to result in the lowest price.

(D) Emergencies. “Emergency procurement” means the procurement of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services which are required to remedy a situation where the health, safety, welfare or quality of welfare of the public or public property is endangered or severely reduced if immediate corrective or preventive action is not taken and the emergency will not permit a delay resulting from a competitive procurement and that the action is necessary to respond to the emergency. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the City Manager, upon finding that there exists an emergency situation as described herein, may authorize the Chief Procurement Officer/designee and/or Public Works Director/designee to make emergency procurements of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services; provided, that such emergency procurements shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. An emergency procurement shall be limited to those goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services necessary to satisfy the emergency need.

(E) Other. Competitive procurement may be dispensed with in accordance with any other section of this code which provides such an exemption. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.060)

3.08.090 Cooperative purchasing authorized.
The Central Purchasing Office may participate in, sponsor, conduct, or administer cooperative purchasing with other public agencies and with nonprofit groups or organizations established by public entities for the purpose of cooperative purchasing; provided, that competitive purchasing procedures similar to those required in the City of Palmdale are employed. Such participation may also consist of the following:

(A) Purchasing goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services through contracts or bid award lists of others; provided, that competitive purchasing procedures similar to those required in the City of Palmdale were employed to create such contracts or bid award lists.

(B) Purchasing supplies and equipment through federal programs when authorized by City Council.

(C) Participating in joint or cooperative sale or disposal of City property. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.070)

3.08.100 Types of contracts.
The award of contracts for construction, repairs, maintenance and other services shall not be limited to the standard process of design/bid/build, but alternative contracting methods such as job order contracting, design/build, and construction manager at risk may be utilized whenever such alternative contracting methods best meet the needs of the City. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

3.08.110 Use of City forces.
City employees may be used to perform services including but not limited to repairs, maintenance and construction of public projects whenever such use best meets the needs of the City. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

3.08.120 Vendors list.
The Central Purchasing Office shall develop and maintain a list (City vendors list) of qualified vendors and contractors, identified as to categories of the types of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services for which they are qualified. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.090)

3.08.130 Local preference.
In order to promote the economic health and development of the City, to stimulate and enhance the local economy, to generate jobs and spur further investment into the community, to recognize the amount of sales tax that is returned to the City as a result of the award of a purchase contract for goods and services to a local bidder, and to encourage local participation in the purchase of goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services, the City shall grant a local preference as provided herein.

(A) In determining the price submitted in response to a formal or informal solicitation, the Chief Procurement Officer/designee shall grant preference to an eligible local provider Palmdale who submits a price within 10 percent of the lowest price submitted by any other bidder, which preference shall allow the eligible local provider Palmdale the opportunity to reduce its price to an amount equal to the amount of the lowest price submitted, if the lowest price is submitted by other than an eligible local provider Palmdale.

(B) If there is no local provider Palmdale, then such preference shall be granted to a local provider Antelope Valley in the same manner as provided above.

(C) If there is neither a local provider Palmdale nor a local provider Antelope Valley, then such preference shall be granted to a local provider employer in the same manner as provided above.

(D) The preference and opportunity to reduce the price submitted shall be provided first to the lowest eligible local provider Palmdale and, if not accepted by such eligible local provider Palmdale within five business days of the opening of the bids, then to each successive eligible local provider (considering all local providers (Palmdale, Antelope Valley and employer)) that is within 10 percent of the lowest price submitted, in ascending order of the amount of the bids.

(E) The local provider shall certify under penalty of perjury, as a part of its bid and in a form and manner as required by the City, that the bidder qualifies as a local provider. The preference established in this section shall be waived if the certification does not appear on the respective bid.

(F) No Exemption from Local Sales Tax. The application of a local preference as set forth in this chapter shall not exempt any eligible local provider to which a contract is let or awarded from having to pay all applicable federal, state or local sales tax.

(G) Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, local preference shall not be applicable to:

(1) Procurements made with federal or state grant funds;

(2) Procurements where the application of local preference is prohibited by the source of funding; or

(3) Procurements made in cooperation with other public entities.

(H) Any bidder, who received an award due to consideration of a local preference, shall agree to designate the City of Palmdale as the recipient of the receipt of the sales tax for the contract that is awarded.

(I) Any person or business falsely claiming to be a local provider under this section will be ineligible to conduct business with Palmdale for a period of not less than three months and not more than 24 months as determined in the sole discretion of the Chief Procurement Officer/designee. The Chief Procurement Officer/designee also has the right to terminate all or part of any contract entered into with such person or business. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

3.08.140 Award of contracts.
Contracts shall be awarded to the vendor or contractor who best meets the needs of the City based on specified criteria, including but not limited to the following:

(A) Price.

(B) Qualifications and experience.

(C) Experience with the City of Palmdale.

(D) Schedule and ability to meet the City’s time constraints.

(E) Percentage of local employees for both prime and subcontractors who will perform one percent or more of the contract.

(F) Any other criteria appropriate for the type of contract to be awarded. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

3.08.150 Contract provisions.
(A) All contracts, including, but not limited to, those for design professional services and for construction-related services, shall require the contractor to fully indemnify the City for all damages and loss caused by them, without regard to negligence and whether caused in whole or in part by the contractor.

(B) Payment and performance bonds in amounts determined by the City to provide appropriate protection shall be required.

(C) Contracts for services in excess of $50,000, except for professional services, shall require the contractor to comply with Chapter 3.10 PMC.

(D) Contractors shall advertise any job openings with the Palmdale work source center. (Ord. 1473 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

3.08.160 Negotiated contract procurement – Direct select.
Goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services valued at $30,000 or less may be procured by negotiated contract and need not be publicly bid but shall be procured at a reasonable price in a manner that best meets the needs of the City. Care shall be taken to avoid the appearance of favoritism, bias or preclusion of new vendors. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.080)

3.08.170 Open market procurement (informal bidding).
Except as otherwise provided herein, goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services valued at more than $30,000 but less than or equal to $125,000 may be procured by the open market procedure described herein.

(A) Solicitation Notice. At least 10 days prior to the date the contract will be awarded, the Chief Procurement Officer/designee shall mail or send electronically a notice requesting quotations or proposals to those vendors or contractors on the City vendors list listed as qualified to provide the required type of service, supplies or equipment. If there are no vendors or contractors on the City’s vendors list qualified to provide the type of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services sought, the notice shall be posted on the City’s website and published on at least three websites that publish solicitations and specifications which have been determined to provide best notice to potential bidders for the type of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services sought. The notice shall generally describe the goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services being sought, describe how to obtain more detailed information and state the time and place for submission of quotations or informal bids. The notice or detailed information shall also describe required contract provisions such as the economic opportunities requirements of Chapter 3.10 PMC. Quotations, proposals and informal bids must be in writing but may be submitted by mail, by fax or electronically.

(B) Minimum Number of Quotations. If fewer than three quotations, proposals or informal bids are received, the Purchasing Officer shall determine whether to use a formal solicitation or to make the award based on less than three quotations because there are fewer than three vendors qualified to provide the services, supplies or equipment.

(C) Quotations and Bids Exceeding $125,000. If all of the quotations, proposals or informal bids received exceed $125,000, a contract may be awarded for not more than $137,500 if the City Council determines, by a four-fifths vote, that the City’s cost estimate was reasonable. Otherwise the goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services must be procured through a formal bid procurement.

(D) Records. Quotations shall be submitted to the Chief Procurement Officer, who shall keep a record of all open market quotations and contracts for a period of two years after submission of quotations or the execution of contracts. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection, except that vendor proprietary data shall not be open to public inspection. (Ord. 1473 § 2, 2015; Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.100)

3.08.180 Procurement by formal solicitation.
Except as otherwise provided herein, purchases of goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services of an estimated dollar value greater than $125,000 shall be procured by a formal competitive procurement process, and awarded to the responsive, responsible bidder who best meets the City’s needs based on the criteria specified in the formal solicitation.

(A) Solicitation Notice. Notices inviting bids, requesting proposals or requesting qualifications and experience shall include a general description of the goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services to be procured, describe how to obtain more detailed information, state where bid forms and specifications may be obtained and state the time and place for submission of bids, proposals or statements of qualifications and experience. The notice or detailed information shall also describe required contract provisions such as the economic opportunities requirements of Chapter 3.10 PMC.

(1) Published Notice. The notice inviting bids, requesting proposals or requesting qualifications and experience shall be published on the City’s website and on at least three websites that publish solicitations and specifications which have been determined to provide best notice to potential bidders for the type of goods, materials, equipment, supplies or services to be procured, at least 30 days before the date of opening of the bids. The notice inviting formal bids for public projects as defined by California Public Contracts Code Section 20161 shall also be published in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with Section 22037 of such Code.

(2) Additional Mailed Notice. The Chief Procurement Officer may also mail the solicitation notice to prospective vendors and contractors whose names are on the City vendors list.

(B) Bidder’s Security. For procurement of construction services for public works projects, bidder’s security in an amount equal to at least 10 percent of the amount of the bid shall be submitted with a bid. When deemed necessary or appropriate by the Chief Procurement Officer for other procurements, bidder’s security in an amount deemed appropriate may also be required. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security; provided, that a successful bidder shall forfeit its bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within the time specified in the invitation to bid, unless the City is responsible for the delay. The City may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next highest scoring (based on the selection criteria) responsive, responsible bidder. If the City awards the contract to the next highest scoring bidder, the amount of the highest scoring bidder’s security shall be applied by the City to the difference between the highest scoring bid and the second highest scoring bid, if any, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the highest scoring bidder.

(C) Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids, proposals and statements of qualifications shall be submitted to the Chief Procurement Officer/designee, and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than 30 calendar days after the bid opening.

(D) Rejection of Bids. Any and all bids may be rejected at the discretion of the City. If the City intends to reject all bids, the Chief Procurement Officer/designee must mail notice of the City’s intent to reject the bid at least two business days prior to the Council meeting at which the bids will be considered. After rejecting all bids, the City may:

(1) Abandon the project;

(2) Re-advertise the project; or

(3) Perform the work with City employees. (Ord. 1473 § 3, 2015; Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.110)

3.08.190 Written contracts required.
Purchases of goods, materials, equipment, supplies and services valued at greater than $2,500 shall be made only by written contract executed by an authorized representative of the City. No verbal agreement greater than such amount shall be binding on the City and no City employee has authority to verbally bind the City of Palmdale to such verbal agreements or any course of action. For purchase of goods, materials and supplies, written contracts may include a purchase order or an executed credit card purchase form. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.120)

3.08.200 Funding of purchases.
The Chief Procurement Officer shall not authorize or issue a written contract for supplies or equipment unless there exists a sufficient unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.130)

3.08.210 Approval of purchase orders or contracts.
(A) Except as provided in PMC 3.08.220, the approval authority for all purchase orders or contracts shall be set forth as follows:

(1) The City Manager shall have the authority to review, approve and execute, on behalf of the City, all purchase orders or contracts for the purchase of equipment or supplies, the retention of professional services, work on a public project or any similar type agreements, in an amount not exceeding $50,000 per contractor per 365-day period. The City Manager shall have the authority to approve in writing any change order directing an addition, deletion or revision to such purchase orders or contracts; however, in no event shall the sum total of the purchase order or contract, including all such change orders, exceed $50,000 in any 365 day period.

(2) All purchase orders or contracts in excess of $50,000 or change orders which cause the total contract or purchase order to exceed $50,000 shall be submitted to the City Council for approval.

(3) The City Manager shall have the authority and discretion to delegate to department directors and division managers such authority as the City Manager deems appropriate up to $25,000 to review, approve and execute contracts, purchase orders, contract amendments and change orders. The department directors or division managers exercising such authority shall see to it that the total of all contracts, purchase orders, contract amendments and change orders does not exceed $25,000 to a single entity or person within a 365-day period.

(B) The City Manager shall periodically report to the City Council on purchase orders, contracts, change orders or similar type agreements which are approved pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1440 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1425 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.140)

3.08.220 Approval of change orders by City Manager.
(A) After the effective date of any contract approved by the City Council for the purchase of services, equipment or supplies, the retention of professional services, or work on a public project, the City Manager shall have authority to approve in writing any amendment or change order directing an addition, deletion or revision in such contract, including, without limitation, plans, specifications, and the nature or quantity of services, equipment, supplies or work, subject to the following limitations:

(1) The cumulative dollar value of all such change orders relating to any one contract shall not exceed 10 percent of the contract price as approved by the City Council.

(2) The City Manager shall annually report to the City Council on change orders which are approved pursuant to this section.

(B) Any change order exceeding the limitations set forth in subsection (A) of this section shall be submitted to the City Council for approval in the form of a contract amendment or supplemental agreement. Such amendment or supplemental agreement shall set forth the amended contract price which will constitute the new contract price for purposes of the authority for City Manager-approved change orders or amendments in accordance with subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 1398 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010; Ord. 1347 § 1, 2008. Formerly 3.08.150)

Chapter 3.10
CITY OF PALMDALE ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES PROGRAM
Sections:

3.10.010    Findings.

3.10.020    Provision of employment opportunities.

3.10.030    Resident of the Antelope Valley.

3.10.040    Good faith effort.

3.10.050    On-the-job training for local residents.

3.10.060    Required documentation.

3.10.070    Forms submitted under penalty of perjury.

3.10.080    Binding on subcontractors.

3.10.090    Declaration of non-responsive bidder.

3.10.100    Declaration of irresponsibility.

3.10.110    Finding of noncompliance.

3.10.120    Disqualification.

3.10.130    City Attorney prosecution.

3.10.140    Contracts, solicitations, bid documents, subcontracts.

3.10.010 Findings.
The City Council of the City of Palmdale finds and declares as follows:

(A) Unemployment rates in Palmdale have been consistently higher than in California as a whole. The average annual unemployment rate in Palmdale as of July 2007 was 6.8 percent. (Source: State of California, Employment Development Department, Labor Market Information Division Labor Force Data For Sub-County Areas. http://www.calmis.ca.gov/file/lfmonth/lasub.xls)

(B) Statistics indicate that the higher unemployment level in the City of Palmdale correlates to a higher number of families living in poverty and to a higher crime rate.

(C) Due to the lack of local jobs, approximately 32 percent of the work force residing in the City of Palmdale is forced to commute long distances to find work, causing increased traffic on state highways, increased pollution, increased use of gas and other fuels and other serious environmental impacts.

(D) Because of the lack of local jobs, many residents of the Antelope Valley must leave for work very early in the morning and return late in the evening, often leaving children and teenagers alone and unsupervised during the hours between school and the parents’ return from work outside the area.

(E) Absentee parents and unsupervised youth can result in increased problems for families, communities and the City of Palmdale; including but not limited to increased crime, more frequent and more serious injuries, poor homework accomplishments, failing grades and increased high school drop out rates.

(F) The City Council of the City of Palmdale has concluded that Palmdale and the Antelope Valley need an expanding employment base and that most employment opportunities in the Antelope Valley arise when existing jobs become vacant, whereas expansions account for new job creation in other areas.

(G) A policy that encourages contractors who receive city contracts to hire residents of the Antelope Valley will benefit the City as a whole. The policy will provide job opportunities to City residents, expand the City’s employment base, lessen the drain on public assistance resources and reduce the impacts on the environment caused by high unemployment and long commuting times to jobs outside the area. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.020 Provision of employment opportunities.
Unless such provision would conflict with a state or federal law or regulation applicable to a particular contract, all City contracts exceeding $50,000 for services, repairs, maintenance, and construction of public works or improvements shall contain provisions pursuant to which the contractor agrees to make a good faith effort, with the assistance of local employment agencies, hiring halls and other local organizations, to hire qualified individuals who are residents of the Antelope Valley in sufficient numbers so that no less than 50 percent of the contractor’s total work force, including any subcontractor work force of subcontractors performing one-half of one percent of the work, for the particular contract, is comprised of residents of the Antelope Valley; provided, however, this requirement shall not apply to contracts for professional services. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.030 Resident of the Antelope Valley.
“Resident of the Antelope Valley” means an individual who is legally domiciled within Antelope Valley immediately preceding the date of the notice of solicitation or bid advertisement by the City and who can verify his or her domicile upon request of the contractor or City by producing documentation such as a rent/lease agreement, telephone and utility bills or payment bills, a valid California driver’s license or identification card, and/or any other similar, reliable evidence that verifies that the individual is legally domiciled within Antelope Valley.

For the purposes of this chapter, the following ZIP Code areas are considered to be within Antelope Valley: 93501, 93502, 93504, 93505, 93510, 93516, 93523, 93524, 93532, 93534, 93535, 93536, 93539, 93543, 93550, 93551, 93552, 93553, 93560, 93584, 93586, 93590, 93591, 93596, and 93599, which includes the cities of Acton, Boron, California City, Edwards Air Force Base, Elizabeth Lake, Lake Los Angeles, Lancaster, Littlerock, Mohave, Palmdale, Pearblossom and Rosamond. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.040 Good faith effort.
A bidder or contractor who fails to meet the goal of having 50 percent of their work force be current residents of the Antelope Valley shall, nevertheless, be deemed to have made a “good faith effort” to hire sufficient numbers of residents of the Antelope Valley if, prior to execution of the contract with the City, at least nine of the following employee recruitment activities have been undertaken and documented:

(A) Placing a valid job order for existing and projected position vacancies with the local office of the State Employment Development Department, for no less than 10 consecutive calendar days.

(B) Placing a valid job order for existing and projected position vacancies with the South Valley Work Source Center, for no less than 10 consecutive calendar days.

(C) Advertising existing and projected position vacancies, job informational meetings, job application workshops, job application centers and job interviews by posting notices which identify the positions to be filled, the qualifications required, and where to obtain additional information about the application process, in conspicuous local authorized public places, including but not limited to the City Hall, schools, post offices, libraries, and senior citizens’ centers.

(D) Conducting a job informational meeting to inform the community of employment opportunities of the contractor, to be held at a City facility (may be combined with other contractors).

(E) Providing ongoing assistance to Antelope Valley residents in completing job application forms.

(F) Conducting a job application workshop to assist the community in applying and interviewing for jobs in the contracting industry, to be held at a City facility (may be combined with other contractors).

(G) Establishing a job application center located in the City of Palmdale, where job applications may be obtained, delivered to and collected.

(H) Conducting job interviews within 10 miles of the location designated for contract performance.

(I) Advertising valid existing and projected position vacancies through the local media, such as community television network, local newspapers of general circulation, and trade papers or minority focus newspapers.

(J) Telephone solicitation of known potential local subcontractors or employees.

(K) Any other means of obtaining employees who are residents of the Antelope Valley, which are reasonably calculated to comply with the Equal Opportunities Program goal. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.050 On-the-job training for local residents.
Ongoing participation in a state-certified apprenticeship or on-the-job training program, where apprentices or trainees who are residents of Antelope Valley are utilized in the performance of the City contract, will satisfy the “good faith effort” requirement as follows: Credit for three of the above listed employment recruitment activities will be allotted for each apprentice or trainee who is a resident of Antelope Valley and is utilized throughout the entire City contract. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.060 Required documentation.
(A) Together with submission of the bid or price quotation, the bidder or contractor shall submit a statement explaining how they and their subcontractors propose to meet the requirements of this chapter, i.e., that 50 percent or more of their work force for the contract will be residents of the Antelope Valley or that the bidder or contractor will make a good faith effort as required by PMC 3.10.040 and 3.10.050. The contractor and each subcontractor may meet the requirements of this chapter by either method.

(B) Within 30 days after bid opening or at such other date specified in the City’s procurement document, the three apparent lowest bidders shall provide sufficient proof to the satisfaction of the purchasing agent that such contractor or bidder and each of its subcontractors who will perform one half of one percent or more of the contract work is in compliance with this chapter.

(C) During the term of the contract, the contractor shall keep an accurate record on a standardized form, showing the name, place of residence, trade classification or description of work to be performed, hours employed, per diem wages and benefits, of each person employed by the contractor, and the contractor’s subcontractors, to perform any work on the project pursuant to the contract with the City, including full-time, part-time, permanent and temporary employees and make such records available to the City upon request, within five working days. The contractor shall also keep a copy of the records submitted by the employee as evidence of local residency. The Public Works Payroll Reporting Form required by the City of Palmdale for public works projects with the evidence of residency documents attached will satisfy the requirements of this section.

(D) During the term of the contract, the contractor shall keep and provide to the City, on forms acceptable to the City, an accurate record documenting compliance with this chapter. Said records shall include: a listing by name and business address of all local recruitment sources contacted by the contractor, the date of the local recruitment contact and the identity of the person contacted, the trade and classification and number of hire referrals requested, the number of local hires made as a result of the contact, and the identity and business address of the person(s) hired pursuant to the contact. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.070 Forms submitted under penalty of perjury.
All forms required under this chapter shall be attested to as true as to the information set forth therein and shall be submitted under penalty of perjury. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.080 Binding on subcontractors.
(A) The good-faith local hiring provisions of this chapter shall bind the contractor both with respect to persons hired directly by the contractor and to all persons hired by the contractor’s direct subcontractors (first tier) who will perform one half of one percent of the contract work. The contractor shall be responsible for assuring that all such subcontractors document said compliance by submitting the forms required by PMC 3.10.060 to the City.

(B) The contractor shall include the following language and a copy of this chapter as may be amended from time to time in all contracts with contractor’s direct subcontractors:

This contract is for services, repairs, maintenance, construction of public works or improvements for the City of Palmdale. As a subcontractor under a city contract, you may be required to comply with all of the requirements of the City of Palmdale Economic Opportunities Program, Palmdale Municipal Code Chapter 3.10, attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference. Failure to comply with the provisions of the Economic Opportunities Program may subject the contractor and/or subcontractor to criminal prosecution and/or disqualification from eligibility for City of Palmdale contracts.

(Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.090 Declaration of non-responsive bidder.
Any bidder or its direct subcontractor who will perform one-half of one percent of the work, who fails to comply with the good-faith local hiring provisions of this chapter, in its bid submissions prior to awards and within 30 days after bid opening, shall be declared by the City to be a non-responsive bidder. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.100 Declaration of irresponsibility.
Where a City contractor or direct subcontractor has failed, or the City has cause to believe a contractor or direct subcontractor shall fail, to abide by a material term of the City contract, applicable prevailing wage laws called for by the contract, other applicable laws governing labor standards or working conditions, any of the provisions of this chapter applicable to contractors or direct subcontractors, or any of the other provisions of the code which expressly reference the sanctions provided for in this chapter, said contractor or direct subcontractor pursuant to procedures outlined in PMC 3.10.110, shall be declared an irresponsible contractor. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.110 Finding of noncompliance.
If the City department director with responsibility for contract administration has cause to believe that any contractor or direct subcontractor has violated this chapter or that any bidder shall not perform the contract in compliance with this chapter, the department director may conduct an investigation. If, upon investigation, the department director determines that evidence exists to conclude that a violation of this chapter has occurred, or that cause exists to indicate a bidder will fail to perform the contract, the department director, after consultation with the City Manager or City Manager’s designee, shall make a written finding of noncompliance which shall include a declaration of irresponsibility. The written finding of noncompliance shall provide the contractor or direct subcontractor with an opportunity to appeal the finding of noncompliance to the City Council. If the council concurs with the finding of noncompliance, it shall affirm that finding along with the declaration of irresponsibility contained therein. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.120 Disqualification.
Any contractor or direct subcontractor declared to be irresponsible pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be disqualified from eligibility for providing goods, labor, materials or services to the City for a period of one year for the first violation and three years for a second, with a right of review and reconsideration by the City Council after two years upon a showing of corrective action indicating violations are not likely to recur. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.130 City Attorney prosecution.
If the City Attorney has reasonable cause to believe that any contractor or direct subcontractor has knowingly committed any of the acts or omissions set forth in this chapter, the City Attorney may prosecute said contractor or subcontractor for violating the provisions of this chapter in accordance with the provisions of PMC Title 1. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

3.10.140 Contracts, solicitations, bid documents, subcontracts.
(A) Contracts, solicitations and bid documents shall incorporate this chapter by reference and shall provide that the failure of any contractor or direct subcontractor to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed a material breach of contract or subcontract.

(B) Contracts and bid documents shall require bidders, contractors and direct subcontractors to maintain and submit records necessary for monitoring their compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 1334 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 3.12
CLAIMS AGAINST THE CITY
Sections:

3.12.010    Authority.

3.12.020    Claims required.

3.12.030    Form of claim.

3.12.040    Claim prerequisite to suit.

3.12.050    Suit.

3.12.060    Claims for tax refunds.

Prior legislation: Ords. 15 and 470.

3.12.010 Authority.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1337 § 2, 2007)

3.12.020 Claims required.
All claims against the City for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Government Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this chapter, “claims”) shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1337 § 2, 2007)

3.12.030 Form of claim.
All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No other agent, including the claimant’s attorney, may sign the claim. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless individually verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. (Ord. 1337 § 2, 2007)

3.12.040 Claim prerequisite to suit.
In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the City prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of PMC 3.12.020. (Ord. 1337 § 2, 2007)

3.12.050 Suit.
Any action brought against the City upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 through 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the City shall conform to the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 1337 § 2, 2007)

3.12.060 Claims for tax refunds.
Claims for tax refunds shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in addition to any other requirements in state law or this municipal code. (Ord. 1337 § 2, 2007)

Chapter 3.14
PROCEDURES FOR RATIFICATION AND APPROVAL OF WARRANTS
Sections:

3.14.010    Certain warrants need not be audited prior to payment – Presentation to City Council for ratification.

3.14.020    Depositories – Requirements.

3.14.030    Designation by resolution of signatures permitted.

    Prior legislation: Ord. 535.

3.14.010 Certain warrants need not be audited prior to payment – Presentation to City Council for ratification.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 37208, payroll warrants or checks, and warrants or checks drawn in payment of demands for City or library purposes, need not be audited by the City Council prior to payment; provided, however, that such warrants or checks shall be certified or approved as conforming to the budget adopted by ordinance or resolution of the City Council by the City Manager, or by the Director of Finance, or by the Assistant Director of Finance. Budgeted payrolls and demands paid by warrants or checks prior to audit by the City Council shall be presented to the City Council for ratification and approval in the form of an audited comprehensive annual financial report, pursuant to California Government Code Section 37208(c). (Ord. 1493 § 1, 2017; Ord. 824 § 2, 1989)

3.14.020 Depositories – Requirements.
Any financial institution or other depository with which the City or the Board of Library Trustees now or hereafter transacts business for the credit and on the account of the City or the Board of Library Trustees is requested, authorized and directed to honor all checks, drafts, warrants, or other orders for the payment of money drawn in the name of the City or the Board of Library Trustees when bearing the authorized signatures of the following designated officials:

(A) For the City: the manual or facsimile signature of the Mayor or the Mayor pro tem, and the manual signature of one of the following: the City Manager, the Director of Finance, the assistant Director of Finance, the City Treasurer, or the deputy City Treasurer;

(B) For the Board of Library Trustees: the manual or facsimile signature of the president or the president pro tem, and the manual signature of one of the following: the City Manager, the Director of Finance, the assistant Director of Finance, the City Treasurer, or the deputy City Treasurer. (Ord. 824 § 3, 1989)

3.14.030 Designation by resolution of signatures permitted.
The City Council shall, from time to time, designate by resolution the names of those individuals holding the offices identified in PMC 3.14.020. Any authorized officer whose facsimile signature is required or permitted may make the necessary filing with the Secretary of State pursuant to Government Code Section 5501. (Ord. 824 § 4, 1989)

Chapter 3.16
REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Sections:

3.16.010    Title.

3.16.020    Imposed.

3.16.030    Documents subject to tax.

3.16.040    Exemption – Instrument securing a debt.

3.16.050    Exemption – Government entity.

3.16.060    Exemption – Reorganization conveyance.

3.16.070    Exemption – Securities and Exchange Commission order.

3.16.080    Exemption – Partnership interest transfer.

3.16.090    Refund claims.

3.16.100    Administration.

3.16.110    Operative date.

3.16.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax ordinance of the City.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 121 § 1, 1967)

3.16.020 Imposed.
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the City is granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds $100.00, a tax at the rate of $0.275 for each $500.00 or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 121 § 2, 1967)

3.16.030 Documents subject to tax.
Any tax imposed pursuant to PMC 3.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit it is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 121 § 3, 1967)

3.16.040 Exemption – Instrument securing a debt.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 121 § 4, 1967)

3.16.050 Exemption – Government entity.
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party, shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 470 § 13, 1982)

3.16.060 Exemption – Reorganization conveyance.
(A) Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

(1) Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

(2) Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

(3) Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

(4) Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

(B) Subsections (A)(1) through (4) of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 121 § 6, 1967)

3.16.070 Exemption – Securities and Exchange Commission order.
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

(A) The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which the conveyance is made recites that the conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

(B) The order specified the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

(C) The conveyance is made in obedience to the order. (Ord. 121 § 7, 1967)

3.16.080 Exemption – Partnership interest transfer.
(A) In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

(1) The partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

(2) The continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

(B) If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, the partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by the partnership at the time of the termination.

(C) Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection (B) of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by the partnership at the time of the termination. (Ord. 121 § 8, 1967)

3.16.090 Refund claims.
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. (Ord. 121 § 10, 1967)

3.16.100 Administration.
The County Recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any County ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 121 § 9, 1967)

3.16.110 Operative date.
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the County pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whichever is later. (Ord. 121 § 11, 1967)

Chapter 3.20
SALES AND USE TAX
Sections:

3.20.010    Title.

3.20.020    Purpose.

3.20.030    Rate.

3.20.040    Administration contract.

3.20.050    Sales tax imposed.

3.20.060    Place of sale designated.

3.20.070    Use tax imposed.

3.20.080    State provisions adopted.

3.20.090    Limitations on adoption of state provisions.

3.20.100    Seller’s permit not required.

3.20.110    Exemptions – Designated.

3.20.120    Exemptions – Additional.

3.20.130    Exemptions – Applicability.

3.20.140    Amendments.

3.20.150    Enjoining collection prohibited.

3.20.160    Operative date.

3.20.170    Penalty for violation.

3.20.180    Credit for taxes due to Community Redevelopment Agency of the City.

3.20.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1973)

3.20.020 Purpose.
The City Council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

(A) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

(B) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

(C) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State sales and use taxes;

(D) To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting City sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 4, 1973)

3.20.030 Rate.
The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 229 § 2, 1973)

3.20.040 Administration contract.
Prior to the operative date this City shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this City has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of the contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 5, 1973)

3.20.050 Sales tax imposed.
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the City at the rate stated in PMC 3.20.030 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this City on and after the operative date. (Ord. 229 § 6, 1973)

3.20.060 Place of sale designated.
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 229 § 7, 1973)

3.20.070 Use tax imposed.
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this City at the rate stated in PMC 3.20.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 229 § 8, 1973)

3.20.080 State provisions adopted.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 9, 1973)

3.20.090 Limitations on adoption of state provisions.
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the state; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the City, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; the substitution shall not be made in Section 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 229 § 10, 1973)

3.20.100 Seller’s permit not required.
If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 11, 1973)

3.20.110 Exemptions – Designated.
There shall be excluded from the measure of tax:

(A) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer;

(B) The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state;

(C) The gross receipts from sales to, and the storage, use or other consumption of property purchased by, operators of common carriers and waterborne vessels to be used or consumed in the operation of the common carriers or waterborne vessels principally outside this City;

(D) The storage or use of tangible personal property in the transportation or transmission of persons, property or communications, or in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity or in the manufacture, transmission or distribution of gas in intrastate, interstate, or foreign commerce by public utilities which are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission of the state. (Ord. 229 § 12, 1973)

3.20.120 Exemptions – Additional.
(A) The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer.

(B) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

(C) There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

(D) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 522 § 1, 1983; Ord. 229 § 13, 1973)

3.20.130 Exemptions – Applicability.
(A) PMC 3.20.120 shall become operative on January 1st of the year following the year in which the State Board of Equalization adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time PMC 3.20.110 shall become inoperative.

(B) In the event that PMC 3.20.120 becomes operative and the State Board of Equalization subsequently adopts an assessment ratio for the state-assessed property which is higher than the ratio which is required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, PMC 3.20.110 shall become operative on the first day of the month next following the month in which the higher ratio is adopted, at which time PMC 3.20.120 shall be inoperative until the first day of the month following the month in which the Board again adopts an assessment ratio for state-assessed property which is identical to the ratio required for local assessments by Section 401 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, at which time PMC 3.20.120 shall again become operative and PMC 3.20.110 shall become inoperative. (Ord. 229 § 14, 1973)

3.20.140 Amendments.
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 229 § 15, 1973)

3.20.150 Enjoining collection prohibited.
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this City, or against any officer of the state or this City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 229 § 16, 1973)

3.20.160 Operative date.
The ordinance codified in this chapter became operative on January 1, 1974. (Ord. 229 § 3, 1973)

3.20.170 Penalty for violation.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 229 § 17, 1973)

3.20.180 Credit for taxes due to Community Redevelopment Agency of the City.
Any person subject to a sales and use tax under the provisions of this chapter shall be entitled to credit against the payment of taxes due under this chapter the amount of sales and use taxes due to the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City pursuant to Section 7202.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. In the event that the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City issues obligations secured in whole or in part by taxes levied pursuant to the provisions of Section 7202.6 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the City shall not revoke this credit in whole or in part, nor shall it reduce its sales and use tax rate, so long as such obligations are outstanding. (Ord. 771 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 3.22
REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT SALES AND USE TAXES
Sections:

Article I. Redevelopment Project Sales and Use Tax

3.22.010    Title of the article.

3.22.020    Agency sales tax.

3.22.030    Agency use tax.

3.22.040    Effective date – Operative date – Contract with the State Board of Equalization.

3.22.050    Amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.

Article II. Redevelopment Project No. 2 Sales and Use Tax

3.22.060    Title of the article.

3.22.070    Agency sales tax.

3.22.080    Agency use tax.

3.22.090    Effective date – Operative date – Contract with the State Board of Equalization.

3.22.100    Amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.

Article III. Redevelopment Project No. 3 Sales and Use Tax

3.22.110    Title of the article.

3.22.120    Agency sales tax.

3.22.130    Agency use tax.

3.22.140    Effective date – Operative date – Contract with the State Board of Equalization.

3.22.150    Amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.

Article I. Redevelopment Project Sales and Use Tax

3.22.010 Title of the article.
This article shall be known as the “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale Sales and Use Tax Ordinance” (the “ordinance”). (Ord. CRA-1 § 1, 1988)

3.22.020 Agency sales tax.
(A)(1) For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed by the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale (the “Agency”) upon all retailers located within the area described more fully in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this article and by this reference incorporated herein (the “Redevelopment Project”) at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail within the Redevelopment Project on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article.

(2) For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State of California (the “State”) sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

(B)(1) Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State (the “Code”), all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, as amended and in force and effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, applicable to sales taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

(2) Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of the Code nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Code.

(3) If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of this section.

(4) There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax due under this section is measured the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

(5) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the Redevelopment Project and the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. CRA-1 § 2, 1988)

3.22.030 Agency use tax.
(A) An excise tax is hereby imposed by the Agency on the storage, use or other consumption in the Redevelopment Project of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article for storage, use or other consumption in the Redevelopment Project at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

(B)(1) Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, as amended and in force and effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, applicable to use taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

(2) Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of the Code nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Code.

(3) There shall be excluded from the amount subject to tax under this section any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

(4) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

(a) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1 or 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code by any city and county, county, city or redevelopment agency in the State; and

(b) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. CRA-1 § 3, 1988)

3.22.040 Effective date – Operative date – Contract with the State Board of Equalization.
(A) The ordinance codified in this article shall be effective immediately upon its final passage by the Agency. The ordinance codified in this article shall be signed by the Chairman of the Agency and attested by the Secretary of the Agency.

(B) The ordinance codified in this article shall become operative on the first day of the first “calendar quarter” (as defined in Section 7202.6(b) of the Code) commencing more than 180 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article.

(C) Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the City Council, by an ordinance, shall have added a provision to the existing City Sales and Use Tax Law granting as a credit against the payment of tax owed under the City Sales and Use Tax Law the amount of sales and use tax paid, if any, to the Agency pursuant to this article.

(D) Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the Secretary of the Agency shall cause the Agency to contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this article; provided, however, that if the Agency shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to 31 days before the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the ordinance shall not become operative until 31 days following the execution of such a contract by and between the Agency and the State Board of Equalization. Such contract, once executed, between the Agency and the State Board of Equalization, shall continue in effect so long as the County of Los Angeles and the City of Palmdale shall have operative sales and use tax ordinances enacted pursuant to Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code. (Ord. CRA-1 § 4, 1988)

3.22.050 Amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the enactment of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code relating to sales and use tax and not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code shall automatically become a part of this article. (Ord. CRA-1 § 5, 1988)

Article II. Redevelopment Project No. 2 Sales and Use Tax

3.22.060 Title of the article.
This article shall be known as the “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale Sales and Use Tax Ordinance” (the “ordinance”). (Ord. CRA-3 § 1, 1993)

3.22.070 Agency sales tax.
(A)(1) For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed by the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale (the “Agency”) upon all retailers located within the area described more fully in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this article and by this reference incorporated herein (the “Redevelopment Project”) at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail within the Redevelopment Project on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article.

(2) For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State of California (the “State”) sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

(B)(1) Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State (the “Code”), all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, as amended and in force and effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, applicable to sales taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

(2) Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of the Code nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Code.

(3) If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of this section.

(4) There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax due under this section is measured the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

(5) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the Redevelopment Project and the city, county, or city and county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. CRA-3 § 2, 1993)

3.22.080 Agency use tax.
(A) An excise tax is hereby imposed by the Agency on the storage, use or other consumption in the Redevelopment Project of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article for storage, use or other consumption in the Redevelopment Project at the rate of one percent of the purchase price of the property. The purchase price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

(B)(1) Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, as amended and in force and effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, applicable to use taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

(2) Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of the Code nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Code.

(3) There shall be excluded from the amount subject to tax under this section any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

(4) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

(a) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1 or 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code by any city and county, county, city or redevelopment agency in the State; and

(b) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. CRA-3 § 3, 1993)

3.22.090 Effective date – Operative date – Contract with the State Board of Equalization.
(A) The ordinance codified in this article shall be effective immediately upon its final passage by the Agency. The ordinance codified in this article shall be signed by the Chairman of the Agency and attested by the Secretary of the Agency.

(B) The ordinance codified in this article shall become operative on the first day of the first “calendar quarter” (as defined in Section 7202.6(b) of the Code) commencing more than 180 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article.

(C) Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the City Council, by an ordinance, shall have added a provision to the existing City Sales and Use Tax Law granting as a credit against the payment of tax owed under the City Sales and Use Tax Law the amount of sales and use tax paid, if any, to the Agency pursuant to this article.

(D) Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the Executive Director of the Agency shall cause the Agency to contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this article; provided, however, that if the Agency shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to 31 days before the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the ordinance shall not become operative until 31 days following the execution of such a contract by and between the Agency and the State Board of Equalization. Such contract, once executed, between the Agency and the State Board of Equalization, shall continue in effect so long as the County of Los Angeles and the City of Palmdale shall have operative sales and use tax ordinances enacted pursuant to Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code. (Ord. CRA-3 § 4, 1993)

3.22.100 Amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the enactment of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code relating to sales and use tax and not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code shall automatically become a part of this article; provided, that any repeal of Section 7200.1 or 7202.6 of the Code shall not be deemed to invalidate, impair or otherwise affect this article or the receipt by the Agency of revenues under this article. (Ord. CRA-3 § 5, 1993)

Article III. Redevelopment Project No. 3 Sales and Use Tax

3.22.110 Title of the article.
This article shall be known as the “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale Sales and Use Tax Ordinance” (the “ordinance”). (Ord. CRA-4 § 1, 1993)

3.22.120 Agency sales tax.
(A)(1) For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed by the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale (the “Agency”) upon all retailers located within the area described more fully in Exhibit A attached to the ordinance codified in this article and by this reference incorporated herein (the “Redevelopment Project”) at the rate of one percent of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail within the Redevelopment Project on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article.

(2) For the purposes of this article, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State of California (the “State”) sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization.

(B)(1) Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State (the “Code”), all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, as amended and in force and effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, applicable to sales taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

(2) Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of the Code nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Code.

(3) If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by reason of this section.

(4) There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax due under this section is measured the amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

(5) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the Redevelopment Project and the city, county, or city and county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. CRA-4 § 2, 1993)

3.22.130 Agency use tax.
(A) An excise tax is hereby imposed by the Agency on the storage, use or other consumption in the Redevelopment Project of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article for storage, use or other consumption in the Redevelopment Project at the rate of one percent of the purchase price of the property. The purchase price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made.

(B)(1) Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code, as amended and in force and effect on the date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this article, applicable to use taxes, are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein.

(2) Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code the State is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require substitution of the name “Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale” for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 of the Code nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203 of the Code.

(3) There shall be excluded from the amount subject to tax under this section any sales or use tax imposed by the State upon a retailer or consumer.

(4) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this section:

(a) The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1 or 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code by any city and county, county, city or redevelopment agency in the State; and

(b) In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the State, the United States, or any foreign government. (Ord. CRA-4 § 3, 1993)

3.22.140 Effective date – Operative date – Contract with the State Board of Equalization.
(A) The ordinance codified in this article shall be effective immediately upon its final passage by the Agency. The ordinance codified in this article shall be signed by the Chairman of the Agency and attested by the Secretary of the Agency.

(B) The ordinance codified in this article shall become operative on the first day of the first “calendar quarter” (as defined in Section 7202.6(b) of the Code) commencing more than 180 days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this article.

(C) Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the City Council, by an ordinance, shall have added a provision to the existing City Sales and Use Tax Law granting as a credit against the payment of tax owed under the City Sales and Use Tax Law the amount of sales and use tax paid, if any, to the Agency pursuant to this article.

(D) Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the Executive Director of the Agency shall cause the Agency to contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this article; provided, however, that if the Agency shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to 31 days before the operative date of the ordinance codified in this article, the ordinance shall not become operative until 31 days following the execution of such a contract by and between the Agency and the State Board of Equalization. Such contract, once executed, between the Agency and the State Board of Equalization, shall continue in effect so long as the County of Los Angeles and the City of Palmdale shall have operative sales and use tax ordinances enacted pursuant to Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code. (Ord. CRA-4 § 4, 1993)

3.22.150 Amendments to the Revenue and Taxation Code.
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the enactment of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Code relating to sales and use tax and not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Code shall automatically become a part of this article; provided, that any repeal of Section 7200.1 or 7202.6 of the Code shall not be deemed to invalidate, impair or otherwise affect this article or the receipt by the Agency of revenues under this article. (Ord. CRA-4 § 5, 1993)

Chapter 3.24
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Sections:

3.24.010    Adopted.

3.24.020    Definitions.

3.24.025    Section 19 amended – Tax collector defined.

3.24.030    Transient occupancy tax imposed.

3.24.035    Section 23 amended – Exemptions.

3.24.040    Enjoining collection forbidden.

3.24.010 Adopted.
(A) Except as provided in this chapter, Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 8607, in effect June 26, 1964, shall be the transient occupancy tax ordinance of the City.

(B) Three copies of the Los Angeles County transient occupancy tax ordinance have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 127 § 1, 1968)

3.24.020 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the County transient occupancy tax ordinance, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

(A) “Clerk of the Board” means the City Clerk.

(B) “County” or “County of Los Angeles” means the City.

(C) “Tax Collector” means the Finance Director of the City. (Ord. 663 § 2, 1987; Ord. 127 § 2, 1968)

3.24.025 Section 19 amended – Tax collector defined.
Section 19 of the County Uniform Occupancy Tax Ordinance No. 8607, adopted by reference in this chapter, is further amended by substituting the following in place of and in lieu of the existing Section 19:

SECTION 19. Tax Collector. Tax collector means the Finance Director of the City of Palmdale.

(Ord. 663 § 1, 1987)

3.24.030 Transient occupancy tax imposed.
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel or motel in the City of Palmdale, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of 10 percent of the rent charged for the room. This tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city, which is extinguished only by payment to the operator, the person or entity collecting the room rent or the City. Any person or entity which collects rent or other charges for the use of a hotel or motel room in the City of Palmdale shall collect and transmit such tax to the City. (Ord. 1372 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1071 § 1, 1995; Ord. 986 § 1, 1992; Ord. 885 § 1, 1990; Ord. 359 § 1, 1979)

3.24.035 Section 23 amended – Exemptions.
Section 23 of Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 8607, known as the “uniform occupancy tax ordinance” and adopted by reference in this chapter, is amended to read as follows:

Section 23. Exemptions. No tax shall be imposed upon any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

(Ord. 1054 § 1, 1994)

3.24.040 Enjoining collection forbidden.
(A) No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the City or an officer thereof, to prevent or enjoin the collection of taxes sought to be collected pursuant to this chapter, and payment of all tax, interest and penalties shall be required as a condition precedent to seeking judicial review of any tax liability.

(B) No suit or proceeding shall be maintained in any court for recovery of any amount alleged to have been erroneously or illegally determined or collected unless a claim for each refund or credit has been duly filed pursuant to Chapter 3.12 PMC. (Ord. 1395 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 3.28
PUBLICITY AND ADVERTISING FUND
Sections:

3.28.010    Created.

3.28.020    Purpose.

3.28.030    Claims against fund.

3.28.040    Allocation.

3.28.010 Created.
In accordance with Sections 40100 through 40103, Chapter 16 of the Government Code, a publicity and advertising fund is created. (Ord. 48 § 1, 1963)

3.28.020 Purpose.
All funds appropriated under this chapter shall be expended for promotion by the Chamber of Commerce of the advantages of the City as a business, industrial and residential center and the dissemination of information relative thereto. (Ord. 48 § 2, 1963)

3.28.030 Claims against fund.
All legal claims against the publicity and advertising fund are legal claims against the general fund of the City. (Ord. 48 § 3, 1963)

3.28.040 Allocation.
The City Council may allocate the funds to a suitable nongovernmental organization by written contract to carry out the purposes enumerated in PMC 3.28.020. Any such contract shall provide for termination by either party thereto on 30 days’ written notice to the other party. (Ord. 48 § 4, 1963)

Chapter 3.32
SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Sections:

3.32.010    Created.

3.32.020    Source of funds.

3.32.030    Expenditure.

3.32.010 Created.
To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the City Treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Ord. 470 § 14, 1982; Ord. 26 § 1, 1962)

3.32.020 Source of funds.
All moneys received by the City from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the City shall be paid into the fund. (Ord. 26 § 2, 1962)

3.32.030 Expenditure.
All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of Section 2107 et seq. of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 470 § 15, 1982; Ord. 26 § 3, 1962)

Chapter 3.33
AIR QUALITY IMPROVEMENT TRUST FUND
Sections:

3.33.010    Definitions.

3.33.020    Fund established.

3.33.030    Audits.

3.33.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

(A) “Mobile source air pollution reduction program” means any program or project implemented by the City to reduce air pollution emitted from motor vehicles pursuant to the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the Air Quality Management Plan for the South Coast Air Quality Management District prepared and adopted in accordance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Sections 40460 through 40470.

(B) “Fee Administrator” means the City Manager of the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 941 § 2, 1991)

3.33.020 Fund established.
The Fee Administrator shall establish a separate account in the City Treasury to be known as the air quality improvement trust fund. All funds received by the City pursuant to Health and Safety Code Sections 44243 and 44224, along with any other funds designated by the City Council, shall be credited to this account and shall be used for the sole purpose of financing mobile source air pollution reduction programs. The Fee Administrator shall be responsible for crediting funds to the air quality improvement trust fund. All interest earned on moneys in this trust fund account shall be allocated to the trust fund account in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 941 § 2, 1991)

3.33.030 Audits.
The City consents to audits, at least once every two years, of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fees provided by Health and Safety Code Section 44243; provided, that such audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the South Coast Air Quality Management District. Audit costs shall be funded as provided in Health and Safety Code Section 44244.1. (Ord. 941 § 2, 1991)

Chapter 3.34
PARKLAND DEDICATION
Sections:

3.34.020    Residential park fees.

3.34.030    Definitions.

3.34.040    Applicability.

3.34.050    Exemptions.

3.34.060    Dedication.

3.34.070    Fee on new construction.

3.34.090    Refund of fee.

3.34.100    Establishment of reserve fund.

3.34.110    Fee adjustment.

3.34.120    Parkland fee credits.

3.34.020 Residential park fees.
(A) The parkland development fees for a residential dwelling unit must be paid, in the amount established by resolution of the City Council, upon the date of the final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first.

(B) For the purposes of this section, the terms “final inspection” and “certificate of occupancy” have the same meaning as described in California Government Code Section 66007, as amended. (Ord. 1143 § 1, 1999; Ord. 813 § 1, 1989; Ord. 505, 1983)

3.34.030 Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section:

(A) “Bedroom” means a room intended to be furnished with a bed and intended primarily for sleeping. In the case of dispute, the decision of the Building Official shall be final.

(B) “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in an apartment building on such real property. A “condominium” may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

(C) “Construct” means the putting together, assembling, erecting or altering of construction materials, components or modules into a structure, or portion of a structure, and includes reconstructing, enlarging or altering any structure. “Construct” also includes the moving and locating of a building, or portions thereof, onto a lot or parcel of land, and also includes the improvement of land as a mobile home park.

(D) “Dwelling unit” means a separate single-family habitation, structure or unit; the term includes:

(1) A single-family dwelling;

(2) Each separate apartment or habitation unit composing a multiple-dwelling structure or condominium; and

(3) Each space or pad designed and allocated to accommodate a mobile home within a mobile home park.

(E) “Mobile home park” means any area or tract of land where one or more mobile home lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation.

(F) “Mobile home space” means any area or portion of a mobile home park designated, designed or used for the occupancy of one mobile home on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis.

(G) “Park and recreation facilities” includes, but is not limited to, land and interests in land, swimming pools, tennis and volleyball and basketball courts, baseball grounds, children’s play areas, turf, sprinkler systems, community center buildings, recreation buildings and other works, properties, structures and facilities necessary or convenient for public park, playground and recreation purposes; and also including any of the facilities described in this subsection constructed or installed within or upon any public school grounds where the City is given the right to use the same for public playground or recreation purposes.

(H) “Person” means any domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, or common law trust, society, club or individual. (Ord. 1408 § 6, 2010; Ord. 505, 1983)

3.34.040 Applicability.
Each person who constructs any dwelling unit or units containing bedrooms in the City shall pay a fee or dedicate land in lieu of the fee as provided in this chapter. Also, each person who constructs a bedroom unit within any existing dwelling unit in the City shall pay a fee or dedicate land in lieu of such fee. All fees and/or dedications pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited or dedicated to the City as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 505, 1983)

3.34.050 Exemptions.
The fee imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the following:

(A) The City, the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, the state or any county, city and county, district or any political subdivision of the state;

(B) Construction of any building, intended and used exclusively to house the elderly or handicapped, which is constructed for and operated by a foundation, agency or entity which, pursuant to Article 13, Section 1(c) of the State Constitution, has been granted a property tax exemption by the State Legislature;

(C) Enlargement, remodeling and/or alteration of a building, but only if the number of bedrooms therein is not increased. If the number of bedrooms in the building is increased, then the fee imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of bedrooms; provided, however, that if such enlargement, remodeling and/or alteration is to an existing single-family dwelling, then the fee imposed under this chapter shall not apply even though such enlargement, remodeling and/or alteration results in an increased number of bedrooms;

(D) Reconstruction of a building which was damaged or destroyed by earthquake, fire, flood or other cause over which the owner has no control (provided that compliance with any building code or other ordinance requirement of the City shall not be deemed a cause over which the owner has no control), but only if the number of bedrooms therein is not increased. If the number of dwelling units in the building is increased, then the fee imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of dwelling units;

(E) Replacement of any building on the same lot, if construction of the new building is commenced within 12 months from the date the previous building was substantially removed from the lot, but only if the number of dwelling units therein is not increased. If the number of bedrooms in the building is increased, then the tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to such increased number of bedrooms. (Ord. 505, 1983)

3.34.060 Dedication.
(A) Where the acceptance of land in lieu of fees will better serve the purpose of the citizens of Palmdale, such land may be accepted based upon findings by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall consider the following:

(1) Parks and recreation element of the City’s general plan;

(2) Topography, geology, access and location of land in the development available for dedication;

(3) Suitability for patrol, supervision and maintenance;

(4) Size and shape of the development and land available for dedication;

(5) The feasibility of dedication;

(6) Availability of previously acquired park property;

(7) The value of such lands to be dedicated shall be no less than the fee(s) which would be otherwise required.

(B) The determination of the Planning Commission as to whether land shall be dedicated or whether a fee shall be charged, or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive, unless appealed to the City Council. (Ord. 505, 1983)

3.34.070 Fee on new construction.
Any person constructing a bedroom or mobile home space in the City shall pay to the City a fee as established by resolution of the City Council. A mobile home space shall be assessed a fee equivalent to the fee assessed for the construction of two bedrooms. (Ord. 789 § 1, 1989; Ord. 505, 1983)

3.34.090 Refund of fee.
A fee paid under this chapter for the construction of a new dwelling unit which is not built is refundable. A refund shall be made upon application of the property owner to the Director of Finance and upon owner’s showing that the construction of a new dwelling unit has not been commenced and the building permit issued therefor has expired, has been cancelled or has been revoked. Application must be made within one year from the cancellation, expiration or revocation of the building permit; provided, however, no refund shall be made when a dwelling unit is damaged or destroyed. In addition, no refund shall be made for mobile home spaces upon final approval of the construction permit for a mobile home park. In no case shall any refund exceed 90 percent of the total fee collected, to offset costs incurred by the City for administering this fee. (Ord. 505, 1983)

3.34.100 Establishment of reserve fund.
All fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in the “City of Palmdale parks development reserve fund.” All such fees shall be used solely for the purpose of providing park and recreational facilities for the benefit of the City. (Ord. 505, 1983)

3.34.110 Fee adjustment.
(A)(1) Any person subject to the parkland development fee required by this chapter may apply to the Director of Parks and Recreation for a reduction in that fee based upon the demonstrable absence of a reasonable relationship between the impact of that person’s development on the City’s parks, playgrounds and other park facilities and either the amount of the parkland development fee charged or the type of facilities to be constructed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the Director of Parks and Recreation not later than the time at which application for site plan review is filed. If site plan review is not required for the development, then the application shall be made in writing and filed with the application for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the request for reduction.

(2) The Director shall make a decision on the application for reduction within 30 calendar days after the application has been filed. Notice of the Director’s decision shall be mailed to the applicant, postage paid.

(B)(1) The decision of the Director of Parks and Recreation may be appealed to the Planning Commission by filing an application for appeal with the Director of Parks and Recreation. The application must be filed within 15 calendar days after notice of the Director’s decision has been mailed to the applicant; provided, however, that if the 15 days expires on a day that Palmdale City Hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next business day.

(2) Failure to file a timely appeal application deprives the Planning Commission of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

(3) The Planning Commission shall consider the appeal at a public hearing to be held within 60 calendar days after the appeal application is filed.

(C)(1) The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by filing an application for appeal with the City Clerk. The application must be filed within 15 calendar days after the Commission has made a final decision on the appeal; provided, however, that if the 15 days expires on a day that Palmdale City Hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next business day.

(2) Failure to file a timely appeal application deprives the City Council of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

(3) The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public hearing to be held within 60 calendar days after the appeal application is filed. The decision of the City Council shall be final.

(D) If a reduction is granted pursuant to this section, any subsequent change in the use of the subject property, or any increase in the square footage of the development, shall invalidate the reduction. (Ord. 789 § 3, 1989)

3.34.120 Parkland fee credits.
For the purpose of this chapter, a developer may fulfill the developer’s obligation to pay parkland development fees, or any portion thereof, by applying parkland fee credits toward the developer’s fee obligation. (Ord. 1299 § 10, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 10, 2006; Ord. 970 § 2, 1992)

Chapter 3.36
REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY FEE
Sections:

3.36.010    Purpose.

3.36.020    Imposition of fee.

3.36.030    Obligation.

3.36.040    Payment.

3.36.010 Purpose.
(A) The redevelopment process provides financial mechanisms which assist in industrial, commercial and residential development within redevelopment project areas within the City.

(B) This industrial, commercial and residential development places additional burdens upon the capital improvements and facilities in the City and contributes to the need for additional facilities and the maintenance and repair of existing facilities.

(C) The policy of the City Council is that new costs which result from the growth-inducing programs of the redevelopment agency shall not be borne by the City, but rather, by the redevelopment agency which is responsible for those new costs.

(D) A mechanism is necessary to provide a predictable and equitable funding method for requiring new development within redevelopment areas to pay for the future capital improvements which are of benefit to such development such that the impacts of new growth will be borne by that new development. (Ord. 506, 1983)

3.36.020 Imposition of fee.
All new development, including residential, commercial and industrial construction, within a specified redevelopment project area shall be assessed a fee by the City equal to four percent of the building valuation of the development. (Ord. 506, 1983)

3.36.030 Obligation.
The obligation for payment of this fee shall be assessed to the redevelopment agency. This fee shall be considered as a debt of the agency for future repayment to the City. (Ord. 506, 1983)

3.36.040 Payment.
This fee will be exclusive of any other fees and obligations required by the City Council or the redevelopment agency. (Ord. 506, 1983)

Chapter 3.38
DRAINAGE FEE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

3.38.010    Finding and intent.

3.38.020    Residential drainage fees required.

3.38.030    Nonresidential drainage fees required.

3.38.040    Drainage fees – Exemptions – Reduction – Deferral.

3.38.050    Fee adjustment.

3.38.060    Use of funds.

3.38.010 Finding and intent.
(A) The City Council finds that flooding problems within the City are caused by relatively flat terrain, the absence of well defined natural channels for drainage, and the lack of a developed flood control system. New development will exacerbate this flooding problem by increasing the runoff from currently undeveloped land. In order to mitigate the flooding problem caused by current development, and to prevent future development from creating additional flooding problems, the City must construct regional and local drainage facilities.

(B) It is the intent of the City to require every person who develops land to mitigate the impacts of that development on the City’s drainage facilities. The City will therefore require developers to construct drainage facilities in accordance with the City of Palmdale master drainage plan or pay drainage fees that will be used to construct drainage facilities pursuant to the master drainage plan.

(C) The amount of the drainage fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to the cost of drainage facilities attributable to new development. The amount of drainage fees collected shall not include the cost of drainage facilities attributable to the need for drainage created by existing development. (Ord. 795 § 2, 1989)

3.38.020 Residential drainage fees required.
Except as provided in PMC 3.38.040, the required drainage fees for a residential dwelling unit must be paid, in the amount established by resolution of the City Council, when the City inspects the completion of rough grading. (Ord. 1143 § 3, 1999; Ord. 814 § 1, 1989; Ord. 795 § 2, 1989)

3.38.030 Nonresidential drainage fees required.
Except as provided in PMC 3.38.040, the required drainage fees for a nonresidential development must be paid, in the amount established by resolution of the City Council, when the City inspects the completion of rough grading. (Ord. 1143 § 4, 1999; Ord. U-980 § 2, 1992; Ord. 795 § 2, 1989)

3.38.040 Drainage fees – Exemptions – Reduction – Deferral.
(A) A developer shall be exempted from the drainage fee requirements of PMC 3.38.020 and 3.38.030 if the developer enters into a development agreement with the City pursuant to which drainage fees are assessed to the developer, or drainage improvements are implemented by the developer.

(B) The City Manager may grant an exemption of the drainage fee required by PMC 3.38.020 and 3.38.030 if the City Manager makes the following findings: (1) that a development will generate extraordinary economic benefit upon the City, and (2) the initial revenue loss to the City, if any, will be recouped over a reasonable period of time through increased revenues to the City. Factors which the City Manager may consider include whether the proposed development will provide job creation, sales tax, property tax, or redevelopment tax-increment revenues to the City and/or the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale either individually or as part of a larger multiparty development plan; if the proposed development will provide a much needed service to the local community or economy, or encourage the development of businesses or suppliers ancillary to preexisting businesses in the City; or development at the proposed site has been hampered by such impediments as the burden of liens, including assessment, community facility district or County tax liens.

(C) A developer shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the drainage fee required by PMC 3.38.020 and 3.38.030 if the developer constructs drainage facilities pursuant to the master drainage plan. The drainage fee shall be reduced by the amount of engineering and construction costs that would be reasonably incurred by the City in building those same drainage facilities. The amount of such reduction shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer prior to construction.

If a developer constructs drainage facilities pursuant to the master drainage plan, and if the City’s engineering and construction costs to install those same improvements would have exceeded the drainage fee assessed to that developer pursuant to PMC 3.38.020 and 3.38.030, then nothing in this section shall prevent the City from entering into a reimbursement agreement with that developer, subject to availability of funds.

(D) Notwithstanding subsection (B) of this section, a developer shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the drainage fee required by PMC 3.38.020 and 3.38.030 if the development is located in an assessment district that has been formed to construct facilities pursuant to the master drainage plan. The drainage fee shall be reduced by the amount of the total assessment placed upon the development for engineering and construction costs of drainage facilities. The amount of such reduction shall not exceed the amount of the drainage fee required by PMC 3.38.020 and 3.38.030.

(E) The City Manager may grant a reduction in the amount of the drainage fee required by PMC 3.38.020 and 3.38.030 if the City Manager determines that a development will contribute extraordinary sales tax revenue to the City and thereby confer extraordinary financial benefit upon the City.

(F) The City Manager may authorize the deferred payment of the nonresidential drainage fees required by PMC 3.38.030 if the City Manager determines that a development complies with all requirements for such deferred payment that are set forth in Chapter 3.43 PMC. (Ord. 1276 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1187 § 1, 2001; Ord. 1013 § 2, 1993; Ord. U-980 § 3, 1992; Ord. 795 § 2, 1989)

3.38.050 Fee adjustment.
(A) Any developer subject to the drainage fees required by this chapter may apply to the Director of Public Works for a reduction in those fees based upon the demonstrable absence of a reasonable relationship between the impact of that development on the City’s drainage facilities and either the amount of the drainage fees charged or the type of facilities to be constructed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the Director of Public Works not later than the time at which the development is conditionally approved by the City. If site plan review is not required for the development, then the application shall be made in writing and filed not later than the time at which the building permit is issued. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the request for reduction.

(B) Failure to file a timely application for reduction deprives the Director of Public Works of jurisdiction to consider the application.

(C) The Director shall make a decision on the application for reduction within 30 calendar days after the application has been filed. Notice of the Director’s decision shall be mailed to the applicant, postage paid. (Ord. U-980 § 4, 1992; Ord. 795 § 2, 1989)

3.38.060 Use of funds.
All drainage fees paid and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be placed in one or more funds and used solely for the purpose of constructing drainage facilities pursuant to the master drainage plan; provided, however, that if the City Engineer authorizes minor alterations to such plan, including the regional facility priority list contained therein, those alterations shall not affect the ability of the City to use drainage fees collected pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of constructing drainage facilities in accordance with the master drainage plan as altered or amended. (Ord. 795 § 2, 1989)

Chapter 3.40
TRAFFIC IMPACT FEE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

3.40.010    Findings and intent.

3.40.020    Residential traffic impact fees required.

3.40.030    Nonresidential traffic impact fees required.

3.40.040    Traffic impact fees – Exemptions – Reduction – Deferral.

3.40.050    Appeals.

3.40.060    Use of funds.

3.40.070    Fee amount applicable to pending projects.

3.40.080    Periodic adjustment to fee amount.

3.40.010 Findings and intent.
(A) New residential and nonresidential development in the City of Palmdale (hereinafter “City”) has attracted and will continue to attract employees and residents to the City, and there is a causal connection between such development projects and the increased need for transportation facilities.

(B) Failure to enhance the ability of the City’s transportation system to accommodate increased traffic will make it more difficult for residents, employers, and employees to access residences and places of employment and could cause unacceptable harm to the quality of life in the City.

(C) Sources of City revenue other than traffic impact fees, including tax revenues which will be paid by new residential and nonresidential development, will be needed for many public purposes and therefore will not be sufficient to offset the burdens on transportation facilities created by new residential and nonresidential development.

(D) It is the intent of the City to require every person or organization that develops land to mitigate the impacts of that development on the City’s transportation system. The City will therefore require developers to mitigate traffic impacts caused by their development or to pay a traffic impact fee that will be used to mitigate those impacts by constructing transportation facilities pursuant to the most current transportation facilities plan.

(E) The amount of traffic impact fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be limited to the cost of traffic impact mitigation attributable to new development. The amount of traffic impact fees collected shall not include the cost of traffic impact mitigation measures made necessary by existing development. (Ord. 1254 § 1, 2005; Ord. 825 § 2, 1989)

3.40.020 Residential traffic impact fees required.
(A) Except as provided in PMC 3.40.040, the required traffic impact fee for a residential building shall be paid, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, prior to or on the date of the final Building Department inspection of the building, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. If the residential development contains more than one dwelling, the traffic impact fee may be paid on a lump-sum basis when the first dwelling in the development or development phase receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first.

(B) The Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for calculating the amount of the traffic impact fee required for each development project based on the applicable land use category and corresponding rate specified in the resolution which adopts the traffic impact fee. In calculating such fee, the Director of Public Works shall utilize the fee rate that is assigned to the land use category that is most applicable to the development project. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to assign a land use category to a development project or to apply the cost per daily trip rate, whichever most reasonably represents the trip generation potential for the project.

(C) For the purposes of this section, “final building inspection” or “final Building Department inspection” shall mean the physical inspection of the building by the Division of Building and Safety of the City of Palmdale for compliance of the building with all applicable building codes and the issuance by all applicable City, County, regional, state and federal agencies of their respective clearances for occupancy.

(D) For the purposes of this section, “certificate of occupancy” shall mean a document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure, building or development conforms with all the applicable municipal codes, ordinances and conditions of approval. (Ord. 1408 § 11, 2010; Ord. 1254 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1143 § 5, 1999; Ord. 825 § 2, 1989)

3.40.030 Nonresidential traffic impact fees required.
(A) Except as provided in PMC 3.40.040, the required traffic impact fee for a nonresidential development shall be paid, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, prior to issuance of the certificate of occupancy for that development; provided, however, that if a nonresidential development project is to be constructed and occupied in phases, and a separate certificate of occupancy will be issued for each phase, payment of the traffic impact fee may be made separately prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for each phase of the development.

(B) The Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall be responsible for calculating the amount of the traffic impact fee required for each development project based on the applicable land use category and corresponding rate specified in the resolution which adopts the traffic impact fee. In calculating such fee, the Director of Public Works shall utilize the fee rate that is assigned to the land use category that is most applicable to the development project. The Director of Public Works shall have the authority to assign a land use category to a development project or to apply the cost per daily trip rate, whichever most reasonably represents the trip generation potential for the project.

(C) For the purposes of this section, “certificate of occupancy” shall mean a document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure, building or development conforms to all the applicable building codes, the Palmdale Municipal Code, and conditions of approval. (Ord. 1254 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1187 § 2, 2001; Ord. 1143 § 6, 1999; Ord. U-979 § 2, 1992; Ord. 825 § 2, 1989)

3.40.040 Traffic impact fees – Exemptions – Reduction – Deferral.
(A) A developer shall be exempted from the traffic impact fee requirements of PMC 3.40.020 and 3.40.030 if the developer enters into a development agreement with the City pursuant to which traffic impact fees are assessed to the developer, or transportation improvements are implemented by the developer.

(B) The City Manager may grant an exemption from the traffic impact fee required by PMC 3.40.020 and 3.40.030 if the City Manager makes the following findings: (1) that a development will generate extraordinary economic benefit upon the City, and (2) the initial revenue loss to the City, if any, will be recouped over a reasonable period of time through increased revenues to the City. Factors which the City Manager may consider include whether the proposed development will provide job creation, sales tax, property tax, or redevelopment tax-increment revenues to the City and/or the Community Redevelopment Agency of the City of Palmdale either individually or as part of a larger multiparty development plan; if the proposed development will provide a much needed service to the local community or economy, or result in the development of businesses or suppliers ancillary to preexisting businesses in the City; or development at the proposed site has been hampered by such impediments as the burden of liens, including assessment, community facility district or County tax liens.

(C)(1) A developer shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the traffic impact fee required by PMC 3.40.020 and 3.40.030 if the developer constructs roadway improvements or traffic signals pursuant to the master traffic level maintenance plan. The traffic impact fee shall be reduced by the amount of engineering and construction costs that would be reasonably incurred by the City in building those same roadway improvements or traffic signals. The amount of such reduction shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer prior to construction.

(2) If a developer constructs roadway improvements or installs traffic signals pursuant to the master traffic level maintenance plan, and if the City’s engineering and construction costs to install those same improvements or signals would have exceeded the traffic fee assessed to that developer pursuant to PMC 3.40.020 and 3.40.030, then nothing in this section shall prevent the City from entering into a reimbursement agreement with that developer, subject to availability of funds.

(D) Notwithstanding subsection (B) of this section, a developer shall be entitled to a reduction in the amount of the traffic impact fee required by PMC 3.40.020 and 3.40.030 if the development is located in an assessment district that has been formed to construct facilities pursuant to the master traffic level maintenance plan. The traffic impact fee shall be reduced by the amount of the total assessment placed upon the development for engineering and construction costs of roadway improvements or traffic signals. The amount of such reduction shall not exceed the amount of the traffic impact fee required by PMC 3.40.020 and 3.40.030.

(E) The City Manager may grant a reduction in the amount of the traffic impact fee required by PMC 3.40.020 and 3.40.030 if the City Manager determines that a development will contribute extraordinary sales tax revenue to the City and thereby confer extraordinary financial benefit upon the City.

(F) The City Manager may authorize the deferred payment of the nonresidential traffic impact fees required by PMC 3.40.030 if the City Manager determines that a development complies with all requirements for such deferred payment that are set forth in Chapter 3.43 PMC. (Ord. 1276 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1254 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1187 § 2, 2001; Ord. 1013 § 3, 1993; Ord. U-979 § 3, 1992; Ord. 825 § 2, 1989)

3.40.050 Appeals.
(A) A developer subject to the traffic impact fee required by this chapter for a particular project may apply to the Director of Public Works for: (1) a fee adjustment based upon a showing of substantial evidence of a lesser impact upon the traffic level of service, (2) an offset or credit against the assessed fee for transportation improvements constructed in compliance with the transportation facilities plan, or (3) a land use category adjustment based upon a showing of substantial evidence that another land use category is more appropriate for a particular development. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the Director of Public Works not later than the time at which the development is conditionally approved by the City. If a development review is not required for the development, then the application shall be made in writing and filed not later than the time at which the building permit is issued. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the request for reduction.

(B) Failure to file a timely application for adjustment deprives the Director of Public Works of jurisdiction to consider the application.

(C) The Director shall make a decision on the application for adjustment within 30 calendar days after the application has been filed. Notice of the Director’s decision shall be mailed to the applicant, postage paid.

(D) The decision of the Director of Public Works may be appealed to the Planning Commission by filing an application for appeal with the Director of Public Works. The application must be filed within 15 calendar days after notice of the Director’s decision has been mailed to the applicant; provided, however, that if the 15 days expired on the day that City Hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next business day.

(E) Failure to file a timely appeal application deprives the Planning Commission of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

(F) The Planning Commission shall consider the appeal at a public hearing to be held within 60 calendar days after the appeal application has been filed. Notice of the Planning Commission’s decision shall be mailed to the applicant, postage paid.

(G) The decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council by filing an application for appeal with the City Clerk. The application must be filed within 15 calendar days after notice of the Commission’s decision has been mailed to the applicant; provided, however, that if the 15 days expires on a date that City Hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next business day. Failure to file a timely appeal application deprives the City Council of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

(H) The City Council shall consider the appeal at a public hearing to be held within 60 calendar days after the appeal application is filed. The decision of the City Council shall be final. The decision of the City Council shall be in writing and shall be mailed to the applicant, postage paid.

(I) If a fee exemption, a fee reduction or a land use category adjustment is granted pursuant to this section, any subsequent change or intensification of the use or uses of the property or any expansion of the structures on the property shall invalidate the fee exemption, fee reduction or land use category adjustment, and the applicant shall be subject to the traffic impact fee requirement applicable to the entire development based on the fee in effect at the time of the change or expansion, less any amount previously paid.

(J) If a fee exemption, fee reduction or land use category adjustment is not granted pursuant to this section, then upon the payment of the required fees, the City shall, pursuant to Government Code Section 66020, provide the applicant a written notice of the amount of the fees or a description of the dedications, reservations, or other exactions, and shall also provide notification that the 90-day protest period has begun. (Ord. 1254 § 1, 2005; Ord. U-979 § 4, 1992; Ord. 825 § 2, 1989)

3.40.060 Use of funds.
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 66006, all traffic impact fees paid and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be placed into one or more separate reserve account(s) established for such fee and used solely for the purpose of constructing transportation improvements pursuant to the most current transportation facilities plan; provided, however, that if the Traffic/Transportation Engineer authorizes minor alterations to such plan, then those alterations shall not affect the ability of the City to use traffic impact fees collected pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of constructing transportation improvements in accordance with the most current transportation facilities plan as altered or amended. (Ord. 1254 § 1, 2005; Ord. 825 § 2, 1989)

3.40.070 Fee amount applicable to pending projects.
Except as may otherwise be provided in the resolution which adopts the fee amount, an applicant subject to the payment of traffic impact fees required by PMC 3.40.020 or 3.40.030 must pay the amount of the fee that is in effect when the fee becomes due. The amount of the fee is the amount specified by resolution of the City Council, as amended from time to time. The fee imposed on a development project for which vested rights have been acquired through a vesting tentative subdivision map shall be the fee in effect at the time the rights became vested, plus any adjustment for inflation made between that date and the date the fee becomes due. (Ord. 1254 § 1, 2005)

3.40.080 Periodic adjustment to fee amount.
The amount of the traffic impact fee may be annually adjusted for inflation as specified in the resolution which adopts the fee amount or by the periodic preparation of a new transportation facilities plan and required studies prepared and adopted pursuant to the Mitigation Fee Act. (Ord. 1254 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 3.42
FIRE FACILITIES IMPACT FEE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

3.42.010    Findings and intent.

3.42.020    Residential fire facilities impact fee required.

3.42.030    Nonresidential public facilities development impact fee required.

3.42.040    Exceptions from, and reduction of, fire facilities impact fees.

3.42.050    Fee adjustment.

3.42.060    Use of funds.

3.42.070    Calculation of fees.

3.42.010 Findings and intent.
(A) The City Council finds that Palmdale is a rapidly growing city. The projected increase in population is reasonably expected to create a substantial increase in the demand placed upon public facilities, including fire protection facilities. The City’s existing fire protection facilities will soon be inadequate to handle the projected population growth at existing levels of service. In order to serve the projected population growth, fire protection facilities must be expanded.

(B) It is the intent of the City Council to require every person who develops land to mitigate the impacts of that development on the City’s public facilities. The City will therefore require developers to pay a fire facilities impact fee that will be used to meet the demand for fire protection facilities created by development.

(C) The amount of the fire facilities impact fees collected in accordance with this chapter will be limited to the cost of the facilities attributable to new development. The amount of the fire facilities impact fees collected will not include the cost of fire facilities that serve existing development. (Ord. 1142 § 1, 1999)

3.42.020 Residential fire facilities impact fee required.
(A) Except as provided in PMC 3.42.040, a fire facilities impact fee for a residential building must be paid, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, upon the date of the final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first.

(B) For the purposes of this section, the terms “final inspection” and “certificate of occupancy” have the same meaning as described in Government Code Section 66007, as amended. (Ord. 1142 § 1, 1999)

3.42.030 Nonresidential public facilities development impact fee required.
A fire facilities impact fee for a nonresidential building must be paid, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, upon the date of final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 1142 § 1, 1999)

3.42.040 Exceptions from, and reduction of, fire facilities impact fees.
(A) A developer is entitled to a reduction in the amount of the fire facilities impact fee required by PMC 3.42.020 and 3.42.030 if the developer constructs fire facilities pursuant to a fire facilities plan adopted by the City Council. The fire facilities impact fee will be reduced by the amount of engineering and construction costs that would reasonably be incurred by the City in building those same public facilities. The amount of the reduction in the fire facilities impact fee is subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works prior to construction of the development.

(B) If a developer constructs fire facilities pursuant to a plan adopted by City Council, and if the City’s engineering and construction costs to construct those same fire facilities would have been more than the fee assessed to that developer pursuant to PMC 3.42.020 or 3.42.030, then nothing in this section prevents the City from entering into a reimbursement agreement with that developer, subject to the availability of funds.

(C) The City Manager may reduce the amount of the fire facilities impact fee required by PMC 3.42.020 or 3.42.030 if the City Manager determines that a development will generate extraordinary sales tax revenue for the City and thereby confer an extraordinary financial benefit upon the City. (Ord. 1142 § 1, 1999)

3.42.050 Fee adjustment.
(A) Application for Fee Adjustment.

(1) Any developer whose development is subject to the fire facilities impact fee required by this chapter may apply to the Director of Public Works for a reduction in that fee based upon the demonstrable absence of a reasonable relationship between the impact of that development on the City’s fire facilities and either the amount of fire facilities impact fee charged, or the type of fire facilities and improvements to be constructed and purchased. The application must be made in writing and filed with the Director of Public Works not later than 90 days after approval of the development project. If no application for discretionary review is required for the development, then the application for fee waiver must be made in writing and filed within 90 days after the City issues a building permit for the development. The application must state in detail the factual basis for the request for reduction.

(2) Failure to file a timely application for reduction deprives the Director of Public Works of jurisdiction to consider that application.

(3) The Director must make a decision on the application for reduction within 30 calendar days after the application has been filed. Notice of the Director’s decision must be mailed to the applicant, postage prepaid.

(B) Invalidation of Fee Reduction. If a reduction is granted pursuant to this section, then any subsequent change in the design of the subject development that may impact the demand for fire facilities, or any increase in the square footage of the development, will invalidate the reduction.

(C) Processing of Protests. The procedure set forth in this section will implement Government Code Section 66020, or any successor statute, and will serve as the City’s method for processing protests filed pursuant to that section. Prior to the effective date of the City’s approval of the development, or, if no discretionary review is required, then prior to the issuance of a building permit, a developer that is subject to this chapter must sign and acknowledge receipt of a notice informing the developer of the amount of the fire facilities impact fee imposed upon the development. The acknowledgment of the notice will not be deemed a waiver of the developer’s right to protest the imposition and to request a fee adjustment under this section. (Ord. 1142 § 1, 1999)

3.42.060 Use of funds.
All fire facilities impact fees paid and collected as authorized by this chapter must be placed in one or more funds and used solely for the purpose of constructing, expanding or rehabilitating fire protection facilities and equipment. (Ord. 1142 § 1, 1999)

3.42.070 Calculation of fees.
A developer subject to the fire facilities impact fee required by PMC 3.42.020 or 3.42.030 must pay the amount of the fee that is in effect when the fee becomes due. Furthermore, any fee imposed on a development that is protected by vested rights acquired through a vesting subdivision map will be the amount in effect at the time the rights became vested, plus any adjustment for inflation made between that date and the date that the fee becomes due. (Ord. 1142 § 1, 1999)

Chapter 3.43
DEFERRED PAYMENT OF DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES
Sections:

3.43.010    Findings and intent.

3.43.020    Eligibility for the deferred payment of development impact fees.

3.43.030    Application for the deferred payment of development impact fees.

3.43.040    Security for payment of development impact fees.

3.43.010 Findings and intent.
The City Council finds and determines that numerous social services of benefit to the community are provided by tax-exempt organizations that develop nonresidential buildings and structures within the City. The City Council further finds and determines that the implementation of policies and procedures that authorize qualified tax-exempt organizations to defer the payment of development impact fees required under Chapters 3.38 and 3.40 PMC will have the salutary effect of expediting the construction of new nonresidential developments that will be used, in whole or in part, to provide social services for the benefit of residents of this community. (Ord. 1187 § 3, 2001)

3.43.020 Eligibility for the deferred payment of development impact fees.
(A) The payment of development impact fees required under Chapters 3.38 and 3.40 PMC for nonresidential developments may be deferred for a period not to exceed five years from the date that they would otherwise be payable if the developer meets the following requirements:

(1) The developer is a tax-exempt organization duly qualified as such by the Internal Revenue Service and by the California Franchise Tax Board.

(2) The developer will, upon completion and occupancy of the proposed nonresidential development, use buildings or structures within that development for the purpose of providing to residents of the City, on a nondiscriminatory basis, social services that fall within one or more of the following categories:

(a) Health care services;

(b) Parenting services;

(c) Marriage counseling services;

(d) Substance abuse counseling and services;

(e) Pre-school or day-care services;

(f) Programs and services benefiting the economically disadvantaged;

(g) Youth services and activities;

(h) Senior services and activities.

(3) The developer submits to the City Manager an application for the deferred payment of development impact fees that contains, at a minimum, the information specified below in PMC 3.43.030, and complies with all other applicable requirements of this chapter.

(B) The City Manager is authorized to determine the eligibility of any tax-exempt organization for the deferred payment of development impact fees as provided for in this chapter; provided, however, that the City Manager’s determination of ineligibility will be subject to appeal to the City Council by the applicant. (Ord. 1187 § 3, 2001)

3.43.030 Application for the deferred payment of development impact fees.
(A) A developer meeting the threshold requirements of PMC 3.43.020 may submit to the City Manager, on a form to be provided by the City, an application for the deferred payment of development impact fees. This application, at a minimum, will require the following information:

(1) The full legal name, address and employer identification number of the tax-exempt organization that is the developer of the proposed nonresidential development;

(2) The name, address, and telephone number of the principal representative of the tax-exempt organization;

(3) The names, addresses, and titles of the officers, directors, trustees, etc., of the tax-exempt organization;

(4) A description of the proposed nonresidential development, the nature and amount of development impact fees that are requested to be deferred, and the requested deferral period, not to exceed five years;

(5) Documents that evidence the formation of the tax-exempt organization and its status as a corporation, partnership, trust, limited liability company, unincorporated association, or other form of entity;

(6) Copies of exempt organization determination letters issued by the Internal Revenue Service and by the California Franchise Tax Board;

(7) A detailed narrative description of the current activities and programs of the tax-exempt organization, as well as the social service programs or activities that will be provided to residents of the City following completion and occupancy of the proposed nonresidential development. With regard to such proposed social service programs or activities, the following additional information should be provided:

(a) The hours, financial resources, personnel and space that will be allocated to these programs or activities;

(b) The manner in which the exempt purpose of the tax-exempt organization will be served by these programs or activities;

(c) The manner in which the availability of these programs or activities will be brought to the attention of the residents of the City;

(d) A statement that describes any limitations or restrictions on participation in these programs or activities by residents of the City and, if so, how participants will be selected;

(e) Whether participants in these programs or activities will be required to pay a fee or charge and, if so, how these fees or charges will be determined and in what amounts;

(8) A statement that the applicant will submit annually to the City, on a form to be provided by the City, a report confirming that the social service programs or activities described in the original application are being provided and, if modified, a description of those modifications;

(9) A statement that the applicant will, as a condition of the deferred payment of development impact fees, enter into an agreement with the City that sets forth the respective rights and obligations of the parties relating to the deferred payment of those fees, including the applicant’s obligation to provide to the City adequate security for payment, as required by the provisions of PMC 3.43.040;

(10) The application must be signed under penalty of perjury by an officer, employee, or authorized agent of the tax-exempt organization.

(B) Within 30 days after the submission of an application containing the information specified in subsection (A) of this section, the City Manager will make a determination whether to authorize the deferred payment of development impact fees as requested by the applicant. If such authorization is granted, it will become effective on the date specified in the agreement between the City and the applicant that sets forth the respective rights and obligations of the parties relating to the deferred payment of the development impact fees. (Ord. 1187 § 3, 2001)

3.43.040 Security for payment of development impact fees.
(A) No authorization by the City Manager of the deferred payment of development impact fees under the provisions of this chapter will become effective until the City has received from the applicant adequate security for the ultimate payment of those deferred fees.

(B) The form of security for ultimate payment of deferred development impact fees by a qualified tax-exempt organization will be specified in the agreement between the City and the tax-exempt organization and may consist of any one or a combination of the following, as may be determined by the City Attorney after consultation with the applicant’s principal representative:

(1) A payment bond, issued by an admitted surety insurer as defined in Section 995.120 of the California Code of Civil Procedure, in a principal sum up to the full amount of the deferred development impact fees.

(2) A deposit with the City of negotiable bonds or an irrevocable letter of credit.

(3) A promissory note secured by a deed of trust on the property owned by the applicant where the proposed development is to be located.

(4) A personal guarantee of payment by one or more individuals who are determined to have the financial capability to satisfy such a guarantee.

(5) Such additional form of security for payment as will adequately protect the interests of the City in collecting the full amount of the deferred development impact fees. (Ord. 1187 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 3.44
BUSINESS LICENSE TAX
Sections:

3.44.010    Title.

3.44.020    Purpose.

3.44.030    Definitions.

3.44.040    Business license required.

3.44.050    Business licenses – Duration.

3.44.060    Business license taxes – Payment.

3.44.070    Business license taxes – Delinquencies.

3.44.080    Business licenses – Issuance to persons operating under fictitious names.

3.44.090    Unlawful business.

3.44.100    Duplicate license.

3.44.110    Presentment of license.

3.44.120    Substitute for other provisions.

3.44.130    Director – Duties.

3.44.140    No license issued or renewed where applicant is indebted to City.

3.44.150    License not transferable.

3.44.160    Preparation and issuance of licenses.

3.44.170    Errors in issuance of licenses.

3.44.180    Licenses for each business activity.

3.44.190    Enforcement.

3.44.200    Evidence of doing business.

3.44.210    Refunds.

3.44.220    Permit prerequisite.

3.44.225    Occupancy review or home occupation permit.

3.44.230    Application.

3.44.240    Renewal license application.

3.44.250    Exemptions.

3.44.260    Confidential information.

3.44.270    Failure to file statement or corrected statement.

3.44.280    Appeal.

3.44.290    Business classifications and license taxes.

3.44.300    Tax amounts.

3.44.310    Severability.

3.44.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the “business license tax ordinance.” (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.020 Purpose.
This chapter is enacted solely for the purpose of raising revenue for general municipal purposes. It is not intended to be regulatory. The payment of a business license tax required by this chapter, its receipt by the City, and the issuance of a business license to any person shall not entitle the holder thereof to conduct any business unless such person has complied with all requirements of this code and all other applicable laws, nor to conduct any business in any building or on any premises designated in such business license if such building or premises are in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is in violation of any law or ordinance. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings unless it is apparent from their context that a different meaning is intended:

(A) “Agent” or “agency” means a person who acts for, on behalf of, or in the place of another person and who receives compensation, either directly or indirectly, for services rendered.

(B) “Antique mall” means a business enterprise wherein the owner or operator thereof provides booths, concessions, stalls or kiosks to independent merchants for the sale of antiques.

(C) “Broker” means a person who, by authority, acts as an intermediary, representative, or agent in the purchase or sale of insurance, real or personal property, stocks, bonds, certificates, notes or other items of value.

(D) “Brokerage” means a business involving the purchase or sale of insurance, real or personal property, stocks, bonds, certificates, notes or other items of value.

(E) “Contractor” means a person who, individually or by or through others, undertakes to construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, remove or demolish any building or structure, or portion thereof. The following shall not be included within this definition:

(1) A person acting solely in the capacity of an architect or civil engineer;

(2) An owner of real property where such construction, alteration or repair is done by such owner; and

(3) Employees of such contractors.

(F) “Business” means all activities engaged in or caused to be engaged in within the City, including any commercial or industrial enterprise, trade, profession, occupation, vocation, calling or livelihood, including the rental or lease of residential or nonresidential real estate and mobile home parks, and the activities of independent contractors, whether or not carried on for gain or profit, but shall not include: (a) the services rendered by an employee to his or her employer; or (b) the activities of a person who manages residential real property that such person owns.

(G) “Business license” means the license issued to a person under this chapter which evidences payment of the tax prescribed by this chapter.

(H) “City” means the City of Palmdale, a municipal corporation of the state of California.

(I) “Director” means the Director of Planning of the City or such other person as the Director shall designate.

(J) “Merchant” means and includes any person who engages in, carries on or conducts the business of buying or selling produce, foodstuffs or any food product, commodities, goods, wares or merchandise to the public.

(K) “Engage in business” means to commence, operate, manage or carry on a business, or to exercise corporate or franchise powers, whether as an owner or by means of one or more officers, agents, managers, employees, servants or otherwise, within the boundaries of the City, regardless of whether the business is operated from a fixed location within the boundaries of the City.

(L) “Flat rate” or “flat rate tax” means a fixed amount assessed per business location or, alternatively, a fixed scale of amounts whose sum is variable depending on the number of factors constituting the basis for determination of the license tax. The term “flat rate” or “flat rate tax” as used in this chapter includes any tax based on the number of persons engaged or employed in a business.

(M) “Home occupation” means any business activity conducted for gain by a resident of a dwelling, which business is conducted as a lawful accessory use in the resident’s dwelling unit.

(N) “Independent contractor” means a person who is engaged to aid in the business of any other person, whether as a professional as defined herein, or whether pursuant to any license, certificate or registration authorized by the California Business and Professions Code, as the same now exists or as may hereafter be amended, and who receives remuneration either through commission, or pursuant to any contract of employment not involving the payment of regular wages or salary.

(O) “Manufacture or process” means all activities of a commercial or industrial nature wherein labor or skill is applied to materials, by hand or machinery, so that, as a result thereof, a new, different or useful article of tangible personal property or article of trade or commerce is produced. Said term shall include the production or fabrication of specially made or custom-made articles.

(P) “Manufacturer” means any person who, either directly, or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufactures for sale or for commercial or industrial use any articles, substances or commodities.

(Q) “Mobile recycling unit” means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. “Mobile recycling unit” also means bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials.

(R) “Person” means any individual, domestic or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint-stock company, partnership, joint venture, club, business or common law trust, society, estate, receiver, retirement plan, trustee, or any other group or combination of individuals or entities acting as a unit.

(S) “Professional” means any person, including any professional corporation, wherever located, engaged in or carrying on, within the City, any profession requiring satisfactory compliance with written or oral examination standards adopted by a branch of the state or federal government. Such professions include, but are not limited to, architects, attorneys, accountants, auditors, audiologists, chiropractors, clinical social workers, dentists, electrologists, engineers, geologists, gemologists, herbalists, marriage, family and child counselors, morticians, naturopaths, nurses (registered), oculists, opticians, optometrists, osteopaths, physicians, podiatrists, psychologists, speech pathologists, surveyors and veterinarians.

(T) “Public storage” means the business of renting or leasing storage units or recreational vehicle storage space to the public.

(U) “Race track” means a business establishment that provides a track for vehicles upon which automotive races are held.

(V) “Rental of commercial property” means and includes renting, leasing, providing, exchanging or trading, without loss of ownership, any real property for industrial, commercial, office, warehouse or other entrepreneurial uses or purposes.

(W) “Rental of residential property” means and includes renting, leasing, providing, exchanging or trading, without loss of ownership, any land, dwelling, building, premises or portion thereof for the purpose of occupancy, sleeping, lodging, boarding, or other use.

(X) “Service industries” means the business of providing, maintaining, or performing labor for the benefit of another within the City; or of supplying some general demand for the benefit of another within the City which does not produce a tangible commodity; or all activities in which any person performs any personal service for another and all services in which any real or personal property, stocks or bonds, or other financial instruments, or evidences of debt, or contracts of insurance or any money or credits are exchanged, leased, transferred, or loaned; as well as every business of maintaining, storing, cleaning; improving or repairing tangible commodities within the City whether or not such business is conducted from a premises, a vehicle, or mobile location within or outside the City. Services include recreation services but do not include theatrical performances, exhibitions, or temporary amusements nor do they include professional services, or telephone services within the terms of this chapter.

(Y) “Swap meet” means a business enterprise consisting of multiple booths, concessions, stalls or kiosks at which goods, wares or merchandise are sold or traded to the general public.

(Z) “Taxpayer” means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.

(AA) “Wholesale business” means the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise or other products for the purpose of resale and not to the ultimate consumer. (Ord. 943 § 2, 1991; Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.040 Business license required.
(A) Generally. It is unlawful for any person to commence or conduct, to purport to commence or conduct, or to engage in any business, either directly or indirectly, in the City without first procuring a business license and paying the required tax therefor.

(B) Advertising Businesses. No person shall advertise or announce a business located in the City unless a business license for such business has been obtained pursuant to this chapter. Advertising or announcing includes, but is not limited to, disseminating pamphlets or handbills, publishing newspaper announcements, and purchasing radio or television commercials. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.050 Business licenses – Duration.
Business licenses shall be valid for a period not to exceed 15 months and shall be issued on a quarterly basis. Therefore, business licenses issued between January 1st through March 31st shall be valid through March 31st of the following year; business licenses issued between April 1st and June 30th shall be valid through June 30th of the following year; business licenses issued between July 1st through September 30th shall be valid through September 30th of the following year; and business licenses issued between October 1st through December 31st shall be valid through December 31st of the following year. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.060 Business license taxes – Payment.
(A) Method of Payment. Business license taxes shall be paid in advance to the Director in lawful money of the United States or by a check or money order drawn on a bank in the United States. Any license issued upon payment by check shall be void if such check fails to clear the bank.

(B) Due Date. Renewals of business license taxes shall be due and payable, pursuant to PMC 3.44.050, on March 31st, June 30th, September 30th and December 31st, as may be applicable. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.070 Business license taxes – Delinquencies.
(A) Generally. All business license taxes shall become delinquent if not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the date that the tax becomes due and payable. If the date that the tax becomes due and payable falls on a Saturday, Sunday, a date on which City offices are closed, or a national or state holiday, the tax will be delinquent if not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the next working day.

(B) Penalties. For failure to pay the business license tax when due, the Director shall add a penalty of 25 percent of the entire license tax, or unpaid portion thereof, on the first day of each month commencing after the due date. The aggregate amount of such penalties shall in no event exceed 50 percent of the amount of the original business license tax due and owing.

(C) Collections. The Director may authorize any delinquent account to be assigned to a collection agency. All delinquent accounts assigned to a collection agency shall be subject to the payment of a collection processing fee, in addition to all applicable penalties. Said collection processing fee shall be in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. U-1001 § 1, 1992; Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.080 Business licenses – Issuance to persons operating under fictitious names.
A business license may be issued to a person operating under a fictitious business name who has complied with all of the applicable provisions of the Business and Professions Code of this state. Otherwise, all licenses shall be issued in the true name of the person applying for a license, and must appear as such on the application for a license. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.090 Unlawful business.
No business license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any business activity which is prohibited under the laws of the United States, the federal and state Constitutions, this code or any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation. Any such business license shall be void. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.100 Duplicate license.
A licensee shall report to the Director the loss of any license, whether in the form of a sticker, tag, card or paper, or otherwise. The Director shall issue the licensee a duplicate and cancel the lost license upon the payment of the fee established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.110 Presentment of license.
(A) Posting. Every person required to have a business license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and who conducts, manages or carries on a business activity at a fixed location shall keep such license posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business.

(B) Carrying. Every person required to have a business license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and who does not have a fixed place of business shall carry such license at all times when conducting the business activity for which such license was issued.

(C) Presentation on Demand. Every person required to have a business license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall produce the license when requested by any City official who is authorized to issue or collect license taxes, or who is authorized to conduct inspections or otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter or of this code. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.120 Substitute for other provisions.
No person required by this chapter to pay license taxes shall be relieved from the payment of any applicable regulatory or permit fees or from compliance with any regulations required by any other provisions of this code. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.130 Director – Duties.
(A) Generally. The Director shall put in writing all necessary rules and regulations to implement the provisions of this chapter and shall do all things necessary and proper to carry out the purpose and intent of this chapter.

(B) Apportionment of Taxes. The Director, in consultation with the City Attorney, may promulgate guidelines for the apportionment of business license taxes for businesses which operate both inside and outside the City to assist taxpayers in calculating that portion of their activities which are subject to the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.140 No license issued or renewed where applicant is indebted to City.
No business license shall knowingly be issued or renewed when, at the time of making application for any license, or renewal thereof, the applicant is indebted to the City for any unpaid license tax, permit fees, transient occupancy taxes, or unpaid invoices for any rates, fees or charges imposed pursuant to this code. The Director may enter into an agreement with any person so indebted to the City to establish a payment schedule for such indebtedness and any delinquencies and interest thereon. In such agreement, the debtor shall acknowledge such debt to the City and shall agree that if any default occurs in the payment of any installment agreed to be paid thereunder, the entire amount to be paid shall become immediately due and payable, and that, if suit is brought to enforce collection of the amount agreed to be paid under such agreement, the debtor will pay all costs of suit incurred by the City, including reasonable attorneys’ fees.

If such an agreement is executed, and all other provisions of this chapter are complied with, a license for the current or ensuing license period may be issued to such person upon payment of the license tax prescribed for the current or ensuing license period, together with any penalties thereon. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.150 License not transferable.
No license issued pursuant to this chapter may be transferred; provided, however, that where a license is issued authorizing a person to conduct business at a particular location, the licensee may, upon application and payment of a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, have the previously issued license amended so as to authorize the conduct of such business from a new and different location, except as may otherwise be provided in this chapter. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.160 Preparation and issuance of licenses.
The Director shall prepare and issue licenses to every person who pays the business license tax required by this chapter. When the required license tax has been paid, the Director shall deliver the original license to the licensee named therein and shall retain a copy thereof on file with the City. Each license shall designate the amount of the tax paid, the date of expiration, the name of the licensee, the business licensed, and, if a fixed or established place of business, the address at which such business is to be conducted. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.170 Errors in issuance of licenses.
No error or mistake on the part of any person issuing a license, including the determination of the amount of any license tax due shall preclude the collection by or for the City of the amount actually due from anyone commencing or conducting any business subject to such license tax. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.180 Licenses for each business activity.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a separate license shall be obtained and a separate tax paid for every separate business or branch establishment. Each license shall authorize the licensee named therein to commence and conduct only the business activity described in such license and only at the location designated therein. Any person who operates a separately owned department or concession in a department store or similar retail establishment shall pay a license tax in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the department or concession so operated by such person. Two or more persons shall not jointly apply for or be issued one business license to cover two or more businesses separately owned. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.190 Enforcement.
(A) Inspection. The Director may inspect all places of business in the City to ascertain whether there has been compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The Director and any duly authorized employee of the City shall have the power to examine the books and records of all persons licensed to do business for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of license taxes required to be paid and shall have the power and authority to enter, at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed by this chapter and to demand the production of the business license, books, records and other documents.

Every person subject to the provisions of this chapter shall maintain complete records concerning all personnel employed in, or in relation to, the business conducted by such person, including payroll records, personnel records, withholding tax records, and all records and reports as to labor, wages, or personnel made to, or required to be kept by, all regulatory agencies. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. No person required to keep records under this section shall refuse to allow any authorized representative of the Director to inspect said records at reasonable times and places.

(B) Enforcement Accountant. For the purpose of enforcement of this chapter, the Director may, with the prior consent of the City Council, engage or designate a qualified accountant to examine the books and records of any person doing business in the City. Any failure or refusal on the part of any person licensed or required to be licensed under this chapter to produce documents or to permit their examination by such accountant shall constitute a violation of this code.

(C) Enforcement Remedies. The conviction of any person for violating any provisions of this chapter shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax for a business, nor shall the payment of any license tax preclude a criminal prosecution for the violation of any provisions of this chapter. All remedies prescribed hereunder shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing this chapter. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.200 Evidence of doing business.
The use of signs, circulars, cards, telephone books, directories, newspapers, or other advertising media by which a person represents that such person is doing business in the City, may be used as evidence that the person is doing business in the City. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.210 Refunds.
No license tax shall be refunded unless it is determined by the Director that the tax has been paid in error, computed incorrectly, overpaid, or collected illegally. No refund shall be made unless a request is received by the Director within one year of the payment of the license tax. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.220 Permit prerequisite.
The Director shall not issue any license for any business, profession, trade, commercial enterprise or occupation for which a business permit is required pursuant to PMC Title 5 until such permit is obtained. The Director shall not issue a license if any such permit has been revoked or has expired and has not been reinstated or renewed. Any license issued under this chapter for any business, profession, trade, commercial enterprise or occupation for which a business permit is required by PMC Title 5, or by any other provision of this code, shall be void upon the revocation or expiration of any such permit. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.225 Occupancy review or home occupation permit.
No license shall be issued or renewed by the Director unless and until the applicant submits evidence that an occupancy review of the existing or proposed business premises has been undertaken or that a home occupation permit has been obtained. (Ord. 943 § 3, 1991)

3.44.230 Application.
Every person desiring to conduct, manage, or carry on any business, profession, trade, commercial enterprise or occupation in the City shall file with the Director a form provided by the City, sworn to or made under penalty of perjury, setting forth the following information, as may be applicable:

(A) The name, home address and telephone number, Social Security number, and California driver’s license number of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as set forth in its articles of incorporation. Additionally, there shall be included the names, addresses and telephone numbers of all directors, any stockholder holding 10 percent or more of the shares of the corporation, and the name, home address and telephone number of an officer who is duly authorized to accept service of legal process. If the applicant is a partnership, the names, home addresses and telephone numbers of each general partner shall be stated. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply to that partner;

(B) The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested, including each separate and distinct type of business conducted or to be conducted on the premises under the same ownership;

(C) The true address of the intended business. A person may not use a post office box, mailbox, message service or other similar device as the true address of the business for purposes of this chapter. A post office box, mailbox, message service or other similar device may be used as the mailing address of the business for business purposes only. If the business is not to be carried on at any permanent location, the application shall include the residence addresses of the owners of the business;

(D)(1) If the business for which a license is sought has existed for at least one year immediately preceding the date of the application, the total number of employees, each of whom worked 1,800 hours during that one-year period, and the total aggregate number of hours worked by all other employees during that one-year period.

(2) If the business has not existed for at least one year immediately preceding the date of the application, the date on which the business commenced, and the total number of hours worked by all employees during the period from the first day of the first calendar month beginning after commencement of said business to and including the calendar month in which the application is made;

(E) The estimated average number of employees the applicant expects to employ during the year for which the license is to be issued;

(F) Any additional information which the Director deems necessary and appropriate. (Ord. 943 § 4, 1991; Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.240 Renewal license application.
In all cases, an applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the Director a statement sworn to or made under penalty of perjury setting forth such information concerning the applicant’s business during the preceding year as may be required to enable the Director to ascertain the amount of license tax to be paid by the taxpayer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.250 Exemptions.
(A) General Exemptions. Except as otherwise provided herein, no license tax shall be required of:

(1) The federal government or the state of California, or any political subdivisions, agencies or instrumentalities thereof;

(2) Any person engaging in any business exempt from the payment of such tax by virtue of the Constitution or laws of the state of California, or the Constitution or laws of the United States; or

(3) Any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, cultural or civic organization, and any other organization, whether incorporated or not, described in Article 1, Chapter 4, Part II of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California; provided, however, that any such organization shall be required to obtain a license and pay the applicable license taxes if and to the extent it engages in any “unrelated trade or business” as that term is used in Section 23734 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code.

(B) Limited Exemptions. The Director, upon application being made therefor, and upon the applicant presenting evidence of its eligibility therefor, shall issue a business license endorsed as partially or wholly exempt from taxes as follows:

(1) A minor under the age of 18 years engaged in activities requiring a license under this chapter where such minor engages in those activities for no more than 20 hours in any week;

(2) Any veteran or widow of any veteran of any United States war or conflict who is a resident of the City shall be entitled to a credit of $25.00 against the business license tax required by this chapter in any year in which the net income of such person from the business is (or is established to be in the case of an initial license) less than $10,000 per year; and

(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B)(2) of this section:

(a) Every honorably discharged or honorably relieved soldier, sailor, or marine of the United States who served in any Indian war, the Spanish-American War, any Philippine insurrection, the Chinese Relief Expedition, the World War of 1914 and years following, or World War II, who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a voter of this state, may distribute circulars, and hawk, peddle, and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous malt, vinous, or other intoxicating liquor, without payment of any license tax or fee whatsoever; provided, however, that he is registered with the City, and the Director shall issue to such soldier, sailor or marine, without cost, a license therefor.

(b) Every person who was honorably discharged or honorably relieved from the military, naval or air service of the United States who served on or after June 27, 1950, and prior to February 1, 1955, or on or after August 5, 1964, and prior to a future date to be established by the Legislature, who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who is a resident of this state may distribute circulars, and hawk, peddle, and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous, or other intoxicating liquor, without payment of any license tax or fee whatsoever, and the Director shall issue to such person, upon registering with the City, a license therefor without cost.

(C) Exempt Licenses to Be Endorsed. Whenever the Director issues a license which is subject to any exemption provided for in this section, the person to whom such license is issued shall endorse the license in the presence of the Director, and no such license shall be transferable. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.260 Confidential information.
Information regarding gross receipts furnished or secured pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be confidential, shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be maintained in such a manner that it is not disclosed to anyone who is not charged with the administration of this chapter. Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

(A) The disclosure to, or examination of such information by, a City official, employee, or agent responsible for the collection of license taxes, for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter;

(B) The disclosure of such information to a grand jury or court of law, upon subpoena;

(C) The disclosure of such information to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular person or licensee hereunder;

(D) The disclosure, after the filing by licensee of a written request to that effect, to the licensee or to the licensee’s successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information regarding the computation of any paid or unpaid license tax, or amounts of license tax and any penalties required to be collected; provided, however, that the City Attorney shall approve each such disclosure and the Director may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when, in the opinion of the Director, the public interest in disclosure is outweighed by the public interest saved by not making the information public; and

(E) The disclosure to the City Council, by way of public meeting or otherwise, of such information as may be necessary to enable the City Council to be fully advised as to the facts when a licensee files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted by the City for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter in the course of City business. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.270 Failure to file statement or corrected statement.
If any person fails to file any required statement within the time prescribed, or, after demand therefor made by the Director, fails to file a corrected statement, or if any person subject to the provisions of this chapter fails to apply for a license, the Director may determine the amount of license tax due from such person by means of such information as the Director may be able to obtain.

If such a determination is made, the Director shall give written notice of the amount of license tax so assessed by serving it on the licensee personally or by depositing such notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the person so assessed at such person’s last known address. Such person may, within 15 days after the mailing or serving of such notice, make application in writing to the Director for a hearing on the amount of the license tax. If such application is made, the Director shall cause the matter to be set for hearing by the City Council within 30 days. The Director shall give such person at least 10 days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. The City Council shall consider all evidence produced at such hearing and shall make findings thereon, which shall be final and conclusive. Notice of such findings shall be served upon the applicant or licensee in the manner prescribed above for serving notices of assessment. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.280 Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Director may appeal to the City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall give written notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving such notice personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at the address shown on such notice of appeal, or if none, at such person’s last known address. The City Council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.290 Business classifications and license taxes.
(A) Classification A – Services Industries. All persons engaged in service industries shall pay a flat rate tax, plus a flat rate per employee.

(B) Classification B – Retail, Wholesale and Manufacturing. All persons engaging in retail, wholesale, or manufacturing businesses shall be in classification B and shall pay a flat-rate tax, plus a flat tax per employee and per square foot of business floor area.

(C) Classification C – Contractors. All persons engaged as a contractor or subcontractor shall be in classification C and shall pay a flat rate tax.

(D) Classification D – Professions. All persons engaged in a business of a professional nature shall be in classification D, and shall pay a flat rate tax for each professional employee, plus a flat tax for each nonprofessional employee.

(E) Classification E – Residential Property – Renting and Leasing. Every person engaged in the business of leasing residential property shall be in classification E and shall pay a flat rate tax per unit.

(F) Classification F – Commercial Property – Rental and Leasing. Every person engaged in the leasing of commercial property shall be in classification F and shall pay a flat rate tax per unit.

(G) Classification G – Agencies Lenders, Brokerages, and Other Similar Services. Every person engaged in the business of an agency, lender, brokerage, or other similar business shall be in classification G and shall pay a flat rate tax.

(H) Classification H – Home Occupations. Every person engaged in a home occupation shall be in classification H and shall pay a flat rate tax.

(I) Classification I – Swap Meet. Every person operating a swap meet shall be in classification I and shall pay a flat rate tax.

(J) Classification J – Race Track. Every person operating a race track shall be in classification J and shall pay a flat rate tax.

(K) Classification K – Vehicles. Every business which uses vehicles as a regular and substantial part of its business shall be in classification K and shall pay a flat rate tax per vehicle and shall provide proof of insurance for each such vehicle. Further, food truck operators shall provide proof of health permit for each such vehicle.

(L) Classification L – Entertainment and Amusement. Every person operating a business of entertainment or amusement for which an admission fee is charged shall be in classification L and shall pay a flat rate tax.

(M) Classification M – Advertising Medium. Every person who owns an advertising bench, billboard, searchlight or sound truck which are leased, rented or sold for the purpose of advertising a message shall be in classification M and shall pay a flat rate tax.

(N) Classification N – Newsracks. Every person who operates a newsrack shall be in classification N and shall pay a tax based on gross receipts.

(O) Classification O – Amusement Devices and Video Machines. Every person who owns an amusement device or video machine shall be in classification O and shall pay a tax based on gross receipts.

(P) Classification P – Vending Machines. Every person who owns a vending machine shall be in classification P and shall pay a tax based on gross receipts.

(Q) Classification Q – Bowling Alleys. Every person who operates a bowling alley shall be in classification Q and shall pay a flat tax plus a tax per alley.

(R) Classification R – Antique Malls. Every person who operates an antique mall shall be in classification R and shall pay a flat rate tax per booth and per employee.

(S) Classification S – Launderette and Self-Service Dry Cleaners. Every person who owns a launderette or self-service dry cleaners shall be in classification S and shall pay a tax based on gross receipts.

(T) Classification U – Mobile Recycling Units. Every person who engages in the business of operating mobile recycling units shall be in classification U and shall pay a flat rate per unit; provided, however, that residential refuse haulers operating under a franchise with the City shall be excluded from this classification.

(U) Classification V – Laundry Equipment. Every person whose business is limited exclusively to renting, leasing or operating laundry equipment, whether or not coin-operated, shall be in classification V and shall pay a tax based upon the entire gross receipts of such business derived within the City, regardless of the number of business locations or machines of such business within the City; provided, however, that this classification shall not apply to coin-operated laundry equipment owned and operated by a retail establishment which provides coin-operated laundry equipment for general public use. (Ord. U-1001 § 2, 1992; Ord. 978 § 2, 1992; Ord. 943 §§ 5, 6, 1991; Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.300 Tax amounts.
The amount of taxes to be paid by each classification of business enterprises shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

3.44.310 Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this chapter. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 897 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 3.45
PUBLIC FACILITY DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEE REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

3.45.010    Findings and intent.

3.45.020    Residential public facility development impact fee required.

3.45.030    Nonresidential public facility development impact fee required.

3.45.040    Exemptions from, and reduction of, public facility development impact fee.

3.45.050    Fee adjustment.

3.45.060    Use of funds.

3.45.070    Calculation of fees.

3.45.010 Findings and intent.
(A) The City Council finds that Palmdale is a rapidly growing city. The projected increase in population is reasonably expected to create a substantial increase in the demand placed upon public facilities, including public safety and library facilities. The City’s existing general public facilities will be inadequate to handle the projected population growth at existing levels of service. In order to serve the projected population growth, the facilities must be expanded.

(B) It is the intent of the City Council to require every person who develops land to mitigate the impacts of that development on the City’s public facilities. The City will therefore require developers to pay a public facility development impact fee that will be used to meet the demand for public facilities created by development.

(C) The amount of the public facility development impact fees collected in accordance with this chapter will be limited to the cost of the facilities attributable to new development. The amount of the public facility development impact fees collected will not include the cost of facilities to serve existing development. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 2004)

3.45.020 Residential public facility development impact fee required.
(A) Except as provided in PMC 3.45.040, a public facility development impact fee for a single dwelling residential building must be paid, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, upon the date of the final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first. If the residential development contains more than one dwelling, the public facility development impact fee must be paid on a lump-sum basis when the first dwelling in the development or development phase receives its final inspection or certificate of occupancy, whichever occurs first.

(B) For the purposes of this section, the terms “final inspection” and “certificate of occupancy” have the same meaning as described in Government Code Section 66007, as amended.

(C) The public facility development impact fee will not be levied against any new additions, which are under 2,000 square feet, or development on rural or public use land, nor will the public facility development impact fee be levied against any building for which a building permit has been issued on or before August 9, 2004. However, any project with a specific condition imposed upon it to participate in an appropriate general public facilities financing mechanism does not qualify for this exclusion and shall remain subject to the public facility development impact fee. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 2004)

3.45.030 Nonresidential public facility development impact fee required.
(A) Except as provided in PMC 3.45.040, a public facility development impact fee for a nonresidential building must be paid, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council, upon the date of the final inspection, or the date the certificate of occupancy is issued, whichever occurs first.

(B) For the purposes of this section, the terms “final inspection” and “certificate of occupancy” have the same meaning as described in Government Code Section 66007, as amended.

(C) The public facility development impact fee will not be levied against any new additions which are under 2,000 square feet, or development on rural or public use land, nor will the public facility development impact fee be levied against any building for which a building permit has been issued on or before August 9, 2004. However, any project with a specific condition imposed upon it to participate in an appropriate general public facilities financing mechanism does not qualify for this exclusion and shall remain subject to the public facility development impact fee. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 2004)

3.45.040 Exemptions from, and reduction of, public facility development impact fee.
(A) A developer is entitled to a reduction in the public facility development impact fee required by PMC 3.45.020 and 3.45.030 if the developer constructs public facilities pursuant to a public facilities plan adopted by the City Council. The public facility development impact fee will be reduced by the amount of engineering and construction costs that would reasonably be incurred by the City in building those same public facilities. The amount of the reduction in the public facility development impact fee is subject to the approval of the Director of Public Works prior to construction of the development.

(B) If a developer constructs public facilities pursuant to a plan adopted by the City Council, and if the City’s engineering and construction costs to construct those same facilities would have been more than the fee assessed to that developer pursuant to PMC 3.45.020 and 3.45.030, then nothing in this section prevents the City from entering into a reimbursement agreement with that developer, subject to the availability of funds.

(C) The City Manager may reduce the amount of the public facility development impact fee required by PMC 3.45.030 if the City Manager determines that a development will generate extraordinary sales tax revenue for the City and thereby confer an extraordinary financial benefit upon the City. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 2004)

3.45.050 Fee adjustment.
(A) Application for Fee Adjustment.

(1) Any developer whose development is subject to the public facility development impact fee required by this chapter may apply to the Director of public works for a reduction in that fee based upon the demonstrable absence of a reasonable relationship between the impact of that development on the City’s public facilities and either the amount of public facility development impact fee charged, or the type of public facilities and improvements to be constructed and purchased. The application must be made in writing and filed with the Director of Public Works not later than 90 days after approval of the development project. If no application for discretionary review is required for the development, then the application for fee waiver must be made in writing and filed within 90 days after the City issues a building permit for the development. The application must state in detail the factual basis for the request for reduction.

(2) Failure to file a timely application for reduction deprives the Director of Public Works of jurisdiction to consider that application.

(3) The Director must make a decision on the application for reduction within 30 calendar days after the application has been filed. Notice of the Director’s decision must be mailed to the applicant, postage prepaid.

(B) Invalidation of Fee Reduction. If a reduction is granted pursuant to this section, then any subsequent change in the design of the subject development that may impact the demand for general public facilities, or any increase in the square footage of the development, will invalidate the reduction.

(C) Processing of Protests. The procedure set forth in this section will implement Government Code Section 66020, or any successor statute, and will serve as the City’s method for processing protests filed pursuant to that section. Prior to the effective date of the City’s approval of the development, or, if no discretionary review is required, then prior to the issuance of a building permit, a developer that is subject to this chapter must sign and acknowledge receipt of a notice informing the developer of the amount of the public facility development impact fee imposed upon the development. The acknowledgment of the notice will not be deemed a waiver of the developer’s right to protest the imposition and to request a fee adjustment under this section. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 2004)

3.45.060 Use of funds.
All public facility development impact fees paid and collected as authorized by this chapter must be placed in one or more funds and used solely for the purpose of constructing, expanding, or rehabilitating the public facilities set forth in the Public Facilities Impact Fee Final Report, dated December, 2003. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 2004)

3.45.070 Calculation of fees.
A developer subject to the public facility development impact fee required by PMC 3.45.020 or 3.45.030 must pay the amount of the fee that is in effect when the fee becomes due. Furthermore, any fee imposed on a development that is protected by vested rights acquired through a vesting subdivision map will be the amount in effect at the time the rights became vested, plus any adjustment for inflation made between that date and the date that the fee becomes due. (Ord. 1233 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 3.46
PALMDALE SPECIAL TAX DISTRICT FINANCING CODE
Sections:

3.46.010    Findings and intent.

3.46.020    Incorporation of Mello-Roos Act.

3.46.030    Additional powers of community facilities districts.

3.46.040    Provisions of Mello-Roos Act that are not applicable.

3.46.050    Provisions of Mello-Roos Act that are modified.

3.46.010 Findings and intent.
(A) The City Council finds that the provision of potable water to developing areas of the City is essential to the development of housing and other facilities and is a municipal purpose.

(B) The City Council finds that the Mello-Roos Community Facilities Act of 1982, as amended, constituting Section 53311 et seq. of the California Government Code (the “Mello-Roos Act”) provides for the financing of certain public improvements and municipal services needed for developing areas in the State of California, but does not provide for the financing of water rights and related costs to provide water to such developing areas.

(C) The City Council desires to provide a means to finance the acquisition of water rights and costs related thereto, and to otherwise provide for an efficient means to form community facilities districts under the Mello-Roos Act, as included in this chapter and as otherwise supplemented and amended hereby. (Ord. 1479 § 1, 2015)

3.46.020 Incorporation of Mello-Roos Act.
(A) Except as provided in this chapter, the provisions of the Mello-Roos Act are by this reference incorporated herein.

(B) In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the Mello-Roos Act or any other provision of law, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. (Ord. 1479 § 1, 2015)

3.46.030 Additional powers of community facilities districts.
(A) In addition to the services authorized to be financed by a community facilities district as described in Section 53313 of the Mello-Roos Act, a community facilities district formed under the provisions of this chapter may finance any other municipal service which the City is authorized by law to provide.

(B) In addition to the facilities authorized to be financed by a community facilities district as described in Section 53313.5 of the Mello-Roos Act, and without regard to the provisions of Section 53313.5 of the Mello-Roos Act which shall not apply to the following, a community facilities district formed under the provisions of this chapter may finance (1) annual or one-time payments for the acquisition of water rights, and for payment of other water-supply related costs of the City or any other public agency, including but not limited to energy and wheeling charges, costs of banking water for future use or sale, and administrative expenses of the City and other public agencies in connection therewith; and (2) any other facilities, public or private, which the City is authorized by law to contribute revenue to, or to construct, own or operate. (Ord. 1479 § 1, 2015)

3.46.040 Provisions of Mello-Roos Act that are not applicable.
(A) Notwithstanding PMC 3.46.020, the following provisions of the Mello-Roos Act shall not apply to community facilities districts formed under the authority of this chapter, or otherwise to extensions of authorized facilities and services, changes in special taxes, annexations of territory, levies of special taxes, or the incurrence of bonded indebtedness with respect to community facilities districts formed under the authority of this chapter (all references below to sections are to sections of the California Government Code, as in effect on the date of adoption by the City Council of Ordinance No. 1479): (1) Section 53312; (2) Section 53312.7; (3) Section 53312.8; (4) Section 53315.6; (5) Section 53316.2; (6) Section 53316.4; (7) Section 53316.6; (8) Section 53325.6; (9) Section 53329.5; (10) Section 53332; (11) Section 53333; (12) Section 53340.1(b); (13) Section 53343.1; (14) Section 53345.8; (15) Section 53356.05; (16) Section 53363.5; and (17) Section 53365.

(B) In addition to the foregoing, the portions of the following provisions of the Mello-Roos Act shall not apply to community facilities districts formed under the authority of this chapter (all references below to sections are to sections of the California Government Code, as in effect on the date of adoption by the City Council of Ordinance No. 1479):

(1) The second and third paragraphs of Section 53313;

(2) The third sentence of Section 53313.5;

(3) The second sentence of Section 53313.5(g);

(4) The second sentence of Section 53313.5(h);

(5) The second sentence of Section 5313.5(i)(1)(A);

(6) The second sentence of Section 53313.5(i)(1)(B);

(7) The second sentence of Section 53313.5(i)(2);

(8) The second and third sentences of Section 53313.5(j)(1);

(9) The second sentence of Section 53317(f);

(10) The last sentence of Section 53326(b); and

(11) The provisions of Section 53328.1(d). (Ord. 1479 § 1, 2015)

3.46.050 Provisions of Mello-Roos Act that are modified.
(A) Notwithstanding PMC 3.46.020, the following provisions of the Mello-Roos Act shall apply, as modified as set forth below, to community facilities districts formed under the authority of this chapter, or otherwise to extensions of authorized facilities and services, changes in special taxes, annexations of territory, levies of special taxes, or the incurrence of bonded indebtedness with respect to community facilities districts formed under the authority of this chapter (all references below to sections are to sections of the California Government Code, as in effect on the date of adoption by the City Council of Ordinance No. 1479):

(1) The reference to “one million dollars ($1,000,000)” in Section 53313.51(b) is hereby modified to be “one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000)”;

(2) The provisions of Section 53317(g) are hereby modified in whole to read as follows: “Legislative body means the City Council of the City of Palmdale”;

(3) The provisions of Section 53317(h) are hereby modified in whole to read as follows: “Local agency means the City of Palmdale, California”;

(4) The reference to “not less than 30” in Section 53321(e) is hereby modified to be “not less than 10”;

(5) The reference to “at least 90 days” in Section 53326(a) is hereby modified to be “at least 45 days”;

(6) The reference to “not be less than 30” in Section 53334 and in Section 53339.3 is hereby modified to be “not to be less than 10”;

(7) The reference to “pursuant to this chapter” in Section 53340(d) is hereby modified to be “pursuant to the Mello-Roos Act or Chapter 3.46 of the Palmdale Municipal Code”;

(8) The reference to “authorized by this chapter” in Section 53343 is hereby modified to be “authorized by the Mello-Roos Act or Chapter 3.46 of the Palmdale Municipal Code”; and

(9) The provisions of Section 53345(d) are hereby modified to add thereto, at the end thereof, the following: “, which hearing shall not be less than 10 days after the adoption of the resolution.” (Ord. 1479 § 1, 2015)

Title 4
MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Chapters:

4.01    Municipal Election Dates

4.04    Fair Campaign Practices

4.08    Repealed

4.10    Electoral District Boundaries

4.11    Councilmember Terms

4.12    Filling City Council Vacancies

4.16    Repealed

Chapter 4.01
MUNICIPAL ELECTION DATES
Sections:

4.01.010    Change of election day.

4.01.020    Concurrent or consolidated election.

4.01.030    Adjustment of terms of office.

4.01.040    Notice to voters.

4.01.050    Environmental review.

4.01.060    Effective date.

4.01.070    Date for the first City Council election in November of even-numbered years.

4.01.080    Settlement of lawsuit and compliance with Los Angeles County Superior Court order.

4.01.010 Change of election day.
Pursuant to Sections 1301 and 10403.5 of the California Elections Code, the day of the general municipal election in the City of Palmdale, California, is moved from the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of odd-numbered years to the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of even-numbered years. (Ord. 1470 § 1, 2015)

4.01.020 Concurrent or consolidated election.
Pursuant to Section 1301 of the California Elections Code, the City hereby requests that the County of Los Angeles approve consolidation of the City’s November City Council election with the statewide general election conducted by the County in November of each even-numbered year. If the County denies the City’s request for consolidation, the City alternatively requests that, pursuant to Section 1301 of the Elections Code, the County permit the City to conduct its election concurrently with future statewide general elections (employing a separate ballot from that of the County) unless and until such time as Los Angeles County approves the consolidation of the City Council election with the statewide general election, in which case the City Council election will be consolidated with the County election. (Ord. 1470 § 2, 2015)

4.01.030 Adjustment of terms of office.
In accordance with Sections 1301 and 10403.5(d) of the California Elections Code, the settlement agreement and the Court’s order, and because of the change of election date, the terms of office of those members of the City Council presently serving whose terms would previously have expired in November 2013 or those whose terms would expire in November 2015 shall instead continue in their offices until certification of the results and administration of oaths of office after the November 2016 general municipal election. (Ord. 1470 § 3, 2015)

4.01.040 Notice to voters.
If the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors approves the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City elections official shall cause a notice to be mailed to registered voters within the City of Palmdale as required by Elections Code Section 10403.5(e). (Ord. 1470 § 4, 2015)

4.01.050 Environmental review.
The City Council finds that the ordinance codified in this chapter is not subject to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) pursuant to Sections 15060(c)(2) and 15061(c)(3), i.e. respectively, that the activity will not result in a direct or reasonably foreseeable indirect physical change in the environment and it does not have the potential to cause a significant effect on the environment (CEQA Guidelines, California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Chapter 3). (Ord. 1470 § 5, 2015)

4.01.060 Effective date.
Pursuant to Elections Code Sections 1301 and 10403.5, the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not become effective until approved by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors (“effective date”). Within 30 days of the effective date, the City Clerk shall cause a notice to be mailed to all voters of the City informing them of the change in the election day. (Ord. 1470 § 6, 2015)

4.01.070 Date for the first City Council election in November of even-numbered years.
The first City Council election to be held in November of even-numbered years shall be November 2016 or the first Council election that is at least one year after Los Angeles County allows the City Council elections to be changed from November of odd-numbered years to November of even-numbered years, whichever is later. (Ord. 1470 § 7, 2015)

4.01.080 Settlement of lawsuit and compliance with Los Angeles County Superior Court order.
The ordinance codified in this chapter is being considered pursuant to a negotiated settlement of a lawsuit which settlement was approved and ordered by the Los Angeles County Superior Court and the California Court of Appeals. (Ord. 1470 § 8, 2015)

Chapter 4.04
FAIR CAMPAIGN PRACTICES
Sections:

4.04.010    Short title.

4.04.020    Purposes of chapter.

4.04.030    Application and scope of this chapter.

4.04.040    Interpretation of this chapter.

4.04.050    Statement of organization – Filing with City Clerk.

4.04.060    Reports of late contributions.

4.04.070    Reports of late independent expenditures.

4.04.080    Campaign statement required for late distribution of reproduced campaign material.

4.04.090    Required notices on reproduced campaign material.

4.04.100    Filing copies of reproduced campaign material.

4.04.105    Use of City seal and other City marks prohibited.

4.04.110    Violations.

4.04.120    Injunctive relief.

4.04.130    Severability.

4.04.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “fair campaign practices ordinance” of the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.020 Purposes of chapter.
The City Council enacts this chapter in order to accomplish the following:

(A) To promote honesty, integrity and fairness in the electoral process by establishing and enforcing reasonable disclosure requirements which will not deprive or restrict any person in the exercise of rights guaranteed by the United States Constitution or the California Constitution.

(B) To ensure that voters will be fully informed and to inhibit improper campaign practices by requiring the full and truthful disclosure in election campaigns of certain contributions and expenditures which are received and made before the date of an election but after the closing date of the last campaign statement required to be filed by a candidate, committee or other person participating in such election.

(C) To provide a means for adequately identifying the source of financing of all mass distributions of reproduced campaign material directed at the voters immediately prior to an election in order to assist them in making their own appraisals of the reason or reasons why, and by whom, a particular candidate is being supported or opposed.

(D) To require identification of the senders and sources of financing of mass distributions of reproduced campaign materials immediately prior to an election so as to facilitate the ability of candidates to refute or rebut allegations, whether truthful or in the nature of smears, which may be asserted.

(E) To ensure that local elections will be the expression of the will of an undeceived, well-informed electorate. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.030 Application and scope of this chapter.
(A) To the extent that this chapter imposes reporting and filing requirements additional to or different from those set forth in Chapter 4 of Title 9 of the Government Code (Sections 84100 through 84400) for elections held in this City, such additional or different reporting and filing requirements shall apply only to candidates seeking election in this City, their controlled committees, committees formed or existing primarily to support or oppose their candidacies, and to committees formed or existing primarily to support or oppose a candidate who is being voted on only in this City, and to general purpose committees active only in this City.

(B) Nothing in this chapter shall exempt or excuse any person from compliance with all applicable provisions of the laws of this state, including the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended (Government Code Sections 81000 through 91015). (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.040 Interpretation of this chapter.
(A) Except as otherwise set forth in this section, the words, terms and phrases used herein shall have the same meanings as defined in the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended, which definitions are contained in Chapter 2 of Title 9 of the Government Code (Section 82000 et seq.).

(B) The definitions set forth below shall be applied in the interpretation and construction of this chapter:

(1) “Clearly identified” means that:

(a) The name of the candidate involved appears;

(b) A photograph or drawing of the candidate; or

(c) The identity of the candidate is apparent by unambiguous reference.

(2) “Committee” includes, without limitation, the following:

(a) “Committee,” as defined in Government Code Section 82013.

(b) “Controlled committee,” as defined in Government Code Section 82016.

(c) “General purpose committee,” as defined in Government Code Section 82027.5.

(d) “Primarily formed committee,” as defined in Government Code Section 82047.5.

(e) “Sponsored committee,” as defined in Government Code Section 82048.7.

(f) “Political committee,” as defined in Government Code Section 85102(c).

(g) “Broad based political committee,” as defined in Government Code Section 85102(d).

(3) “Mass distribution” means the dissemination of 200 or more substantially similar pieces of reproduced campaign literature by means of the mail, or any other method of distribution, circulation or display, before the date of an election but after the closing date of the last campaign statement required to be filed before the election.

(4) “Reproduced campaign material” means any written communication, including flyers, handbills, leaflets, letters, pamphlets, posters, brochures, circulars, and yard signs, which is (a) reproduced by any mechanical or electrical means including, but not limited to, printing, photocopying, mimeographing or silk screening, and (b) expressly advocates the election or defeat of a clearly identified candidate. “Reproduced campaign material” does not include items such as pins, buttons, matchbooks, pot holders, bumper stickers, pens, pencils and similar campaign materials containing a nominal amount of text and commonly used in election campaigns. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.050 Statement of organization – Filing with City Clerk.
(A) Each committee shall file a statement of organization with the City Clerk.

(B) Each candidate and committee shall comply with all the filing and reporting requirements of Government Code Section 84101 et seq., including, but not limited to, the late filing requirements in Government Code Section 84101(b). (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.060 Reports of late contributions.
(A) Each candidate or committee that makes or receives a late contribution, as defined in Government Code Section 82036, shall report the late contribution to the City Clerk.

(B) Each candidate and committee shall comply with all the late contribution filing and reporting requirements of Government Code Section 84203. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.070 Reports of late independent expenditures.
(A) Each candidate or committee that makes a late independent expenditure, as defined in Government Code Section 82036.5, shall report the late independent expenditure to the City Clerk.

(B) Each candidate and committee shall comply with all the late independent expenditure filing and reporting requirements of Government Code Section 84204. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989. Formerly 4.04.080)

4.04.080 Campaign statement required for late distribution of reproduced campaign material.
If a candidate, committee or other person disseminates a mass distribution of reproduced campaign material 16 days or fewer before an election, the candidate, committee or person responsible for the mass distribution of reproduced campaign material shall file or cause to be filed with the City Clerk a campaign statement with all of the information required by Government Code Section 84211. The period covered by the campaign statement shall be from the date of the last campaign statement filed with the City Clerk until, and including, the date of the mass distribution of reproduced campaign material. The campaign statement required by this section shall be filed with the City Clerk at the same time a copy of the reproduced campaign material is filed with City Clerk as required in PMC 4.04.100. A campaign statement filed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other requirement of this chapter or the Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013)

4.04.090 Required notices on reproduced campaign material.
(A) Reproduced campaign material which is disseminated by any mass distribution before the date of an election, but after the closing date of the last campaign statement required to be filed before the election, shall have affixed the following notices, as applicable:

(1) A “notice to voters,” in substantially the following form:

NOTICE TO VOTERS

(Required by Palmdale Municipal Code)

The names and addresses of all contributors of $100 or more to this [candidate/committee] as of the distribution date hereof are on file with the Palmdale City Clerk and available for public inspection.

(2) If the sender of the reproduced campaign material is a person or committee which is not controlled, directly or indirectly, by a candidate, and which does not act jointly with a candidate or a controlled committee in connection with the making of expenditures, the following supplemental notice shall be affixed, either separately or in combination with the notice required in subsection (A)(1) of this section:

NOTICE TO VOTERS

(Required by Palmdale Municipal Code)

This campaign material is not authorized or approved by any candidate or local election official. It is paid for by ________.

(Name)

_________________________________

Address       City        State        Zip Code

(B) Any notice required under the provisions of subsection (A) of this section shall appear on the reproduced campaign material in at least 10-point type, not subject to the half-tone or screening process, and in a printed or drawn box set apart from any other printed matter.

(C) If the reproduced campaign material is a mass mailing, as defined in Government Code Section 82041.5, and if the sender is a candidate, a committee or a controlled committee, the information required by Government Code Section 84305 shall also be set forth. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.100 Filing copies of reproduced campaign material.
The candidate, committee or other campaign responsible for a mass distribution of reproduced campaign material before the date of an election, but after the closing date of the last campaign statement required to be filed before the election, shall file or cause to be filed with the City Clerk a copy of each such item. The copy shall be filed with the City Clerk within 24 hours after all or any portion of such reproduced campaign material is first disseminated to the public and shall be filed with the campaign statement required by PMC 4.04.080. Copies filed with the City Clerk shall be a public record and available for public inspection. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.105 Use of City seal and other City marks prohibited.
No candidate, committee or campaign responsible for a mass distribution of reproduced campaign material shall include any image of the City seal or any emblem, symbol, slogan, logotype, or other distinctive mark of the City, in whole or in part, in its reproduced campaign material. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1341 § 2, 2008)

4.04.110 Violations.
(A) Any person who knowingly or wilfully violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(B) Whether a violation is inadvertent, negligent or deliberate, and the presence or absence of good faith, shall be considered in applying the remedies and sanctions of this section. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.120 Injunctive relief.
Any person residing in the City may sue for injunctive relief to enjoin violations or to compel compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

4.04.130 Severability.
If any provisions of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of this chapter, to the extent it can be given effect, or the application of those provisions to persons or circumstances other than those as to which it was held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and, to this end, the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 1441 § 1, 2013; Ord. 849 § 2, 1989)

Chapter 4.08
ELECTION CAMPAIGNS VOLUNTARY EXPENDITURE CEILING
(Repealed by Ord. 1350)

Chapter 4.10
ELECTORAL DISTRICT BOUNDARIES
Sections:

4.10.010    District boundaries.

4.10.020    Map.

4.10.010 District boundaries.
The following district boundaries are set forth in the amended judgment, and are hereby adopted as the electoral districts for the four City Council members of the City of Palmdale through the general municipal election in November 2020:

District #1

The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of City Boundary and E Ave P-8, and proceeding southerly along City Boundary to 30th St E, and proceeding southerly along 30th St E to E Ave R, and proceeding westerly along E Ave R to 17th St E, and proceeding northerly along 17th St E to E Palmdale Blvd, and proceeding westerly along E Palmdale Blvd to 12th St E, and proceeding southerly along 12th St E to E Ave R, and proceeding westerly along E Ave R to 10th St E, and proceeding southerly along 10th St E to E Ave S, and proceeding easterly along E Ave S to Palmdale Siding 2 RR, and proceeding easterly along Palmdale Siding 2 RR to Southern Pacific RR, and proceeding easterly along Southern Pacific RR to JOJOBA TER, and proceeding southerly along JOJOBA TER to 30th St E, and proceeding southerly along 30th St E to 30TH ST E, and proceeding northerly along 30TH ST E to Jojoba Ter, and proceeding easterly along Jojoba Ter to 33rd St E, and proceeding southerly along 33rd St E to Conestoga Canyon Rd, and proceeding easterly along Conestoga Canyon Rd to Jenna Ln, and proceeding southerly along Jenna Ln to Purple Sage Ln, and proceeding westerly along Purple Sage Ln to 33rd St E, and proceeding southerly along 33rd St E to Pearblossom Hwy, and proceeding easterly along Pearblossom Hwy to City Boundary, and proceeding southerly along City Boundary to TLID:627483510, and proceeding northerly along TLID:627483510 to TLID:142830567, and proceeding northerly along TLID:142830567 to TLLD:241215263, and proceeding easterly along TLID:241215263 to TLLD:241215641, and proceeding easterly along TLID:241215641 to TLID:241208656, and proceeding northerly along TLID:241208656 to TLID:142833675, and proceeding northerly along TLID:142833675 to TLlD:141864761, and proceeding northerly along TLID:141864761 to TLID:142705412, and proceeding northerly along TLID:142705412 to TLID:142705411, and proceeding northerly along TLID:142705411 to TLID:142705409, and proceeding northerly along TLID:142705409 to W City Ranch Rd, and proceeding easterly along W City Ranch Rd to TLID:141845802, and proceeding easterly along TLID:141845802 to TLID:141845803, and proceeding easterly along TLID:141845803 to TLID:241112777, and proceeding easterly along TLID:241112777 to TLID:241112778, and proceeding easterly along TLID:241112778 to TLID:141848619, and proceeding easterly along TLID:141848619 to TLID:141848620, and proceeding easterly along TLID:141848620 to TLID:142671550, and proceeding easterly along TLID:142671550 to TLID:241249396, and proceeding easterly along TLID:241249396 to TLID:142829748, and proceeding easterly along TLID:142829748 to TLID:141857328, and proceeding easterly along TLID:141857328 to Tierra Subida Ave, and proceeding northerly along Tierra Subida Ave to W Palmdale Blvd, and proceeding easterly along W Palmdale Blvd to W Ave Q, and proceeding easterly along W Ave Q to E Ave Q, and proceeding easterly along E Ave Q to Carolside Ave, and proceeding southerly along Carolside Ave to E Ave Q, and proceeding easterly along E Ave Q to 3rd St E, and proceeding northerly along 3rd St E to E Ave Q, and proceeding easterly along E Ave Q to City Boundary, and proceeding easterly along City Boundary to E Ave Q, and proceeding easterly along E Ave Q to City Boundary, and proceeding easterly along City Boundary to E Ave P-8, and proceeding easterly along E Ave P-8 to the point of beginning.

District #2

The region bounded and described as follows: 1. Beginning at the point of intersection of City Boundary and TLID:627483510, and proceeding easterly along City Boundary to 50th St E, and proceeding southerly along 50th St E to City Boundary, and proceeding westerly along City Boundary to E Ave P-8, and proceeding westerly along E Ave P-8 to City Boundary, and proceeding westerly along City Boundary to E Ave Q, and proceeding westerly along E Ave Q to City Boundary, and proceeding westerly along City Boundary to E Ave Q, and proceeding westerly along E Ave Q to 3rd St E, and proceeding southerly along 3rd St E to E Ave Q, and proceeding westerly along E Ave Q to Carolside Ave, and proceeding northerly along Carolside Ave to E Ave Q, and proceeding westerly along E Ave Q to W Ave Q, and proceeding westerly along W Ave Q to W Palmdale Blvd, and proceeding westerly along W Palmdale Blvd to Tierra Subida Ave, and proceeding southerly along Tierra Subida Ave to TLID:141857328, and proceeding westerly along TLID:141857328 to TLID:142829748, and proceeding westerly along TLID:142829748 to TLID:241249396, and proceeding westerly along TLlD:241249396 to TLID:142671550, and proceeding westerly along TLID:142671550 to TLID:141848620, and proceeding westerly along TLID:141848620 to TLID:141848619, and proceeding westerly along TLID:141848619 to TLID:241112778, and proceeding westerly along TLID:241112778 to TLID:241112777, and proceeding westerly along TLID:241112777 to TLID:141845803, and proceeding westerly along TLID:141845803 to TLID:141845802, and proceeding westerly along TLID:141845802 to W City Ranch Rd, and proceeding westerly along W City Ranch Rd to TLID:142705409, and proceeding southerly along TLID:142705409 to TLID:142705412, and proceeding southerly along TLID:142705412 to TLID:141864761, and proceeding southerly along TLID:141864761 to TLID:142833675, and proceeding southerly along TLID:142833675 to TLID:241208656, and proceeding southerly along TLID:241208656 to TLID:24121541, and proceeding westerly along TLID:241215641 to TLID:241215263, and proceeding westerly along TLID:241215263 to TLID:l42830567, and proceeding southerly along TLID:142830567 to TLID:627483510, and proceeding southerly along TLID:627483510 to the point of beginning.

District #3

The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of 17th St E and E Palmdale Blvd, and proceeding southerly along 17th St E to E Ave R, and proceeding easterly along E Ave R to 45th St E, and proceeding southerly along 45th St E to Southern Pacific RR, and proceeding easterly along Southern Pacific RR to 47th St E, and proceeding southerly along 47th St E to City Boundary, and proceeding westerly along City Boundary to Pearblossom Hwy, and proceeding westerly along Pearblossom Hwy to 33rd St E, and proceeding northerly along 33rd St E to Purple Sage Ln, and proceeding easterly along Purple Sage Ln to Jenna Ln, and proceeding northerly along Jenna Ln to Conestoga Canyon Rd, and proceeding westerly along Conestoga Canyon Rd to 33rd St E, and proceeding northerly along 33rd St E to Jojoba Ter, and proceeding westerly along Jojoba Ter to 30th St E, and proceeding southerly along 30th St E to JOJOBA TER, and proceeding northerly along JOJOBA TER to southern Pacific RR, and proceeding westerly along Southern Pacific RR to Palmdale Siding 2 RR, and proceeding westerly along Palmdale Siding 2 RR to E Ave S, and proceeding westerly along E Ave S to 10th St E, and proceeding northerly along 10th St E to E Ave R, and proceeding easterly along E Ave R to 12th St E, and proceeding northerly along 12th St E to E Palmdale Blvd, and proceeding easterly along E Palmdale Blvd to the point of beginning.

District #4

The region bounded and described as follows: Beginning at the point of intersection of City Boundary and 50th St E, and proceeding easterly along City Boundary to 47th St E, and proceeding northerly along 47th St E to Southern Pacific RR, and proceeding westerly along Southern Pacific RR to 45th St E, and proceeding northerly along 45th St E to E Ave R, and proceeding westerly along E Ave R to 30th St E, and proceeding northerly along 30th St E to City Boundary, and proceeding easterly along City Boundary to 50th St E, and proceeding northerly along 50th St E to the point of beginning.

(Ord. 1474 § 2, 2015)

4.10.020 Map.
A map depicting the boundaries set forth in PMC 4.10.010 is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A and incorporated into this chapter by this reference. (Ord. 1474 § 3, 2015)

Chapter 4.11
COUNCILMEMBER TERMS
Sections:

4.11.010    Term of office for Districts One and Two.

4.11.020    Term of office for Districts Three and Four.

4.11.030    Subsequent terms of office.

4.11.010 Term of office for Districts One and Two.
The term of office of the Councilmembers elected to represent District One and District Two at the November 8, 2016, general municipal election shall be four years, and until a successor is qualified. (Ord. 1478 § 2, 2015)

4.11.020 Term of office for Districts Three and Four.
The term of office of the Councilmembers elected to represent District Three and District Four at the November 8, 2016, general municipal election shall be two years, and until a successor is qualified. (Ord. 1478 § 3, 2015)

4.11.030 Subsequent terms of office.
After the initial terms of office as set forth in PMC 4.11.010 and 4.11.020, the term of office of members of the City Council of the City of Palmdale elected pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be four years, and until a successor is qualified. (Ord. 1478 § 4, 2015)

Chapter 4.12
FILLING CITY COUNCIL VACANCIES
Sections:

4.12.010    Filling City Council vacancies.

4.12.010 Filling City Council vacancies.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or City Councilmember, the City Council may, by majority vote, either fill the vacancy by appointment or call a special election to fill the vacancy. The special election shall be held on the next regularly established election date not less than 114 days from the call of the special elections. A person appointed or elected to fill a vacancy shall hold office only for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. If the City Council does not fill the vacancy by appointment and does not call a special election to fill such vacancy, then the vacancy shall be filled at the next election called by the City Council, whether such election is special or regular election. (Ord. 1391 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1364 § 1, 2008; Ord. 1162 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 4.16
TERM LIMITS
(Repealed by Ord. 1371)

Title 5
BUSINESS LICENSES, TAXES AND REGULATIONS
Chapters:

5.04    Business Regulation

5.05    Cannabis

5.10    Synthetic Drugs

5.12    State Video Franchises

5.28    Gambling and Related Activities

5.44    Mobile Home Space Rent Control

5.48    Interim School Facilities Financing

5.52    Solid Waste Handling and Recycling Services

Chapter 5.04
BUSINESS REGULATION
Sections:

Article I. Business Permits Generally

5.04.010    Title.

5.04.020    Purpose.

5.04.030    Applicability.

5.04.040    Definitions.

5.04.050    Permits required.

5.04.060    Permits – Duration.

5.04.070    Permits – Issuance to persons operating under fictitious business names.

5.04.080    Unlawful business.

5.04.090    Duplicate permit.

5.04.100    Presentment of permit.

5.04.110    Substitute for other provisions.

5.04.120    Fees.

5.04.130    Applications.

5.04.140    Business permits – Contents.

5.04.150    Businesses requiring a business permit.

5.04.160    Fingerprinting and photo identification.

5.04.170    Review and approval.

5.04.180    Investigation.

5.04.185    Consideration of applicant’s criminal record and prior business history.

5.04.190    Notice and hearing.

5.04.200    Grounds for denial of business permit.

5.04.210    Effect of business permit denial.

5.04.220    Permit required for each business activity.

5.04.230    Business permit – Operative.

5.04.240    Insurance and bond requirements.

5.04.250    Business permit renewal.

5.04.260    Business permit transfers and changes.

5.04.270    Modification, suspension or revocation.

5.04.280    Revocation – Initiation of hearing.

5.04.290    Revocation – Notice to permittee.

5.04.300    Procedure for revocation hearing.

5.04.310    Grounds for revocation of business permit.

5.04.320    Effect of revocation or suspension.

5.04.330    Conditions of approval.

5.04.340    Appeal from Director’s decision to City Council.

5.04.350    Appeals – Notice of hearing.

5.04.360    Appeals – Hearing procedure.

5.04.370    Violations.

Article II. Businesses Requiring a Business Permit

5.04.400    Adult-oriented businesses.

5.04.410    Ambulances and ambulance drivers.

5.04.420    Billiards.

5.04.430    Bingo.

5.04.440    Carnivals and concessions.

5.04.450    Dance halls and dances.

5.04.460    Entertainment.

5.04.470    Escort bureaus and introductory services.

5.04.480    Fortunetelling.

5.04.490    Game arcades.

5.04.500    Gun dealers.

5.04.510    Health clubs.

5.04.520    House and street numbering.

5.04.530    Hypnotist.

5.04.540    Reserved.

5.04.550    Locksmith.

5.04.560    Massage establishments and massage technicians.

5.04.570    Motion picture theater.

5.04.580    Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers.

5.04.590    Peddlers and commercial solicitors.

5.04.610    Private patrol service.

5.04.620    Family entertainment center.

5.04.650    Solicitation for charitable purposes.

5.04.660    Taxicab business.

5.04.670    Tobacco/smoking product retailer.

5.04.680    Tow truck.

Article I. Business Permits Generally

5.04.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the “business regulation ordinance.” (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health, welfare and safety by:

(A) Providing adequate information regarding the ownership and operation of businesses within the City and facilitating contact between the City and those businesses.

(B) Regulating the operation of certain enumerated businesses to ensure that such operation does not adversely affect the general welfare.

(C) Providing for a healthy and stable business community within the City’s boundaries.

(D) Collecting statistical information regarding businesses within the City’s boundaries.

(E) Monitoring sales tax registration and compliance. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.030 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all businesses engaged in the activities listed in PMC 5.04.150. The provisions in this article constitute general requirements applicable to all such businesses. In the event of any conflict between the provisions contained in Article II and this article, the provisions contained in Article II shall control. (Ord. 1090 § 4, 1997; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.040 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(A) “Adult-oriented businesses” means any of the uses defined in PMC 5.04.400(B).

(B) “Agent” or “agency” means a person who acts for, on behalf of, or in the place of another person.

(C) “Agency review” or “departmental review” means that process by which business permit applications are reviewed by designated City departments to determine whether the operation of a particular business will conform to the requirements of this chapter.

(D) “Business” means an establishment engaged in one or more commercial or mercantile activities for the purpose of earning, in whole or in part, a profit or livelihood whether or not a profit or livelihood is actually earned thereby.

(E) “Business activity” means a commercial or mercantile activity, together with all devices, machines, articles, and appurtenances used therein, which is conducted for the purpose of earning, in whole or in part, a profit or livelihood whether or not a profit or livelihood is actually earned thereby.

(F) “Director” means the Director of Finance or the designee of the Director of Finance.

(G) “Home occupation” means any activity carried out for gain by a resident of a dwelling conducted as a lawful accessory use in the resident’s dwelling unit.

(H) “Permittee” means any person holding a permit to operate a business within the City.

(I) “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or joint venture which conducts or purports to conduct a business activity within the City.

(J) “Commence” means and includes to begin, initiate, start, open or establish.

(K) “Conduct” means and includes to commence, transact, maintain, practice, do, operate or carry on.

(L) “Employee” means any person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business in the City, whether as an owner, a member of the owner’s family, or as a partner, agent, manager, solicitor, apprentice, trainee, or any other category of person employed or working in such business.

(M) “Permit” means the certificate issued by the Director or by the City Council, as may be appropriate, as a prerequisite to operating a business pursuant to this chapter.

(N) “Sexually oriented business” shall mean any one of the following:

(1) Any business wherein the preponderant business is the offering of services, materials, goods and/or products which are characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or in relation to “nude” or “semi-nude” persons or “specified sexual activities,” as defined in Section 92.05.B.2, 3 and 5 of the Palmdale zoning ordinance, for observation by patrons therein. Such businesses shall include, but not be limited to, an adult bookstore, adult video store, picture arcade showing adult entertainment pictures, adult motion picture theater or other similar businesses; or

(2) Any business which utilizes or encourages sexual arousal, sexual gratification, and/or sexual stimulation of a customer or prospective customer in connection with the sale or offering for sale of services, goods, or materials. Such business shall include, but not be limited to, Turkish bath, “nude” or “semi-nude” modeling studio, business using “nude” or “semi-nude” models in offering lingerie or intimate apparel for sale, sexual catharsis center, sexual encounter establishment, bondage or discipline parlor, escort bureau and introductory services, or other similar businesses; or

(3) Any business, having as a portion of its goods for sale, products which replicate or are designed to simulate “specified anatomical areas,” as defined in Section 92.04.B.4 of the Palmdale zoning ordinance, to cause sexual excitement thereof. Such business shall include, but not be limited to, a sexual novelty store or other similar businesses.

This definition of adult business does not apply, nor shall it be interpreted to apply, to any business conducted, operated by or employing licensed chiropractors, licensed physicians, licensed physical therapists, licensed psychologists, licensed social workers or licensed marriage family counselors when performing functions under or pursuant to their respective licenses. “Sexually oriented business” shall mean the same as an adult-oriented business. (Ord. 1120 §§ 4, 5, 1998; Ord. 1090 § 5, 1997; Ord. 915 § 1, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.050 Permits required.
(A) Generally. It is unlawful for any person to commence or conduct or purport to commence or conduct, either directly or indirectly, any business activity in the City without first having procured a business permit, where required, and paying the required fees therefor.

(B) When Permit Required. All business activities listed in PMC 5.04.150 shall be authorized by a business permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

(C) Advertising Businesses. No person shall advertise or announce a business activity located in the City until a business permit has first been obtained as required by this chapter. Advertising or announcing includes, but is not limited to, disseminating pamphlets or handbills, publishing newspaper announcements, and purchasing radio or television commercials.

(D) Managers. Where the provisions of this chapter governing particular business activities require a manager, such individual, unless he or she is the person to whom the permit for the business activity is issued, must obtain a manager’s permit and pay the required fee therefor. The application for a manager’s permit should be on a form provided by the City and shall, to the extent feasible, be submitted concurrently with the application for business permit required by PMC 5.04.130. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.060 Permits – Duration.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, all business permits shall be issued for one year and shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.070 Permits – Issuance to persons operating under fictitious business names.
A business permit may be issued to a person operating under a fictitious business name who has complied with all of the applicable provisions of the Business and Professions Code of this state. Otherwise, all permits shall be issued in the true name of the individual, or individuals, applying for a permit, and must appear as such on the application for a permit. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.080 Unlawful business.
No business permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any business activity which is prohibited under the laws of the United States, the federal and state Constitutions, this code or any applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation. Any such business permit shall be void. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.090 Duplicate permit.
A permittee shall report to the Director the loss of any business permit, whether in the form of a sticker, tag, card, paper, or otherwise. The Director shall issue to the permittee a duplicate permit and cancel the lost permit upon the payment of the prescribed fee established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.100 Presentment of permit.
(A) Posting. Every person required to have a business permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and who conducts, manages or carries on a business activity at a fixed location shall keep such permit posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business.

(B) Carrying. Every person required to have a business permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and who does not have a fixed place of business shall carry such permit at all times when conducting the business activity for which such permit was issued.

(C) Presentation on Demand. Every person required to have a business permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall produce the permit when requested by any City official who is authorized to issue or collect permit fees, or who is authorized to conduct inspections or otherwise enforce the provisions of this chapter or of this code. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.110 Substitute for other provisions.
No person required by this chapter to pay permit fees shall be relieved from the payment of any applicable license or regulatory fees or from compliance with any regulations required by any other provisions of this code. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.120 Fees.
Business permit fees shall be established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.130 Applications.
(A) Generally. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, every person commencing or conducting, or purporting to commence or conduct, any business activity required to be permitted pursuant to this chapter shall file an application for a business permit and pay the required fees therefor. Applications for business permits shall be provided by the City.

(B) Application Deadlines. Every person engaging in or operating a regulated business activity on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply for a business permit no later than December 31, 1990. Every person commencing or purporting to commence a business activity after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall apply for a business permit by December 31, 1990, or not less than 30 days prior to commencing the business activity, whichever is later. The required fees shall be paid at the time the business permit application is submitted.

(C) Submission of Applications. The Director shall determine whether an application is complete. If an application is determined to be complete, the application shall be accepted. If it is determined that the application is incomplete, the applicant shall be notified of what information is necessary to complete the application. An application shall not be considered filed unless it has been determined to be complete. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.140 Business permits – Contents.
(A) The application for a business permit shall be signed by an individual applicant or a sole-proprietorship applicant, or by an authorized signatory for a partnership or corporate applicant. The application shall contain the following information, to the extent applicable:

(1) The full name and address of the applicant.

(a) If the applicant is an individual or sole proprietorship, the name and residence address of the individual applicant or of the individual conducting the sole proprietorship shall be set forth.

(b) If the applicant is a partnership, the name and residence address of each general partner shall be set forth. If one or more of the general partners is a corporation, the provisions of subsection (A)(1)(c) of this section pertaining to a corporate applicant shall apply to each corporate general partner.

(c) If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be set forth as it appears in the articles of incorporation, and the address set forth shall be the principal executive office for the conduct of business in the state or if none, the principal executive office in the applicant’s state of incorporation. If the capital stock of the corporate applicant is not publicly traded, the additional information set forth below shall also be provided:

(i) The name and residence address of each director of the corporation,

(ii) The name and residence address of each executive officer of the corporation, i.e., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, etc.,

(iii) The name and residence address of each shareholder owning 10 percent or more of the outstanding capital stock of the corporation,

(iv) The name and business address of the person designated by the corporation to accept service of process in the state.

(2) The true address of the intended business. A person may not use a post office box, mailbox, message service or other similar device as the true address of the business for purposes of this chapter. A post office box, mailbox, message service or other similar device may be used as the mailing address of the business for business purposes only.

(3) A description of the facility proposed to house the intended business activity.

(4) A full description of the intended business activity and, if a new business, the estimated starting date of such business activity.

(5) If the business is advertised to the public and operates under a name other than the name of the applicant, such other name or designation shall also be included.

(6) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of at least two individuals who may be contacted by the City in case of an emergency.

(7) With regard to each of the individuals required to be identified by name and address as specified in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the applicant shall describe in narrative form the details of any of the following events that occurred during the previous five years:

(a) Such individual was convicted in a criminal proceeding or is a named subject of a pending criminal proceeding (excluding traffic violations and infractions).

(b) Such individual, or any partnership or corporate entity with which such individual was affiliated as a partner, officer, director, or as a shareholder owning 10 percent or more of the outstanding capital stock, was the subject of any order, judgment or decree, not subsequently reversed, suspended or vacated, or any court of competent jurisdiction, permanently or temporarily enjoining or otherwise limiting such individual or entity from engaging in or continuing any conduct or practice in connection with the operation of this type of business activity, or a substantially similar business activity.

(c) Such individual, or any partnership or corporate entity with which such individual was affiliated as a partner, officer, director, or as a shareholder owning 10 percent or more of the outstanding capital stock, in previously operating or engaging in the operation of this type of business activity, or a substantially similar business activity, in this or any other city or state, under license or permit, has such license or permit denied, revoked or suspended.

(d) With regard to any of the events required pursuant to this subsection (A)(7), the applicant shall be entitled to document and explain any mitigating circumstances associated with such events.

(B) The application for a business permit shall also contain such additional information as may be required by this chapter in connection with the specific business activity for which a permit is requested, or which the Director may deem to be necessary and appropriate for the purpose of evaluating the ability and willingness of the applicant to comply with all regulatory conditions and restrictions imposed by this chapter and to thereby protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community. (Ord. 919 § 1, 1991; Ord. U-919 § 1, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.150 Businesses requiring a business permit.
(A) No person shall commence, conduct or purport to commence or conduct the following business activities without a valid business permit:

(1) Adult-oriented businesses*º;

(2) Ambulances and ambulance drivers+;

(3) Billiards;

(4) Bingo;

(5) Carnivals and concessionsº+;

(6) Dance halls and dancesº;

(7) Entertainment*º;

(8) Introductory services*º;

(9) Fortunetelling;

(10) Game arcades;

(11) Gun dealers*;

(12) Health clubs;

(13) House and street numbering;

(14) Hypnotist+;

(15) Locksmith;

(16) Massage establishments and massage technicians*º;

(17) Motion picture theater*+;

(18) Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers;

(19) Peddlers and commercial solicitors;

(20) Reserved;

(21) Private patrol service;

(22) Family entertainment center+º;

(23) Swap meet;

(24) Taxicabs and taxicab drivers+;

(25) Tobacco/smoking product retailer;

(26) Tow trucks+.

*    Indicates that such business activity requires a hearing before the City Council before issuance of a business permit.

+    Indicates that such business activity is subject to insurance or bond requirements.

º    Indicates that such business activity requires a permitted manager pursuant to PMC 5.04.050.

(B) The regulations pertaining to specified businesses or business activities requiring a business permit are set forth in Article II of this chapter commencing with PMC 5.04.400. (Ord. 1384 § 8, 2010; Ord. 1117 § 4, 1997; Ord. U-1117 § 4, 1997; Ord. 1108 § 2(a), 1997; Ord. 1090 § 6, 1997; Ord. U-1030 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1026 § 1, 1993; Ord. 919 § 2, 1991; Ord. U-919 § 1, 1991; Ord. 909 § 1, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.160 Fingerprinting and photo identification.
An applicant may be required to provide a set of his or her fingerprints and/or proffer photographic identification, as defined in PMC 1.04.100, in connection with an application for a particular business permit. (Ord. 1317 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1090 § 7, 1997; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.170 Review and approval.
(A) Responsibility. The responsibility for approving business permit applications shall be as follows:

(1) Business Permit Applications Which Do Not Require Hearings. These business permit applications shall be subject to the approval of the Director as the reviewing authority. Any person may appeal the Director’s decision on the application in a manner consistent with the requirements of PMC 5.04.340. The timely filing of an appeal shall entitle the aggrieved party to a hearing.

(2) Business Permit Applications Which Require Hearings. These business permit applications shall be subject to the approval of the City Council as the reviewing authority.

(B) Preconditions to Approval. Before any business permit is issued, the reviewing authority shall ensure that the applicant has agreed to abide by all the conditions and restrictions imposed by this chapter on the particular business involved. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.180 Investigation.
(A) Generally. Once a completed application is filed, and the applicant has paid the prescribed business permit fee, the Director shall initiate an investigation of facts relating to the business permit application with appropriate City and County departments and agencies. This review process shall ensure that the action on each business permit application is consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter.

(B) First Amendment Activities. In the case of businesses involved primarily in First Amendment activities, this review process shall be completed within 45 days, and the Director’s or City Council’s decision approving or denying the business permit shall be made within the 45-day period, unless a longer period is approved by the applicant. (Ord. 919 § 3, 1991; Ord. U-919 § 1, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.185 Consideration of applicant’s criminal record and prior business history.
(A) The information disclosed by an applicant for a business permit pursuant to PMC 5.04.140(A)(7) shall be reviewed and considered by the Director or the City Council, as applicable, in evaluating the ability and willingness of the applicant to comply with all regulatory conditions and restrictions imposed by this chapter on the specific business for which a permit is requested and to thereby protect the health, safety and general welfare of the community.

(B) In no event shall a prior criminal record, whether considered alone or in conjunction with prior injunctive relief or the prior denial, revocation or suspension of a business license or permit, constitute the sole basis or justification for the denial of a business permit unless the Director or the City Council, as applicable, after reviewing and considering all relevant facts and circumstances, finds and determines as follows:

(1) That, with regard to a proposed business activity primarily involving First Amendment activities, the issuance of the permit would constitute a clear and present danger of a serious substantive evil; or

(2) That, with regard to a proposed business activity not involving First Amendment activities, the applicant’s prior criminal record includes one or more convictions for a crime involving moral turpitude which is substantially related to the business activity for which the permit is requested and, when considered alone or in conjunction with prior injunctive relief or the prior denial, revocation or suspension of a business license or permit, the issuance of the permit would be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the community.

(C) Whenever the City Council, whether upon an appeal from a determination by the Director or in the course of any hearing required by this chapter to be conducted by the City Council, determines that it is necessary to discuss and determine whether an applicant for a business permit or business permit renewal, which applicant, or any individual affiliated with a partnership or corporate applicant as a partner, officer, director, or as a shareholder owning 10 percent or more of the outstanding capital stock, has a criminal record, is sufficiently rehabilitated to obtain the business permit, the City Council may hold a closed session with the applicant and the applicant’s attorney, if any, for the purpose of holding the discussion and making the determination. Such closed session shall be held pursuant to Section 54956.7 of the Government Code, as it now exists or is hereafter amended. (Ord. 919 § 4, 1991; Ord. U-919 § 1, 1991)

5.04.190 Notice and hearing.
(A)(1) Notice Where City Council Review Required. Upon receipt in proper form of a business permit application requiring City Council review and approval, as specified in PMC 5.04.150, notice of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior thereto in the following manner:

(a) Notice of the hearing shall be posted at the three legal posting places specified in this code; shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation; and the applicant shall cause a public hearing notice sign to be posted at the proposed business location 10 days in advance of the hearing. Such notice shall include the time, place and date set for the hearing as well as the business activity proposed; and

(b) Notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to those individuals or community or neighborhood groups that have requested from the City written notification of business permit applications and shall be mailed to all property owners and residents within a 500-foot radius of the proposed business location as submitted by the applicant. Such notice shall include the time, place and date set for the hearing as well as the business activity proposed.

(2) Notice Where City Council Review Not Required. Upon receipt in proper form of a business permit application for a business activity not requiring City Council review and approval as specified in PMC 5.04.150, the Director shall notice review of the application in the following manner:

(a) Notice of the submission of a completed application, the period during which any interested party may make written comment regarding the application, the nature of the business activity proposed to be operated and the location of such proposed business activity shall be noticed as required in subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section.

(B) Hearings. The City Council shall have the authority to conduct all hearings required of it under this chapter. Such hearings shall be conducted as follows:

(1) Testimony. At the time set for the hearing, or on any date to which the hearing may be continued, the City Council shall hear the applicant, who may present any facts to show why the permit should be granted, and shall hear testimony from all other interested persons who attend the hearing to present reasons why the permit should or should not be granted.

(2) Filing Protests. Any interested person, at any time after the filing of an application or before the close of the hearing regarding such application, or at any time after the filing of an application and before the close of the Director’s review, may file written letters of support or protest, for or against the granting of such application. In considering the application, the Director or City Council, as applicable, shall give consideration to all such documents so filed. (Ord. 1090 § 8, 1997; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.200 Grounds for denial of business permit.
(A) Business Activities Involving First Amendment Activities. Neither the Director nor the City Council shall approve an application for a business permit for a business activity primarily involving First Amendment activities if any of the following findings are made:

(1) The building, structure, premises, or the equipment used to conduct the business activity fails to comply with all applicable health, zoning, fire, building and safety laws of the state or of the City; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to require that the applicant actually be in compliance with such laws at the time set for review and approval. The Director or the City Council, as applicable, may approve a business permit and condition its operative date upon the later submission by the applicant to the Director of a certificate of occupancy issued by the Division of Building and Safety or other satisfactory evidence that the business activity is then in compliance with all such applicable laws;

(2) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for the business permit or in any report or statement required to be filed with the Director or the City Council;

(3) The business is prohibited by any local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or is prohibited in the particular location or zone by any law, statute, rule, or regulation; or

(4) The City Council has made the findings and determination as specified in PMC 5.04.185 relating to an applicant for a permit for a proposed business activity involving First Amendment activities.

(B) Business Activities Not Involving First Amendment Activities. Neither the Director nor the City Council shall approve an application for a business permit for a business activity not primarily involving First Amendment activities if any of the following findings are made:

(1) The building, structure, premises, or the equipment used to conduct the business activity fails to comply with all applicable health, zoning, fire, building and safety laws of the state or of the City; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be construed to require that the applicant actually be in compliance with such laws at the time set for review and approval. The Director or the City Council, as applicable, may approve a business permit and condition its operative date upon the later submission by the applicant to the Director of a certificate of occupancy issued by the Division of Building and Safety or other satisfactory evidence that the business activity is then in compliance with all such applicable laws;

(2) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for the business permit or in any report or statement required to be filed with the Director or the City Council;

(3) The business is prohibited by any local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or is prohibited in the particular location or zone by any law, statute, rule, or regulation;

(4) The City Council has made the findings and determination as specified in PMC 5.04.185 relating to an applicant for a permit for a business activity not involving First Amendment activities. (Ord. 1408 § 4, 2010; Ord. 919 § 5, 1991; Ord. U-919 § 1, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.210 Effect of business permit denial.
(A) Limitation on New Applications. If an applicant’s business permit application for a particular business activity has been denied, the Director shall not process a new application by that applicant for that business activity for a 12-month period after the denial unless the Director determines that the reason for the denial has been cured and no longer exists.

(B) Appealability. The denial of an application by the Director may be appealed to the City Council in a manner consistent with PMC 5.04.340. If the denial of an application for a business primarily involving a First Amendment activity is appealed, the appeal shall be heard within 30 days of the date on which a timely and complete notice of appeal is received. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.220 Permit required for each business activity.
When any person is engaged at one location in more than one business activity for which a business permit is required, such person shall be deemed to be conducting each business activity separate and apart from any other business activity. The total fees for all business activities shall be determined by reference to the fee schedule established by resolution of the City Council, as authorized by PMC 5.04.120. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.230 Business permit – Operative.
(A) Generally. The operative date for a business permit shall be the date of approval of the application by the Director or the City Council.

(B) Duration. The operative date for a business permit is as follows:

(1) Business permits are valid for a period not to exceed 15 months and will be issued on a quarterly basis. Therefore, business permits issued between January 1st and March 31st are valid through March 31st of the following year; business permits issued between April 1st and June 30th are valid through June 30th of the following year; business permits issued between July 1st and September 30th are valid through September 30th of the following year; and business permits issued between October 1st and December 31st are valid through December 31st of the following year. (Ord. 1090 § 9, 1997; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.240 Insurance and bond requirements.
(A) Permit Validity and Grounds for Suspension. Whenever the provisions of this chapter require an applicant for any business permit to procure, post or maintain in effect any bond, undertaking, deposit, or policy of insurance, any business permit issued is valid only while such bond, undertaking, deposit, or policy of insurance is in full force and effect. The business permit shall automatically be suspended without notice if at any time such bond, undertaking, deposit, or policy of insurance is not in full force and effect. The Director shall notify the permittee in writing of any suspension pursuant to this section. Within 10 days thereafter, the permittee may request in writing a hearing before the City Council. The City Council shall conduct a hearing in a manner consistent with PMC 5.04.350 and, as warranted by the evidence received at the hearing, may revoke the permit or terminate the suspension and restore the permit. If the permittee does not request a hearing, the permit is automatically revoked at the end of 10 days following the notification of suspension.

(B) Cancellation of Insurance or Bond. Except as otherwise provided, a policy of insurance or a bond or undertaking required under this chapter shall not be accepted unless it provides that it shall not be canceled until 30 days after the insurer or surety gives notice thereof to the Director. If a permittee learns that such a bond, undertaking or policy of insurance will be or has been canceled, such permittee shall notify the Director within three days of such notice. If a new bond, undertaking or policy of insurance acceptable to the Director is filed before the old one is canceled or expires, then the permit will continue in full force. Any employee, officer or department informed of any modification or cancellation of any insurance policy, undertaking or bond required under this chapter shall immediately notify the Director of such modification or cancellation.

(C) Contents of Insurance Policy. Except as otherwise provided, in every instance where an insurance policy is required for the permitting of a particular business, such insurance policy shall comply with the following requirements unless the City Council, upon application, notice and hearing, directs otherwise:

(1) It shall be primary and not contributing to any other insurance maintained by the City;

(2) It shall name the City, its officers, agents and employees, as additional insureds;

(3) Its liability limits shall be as specified in the regulations pertaining to the specific business;

(4) It shall bear a deductible in an amount approved by the Director;

(5) It shall be issued by an insurer approved by the City; and

(6) It shall be endorsed so as to provide the Director with 30 days’ prior notice of any cancellation or modification of the policy.

(D) Indemnification. Whenever this chapter requires a business permit applicant or permittee to indemnify the City, the applicant or permittee shall be required to execute an indemnification statement in substantially the following form:

It shall be a condition of this permit issued under the Business Regulation Ordinance that the permittee agrees to indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the City, its City Council, and each member thereof, and every officer, agent and employee of the city, from any and all liability or financial loss resulting from any suits, claims, losses, or actions brought by any person, and from all costs and expenses of litigation, including attorney’s fees, by reason of injury to any person, including, but not limited to, officers and employees of the permittee, performed under and pursuant to this permit, and any and all activities, operations, and conditions in any manner connected therewith or pertaining thereto. Such indemnity shall include, but not be limited to, any and all liabilities, demands, claims, damages, losses, costs and expenses caused or alleged to have been caused by any negligent or other act of this permittee.

(Ord. U-1030 § 2, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.250 Business permit renewal.
(A) Generally. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (E) of this section, when an applicant timely submits a business permit renewal application, the Director shall renew the permit effective upon the expiration of the prior permit.

(B) Renewal Application Deadlines. Every person desiring to continue in business after the expiration of the permit period shall file an application for renewal not less than 30 days prior to the expiration of the permit period. In the case of a business activity having a fixed location, a permit for a different location is not a renewal and is deemed a new application.

(C) Late Applications – Before Expiration. The Director may accept an application for renewal after the time specified in subsection (B) of this section if it is filed before the expiration of the prior permit. The filing of such late application shall give the applicant no greater rights than upon the filing of an application for an original permit.

(D) Late Application – After Expiration.

(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Director shall not accept a renewal application for a permit which has expired, or which for any other reason is not in full force and effect. The applicant may apply for a new permit if not prohibited from doing so by any other provision of this chapter, and such application shall be accompanied by the required fee for a new permit.

(2) The Director may accept an application for a renewal after the time specified in subsection (B) of this section if it is filed not later than 60 days after the expiration of the prior permit and if the Director finds good cause as to why the application was not filed before the expiration of the permit period. When an application is submitted pursuant to this subsection the fee shall be the renewal fee plus 25 percent thereof. Such application shall give the applicant no greater rights than upon the filing of an application for an original permit.

(3) Good cause, pursuant to subsection (D)(2) of this section, shall be found where:

(a) A serious illness that required hospitalization or confinement to bed prevented timely renewal; or

(b) Unforeseen and extraordinary circumstances prevented timely renewal.

(E) Denial of Permit Renewal. If the City has received notice of any of the following upon the filing of any permit renewal application, the application for renewal may be denied, subject to the permittee’s right to appeal as provided for in PMC 5.04.340:

(1) A transfer or change pursuant to PMC 5.04.260;

(2) A significant change in operation of any permitted business which may involve noncompliance with City or County regulations;

(3) One of the departments or officers performing a review of the permit renewal application has recommended denial of, or the imposition of additional conditions upon, such permit. (Ord. U-1030 § 3, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.260 Business permit transfers and changes.
(A) Generally. No business permit issued under this chapter shall be transferred or changed pursuant to subsection (B) of this section unless such transfer or change is approved in the same manner as an original permit for the business activity. Upon approval of the transfer or change, the transferee shall be issued a new permit for the business activity.

(B) Transfers. The following transactions shall be deemed to be transfers:

(1) The addition of a new partner or partners, or the withdrawal of a former partner or partners;

(2) The transfer of a business from one partnership to another;

(3) The transfer of a business from a partnership to a corporation;

(4) The transfer of a business from one corporation to another;

(5) The transfer of a business from a corporation to a partnership;

(6) The transfer of a business from a corporation to an individual, or vice versa;

(7) The transfer of a business from a partnership to an individual, or vice versa;

(8) The transfer of a majority of the stock in a corporation from one shareholder to another shareholder or to another person.

(C) Change of Location. A permittee may transfer a business permit to a different location upon application to the Director who shall review such application in a manner consistent with PMC 5.04.180. (Ord. U-1030 § 4, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.270 Modification, suspension or revocation.
Any business permit issued by the City may be conditioned, modified, suspended or revoked for cause by the City Council pursuant to PMC 5.04.280 et seq. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.280 Revocation – Initiation of hearing.
A hearing to determine whether an existing permit should be conditioned, modified, suspended or revoked shall be initiated by a written statement of charges. Such statement may be initiated by any department or agency required to review or inspect the permitted business activity for compliance with City regulations. Such statement shall be submitted to the Director. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.290 Revocation – Notice to permittee.
If the Director determines that a hearing is warranted, written notice of the hearing shall be given to the permittee not less than 10 days prior thereto. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.300 Procedure for revocation hearing.
(A) Right to Witnesses. The permittee or legal representative of the permittee shall have the right to bring witnesses to testify on behalf of the permittee.

(B) Rules of Evidence. Hearings need not be conducted according to technical rules of evidence. Oral evidence shall be taken only on oath or affirmation.

(C) Decision. The City Council shall issue its decision in writing. The decision shall contain a determination of the issues presented. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.310 Grounds for revocation of business permit.
After the hearing, the City Council may condition, modify, suspend or revoke a business permit for any business activity required to be permitted under this chapter if the City Council finds that one or more of the following conditions exist:

(A) Business Activities Involving First Amendment Activities.

(1) That the building, structure, premises or equipment used in the conduct of the business does not comply with any health, zoning, fire, or building and safety laws of the state or ordinances of the City;

(2) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has violated any federal or state statute or any ordinance or regulation of the City in the course of exercising any rights under the business permit which is being considered for revocation;

(3) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for permit, or in any report or statement required to be filed with the Director or the City Council;

(4) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has published, uttered or disseminated any false, deceptive or misleading statements or advertisements in connection with the permitted business;

(5) That the permittee has failed or refused to notify the Director of any change in facts as required by this chapter within 10 days after such change;

(6) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has violated any conditions or restrictions of the business permit; or

(7) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has allowed, or failed to prevent, the use of the business as a base for unlawful or criminal activity, including, but not limited to, solicitation, prostitution or drug trafficking.

(B) Business Activities Not Involving First Amendment Activities.

(1) That the building, structure, premises or equipment used in the conduct of the business does not comply with any health, zoning, fire, or building and safety laws of the state or ordinances of the City;

(2) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has violated any federal or state statute or any ordinance of the City in the course of exercising any rights under the business permit which is being considered for revocation;

(3) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has been found to have committed a crime of moral turpitude which bears a substantial relationship to the conduct of the business activity for which the business permit is being considered for revocation;

(4) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for permit, or in any report or statement required to be filed with the Director or the City Council;

(5) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has published, uttered or disseminated any false, deceptive or misleading statements or advertisements in connection with the operation of the permitted business;

(6) That the permittee has failed or refused to notify the Director of any change in facts as required by this chapter within 10 days after such change;

(7) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has violated any conditions or restrictions of the business permit;

(8) That the permittee has been held liable for, or has been convicted of, any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance resulting from any act performed in exercising any rights under the business permit which is being considered for revocation;

(9) That the permittee, or any employee, agent or manager of the permittee, has violated any rule or regulation adopted by the City Council or any other governmental agency relating to the permittee’s business; or

(10) That the permittee has conducted the permitted business in a manner contrary to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.320 Effect of revocation or suspension.
(A) No refunds of any business permit fees shall be made to any permittee upon revocation of a business permit.

(B) Following revocation of any business permit for cause under this chapter, no business permit to conduct the same business activity shall be issued to the same person for a period of one year.

(C) Whenever a business permit is suspended or revoked, the Director shall take into possession the business permit for the subject business activity. The permittee shall surrender the business permit and permit stickers, or similar evidence of a permit, to the Director.

(D) Upon revocation or suspension of a business permit, the permittee shall immediately cease operation of the business activity. Except as otherwise provided, if the permit is suspended, the permittee may resume operation upon expiration of the suspension period. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.330 Conditions of approval.
(A) Right to Condition Permit. The Director or the City Council, as applicable, may condition any business permit if it is determined that grounds for denial or revocation exist, or that the manner in which the business has been conducted or operated is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, in that:

(1) The permittee, or any agent, manager or employee of the permittee, has failed to maintain the premises in a neat and clean condition and has allowed the business premises to deteriorate and become blighted;

(2) The permittee, or any agent, manager or employee of the permittee, has allowed, or failed to prevent, the use of the business premises by its patrons as a base for criminal or otherwise unlawful activity;

(3) The permittee, or any agent, manager or employee of the permittee, has allowed, or failed to discourage, criminal or otherwise unlawful activity on or immediately adjacent to the business premises;

(4) The permittee, or any agent, manager or employee of the permittee, has failed to provide adequate parking to serve its patrons, thereby causing patrons to cruise on neighborhood streets in search of parking, and causing other traffic-related noise and disturbances; or

(5) The permittee, or any agent, manager or employee of the permittee, has failed to control the actions of its patrons on or immediately adjacent to the business premises.

(B) Application to Modify Conditions. The City Council may modify or eliminate any conditions previously imposed on a business permit upon written request of the permittee if it finds that the reasons for the original imposition of such conditions have been cured or no longer exist. Applications to modify conditions shall be noticed and set for hearing in a manner consistent with PMC 5.04.350.

(C) Consent to Right of Entry. If the Director finds that unannounced inspections of the business premises are necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, the Director may impose as a condition of the permit that the permittee consent to entry of the permittee’s place of business at all reasonable times by any City officer or employee authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter or other provisions of the code. Upon presentation of proper credentials by any such officer or employee, the permittee shall allow such inspection.

(D) Noise Abatement. Whenever the Director determines that noise from any business activity permitted under this chapter interferes with the right of persons dwelling in the vicinity of such business activity to the peaceful and quiet use and enjoyment of their property, or that the business activity permitted under this chapter is in violation of the noise ordinance of the City, the Director or the City Council may require that the premises of the business activity be soundproofed to eliminate the noise or reduce it to a reasonable level. In taking any action under this section, the Director or the City Council shall balance all of the interests of the respective parties, as well as the hardship which will result from any such noise mitigation measures. If the Director or the City Council finds that the noise complained of is minimal or inconsequential, no action shall be taken under this section. (Ord. U-1030 § 5, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.340 Appeal from Director’s decision to City Council.
(A) Filing. Any applicant for a business permit or for the renewal of a business permit who is aggrieved by any decision of the Director may file with the Director a notice of appeal to the City Council within 10 days of the date of mailing of the decision. The notice shall be signed by the appellant or the legal representative of the appellant and shall be sufficient if it states that the appellant appeals from a specified decision or a particular part thereof. The notice of appeal may state briefly the grounds upon which the appeal is based but shall contain no argument, evidence or legal points and authorities.

(B) Effect of Notice of Appeal. If a timely appeal is filed, the effect of the Director’s decision shall be stayed pending the City Council’s resolution of the matter unless the Director specifically finds that the public health and safety will be endangered by any such stay.

(C) Deposit of Estimated Costs. With every notice of appeal filed pursuant to this section, the appellant shall deposit with the Director an amount which the Director estimates will cover the cost of production of a transcript of documentation on the matter, including the record of any hearing conducted by the Director, which resulted in the decision on which the appeal is taken.

(D) Accounting of Funds. The Director shall keep a permanent and accurate account of all deposits received on appeal. If the actual cost of the transcript exceeds the amount deposited by the appellant, the appellant shall pay the deficiency; if it is less, the Director shall refund the difference to the appellant. (Ord. U-1030 § 6, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.350 Appeals – Notice of hearing.
Upon receipt of a timely notice of appeal, the Director shall notify the City Clerk of the request for appeal. The Director shall give not less than 15 days’ written notice to the appellant of the date, time and place of the hearing. The notice shall also state whether the City Council will allow the introduction of additional evidence. (Ord. U-1030 § 7, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.360 Appeals – Hearing procedure.
(A) Transmission of Evidence. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the Director shall transmit to the City Council the transcript of the documentation on the matter. Copies of the documentation shall also be delivered to the appellant.

(B) Conduct of Hearing. Upon receipt of the documentation required by subsection (A) of this section, the City Council shall conduct the appeal. The City Council may, at its discretion, receive new evidence or testimony which is not part of the record upon a showing that it could not, in the exercise of due diligence, have been presented at the time of the Director’s decision. The City Council may hear and consider additional argument and points and authorities of law, and may require the parties before it to submit such argument and points and authorities of law prior to rendering any decision on the appeal.

(C) City Council Action. Upon reviewing the evidence and considering the parties’ arguments and any points and authorities of law submitted, the City Council may either:

(1) Render a decision upholding, reversing, or modifying in any respect the decision of the Director; or

(2) Remand the matter to the Director with directions. (Ord. U-1030 §§ 8, 9, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.370 Violations.
(A) Generally. Except as hereafter provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as provided for in this code. Where the conduct constituting the violation is of a continuing nature, each day that the conduct continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.

(B) False Statements. Any person who knowingly makes any false statement in any application for a business permit or in any report required under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and punishable as provided for in this code. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

Article II. Businesses Requiring a Business Permit

5.04.400 Adult-oriented businesses.
(A) Purpose. The purpose of this section is to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community from the harmful secondary effects brought about by the unregulated operation of adult-oriented businesses. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to: depreciation of property values; increased vacancy rates in residential and commercial areas; increased criminal activity; increased litter, noise, and vandalism; and interference with the enjoyment of residential property in the vicinity of such businesses. The provisions of this section have neither the purpose or intended effect of: (i) imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative material; (ii) denying access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. or state Constitutions; or (iii) denying access by distributors or exhibitors of adult-oriented materials or entertainment to their intended market.

(B) Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended the following definitions shall apply:

(1) Adult-Oriented Businesses. “Adult-oriented businesses” means any one of the following:

(a) Adult Arcade. The term “adult arcade,” as used in this section, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(b) Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store, Adult Video Store. The term “adult bookstore,” “adult novelty store” or “adult video store,” as used in this section, is an establishment that has 20 percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, adult-oriented merchandise, or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records or other forms of visual or audio representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. An adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store shall not include mail order businesses or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises.

(c) Adult Cabaret. The term “adult cabaret,” as used in this section, means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (1) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude; and/or (3) shows films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(d) Adult Hotel/Motel. The term “adult hotel/motel,” as used in this section, means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which: (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a 10-hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.

(e) Adult Motion Picture Theater. The term “adult motion picture theater,” as used in this section, is a business establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, computer-generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and 30 percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

(f) Adult Theater. The term “adult theater,” as used in this section, means a business establishment which for any form of consideration regularly features live performances, for an audience on the premises, which performances either: (1) are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) regularly feature entertainers who appear semi-nude.

(g) Adult Modeling Studio. The term “adult modeling studio,” as used in this section, means a business or other premises or location which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, or on a voluntary or otherwise unpaid basis, figure models, actors or actresses who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of other persons either on-site or off-site, appear either nude, semi-nude or display “specified anatomical areas” or perform “specified sexual activities” to be observed, sketched, filmed, photographed, videotaped, electronically or digitally recorded, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons on the premises, cable-casted, web-casted, broadcasted, transmitted to persons or locations off-site, or otherwise provided for sale. “Adult modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Adult modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available “specified sexual activities.”

(2) Adult-Oriented Business Operator. “Adult-oriented business operator” (hereinafter “operator”), as used in this section, means a person who supervises, manages, inspects, directs, organizes, controls or in any other way is responsible for or in charge of the premises of an adult-oriented business or the conduct or activities occurring on the premises thereof.

(3) Adult-Oriented Merchandise. The term “adult-oriented merchandise” means sexually oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos; auto sucks; sexually oriented vibrators; edible underwear; ben wa balls; inflatable orifices; anatomical balloons with orifices; simulated vaginas, and similar sexually oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

(4) “Applicant” means a person who is required to file an application for a permit under this section, including an individual owner, managing partner, officer of a corporation, or any other operator, manager, employee, or agent of an adult-oriented business.

(5) Bar. For the purposes of this section, a “bar” is defined as an establishment in which the primary use is the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on-site which requires an alcoholic beverage control license (Type 40, 41, 42, 48 or 61) which does not meet the definition of a bona fide restaurant, as defined in Section 92.07 of the Palmdale zoning ordinance.

(6) Distinguished or Characterized by an Emphasis Upon. As used in this section, the term “distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal. App. 3 151 (1981).

(7) Entertainer. The term “entertainer” means a person who, for any form of consideration, or on a voluntary basis, performs any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, movie, song, dance act, song and dance act, exhibition, athletic competition, sporting event, dancing for compensation, or poetry recitation, performed for the benefit of the public at an adult-oriented business. Such persons shall constitute “entertainers” regardless of their legal relationship (e.g., employee, owner, independent contractor, or volunteer) with the adult-oriented business.

(8) Figure Model. “Figure model,” as used in this section, means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, consideration, hire or reward, or on a voluntary or otherwise unpaid basis, poses or appears in an adult modeling studio either nude or semi-nude, displays “specified anatomical areas,” or performs “specified sexual activities” to be observed, sketched, filmed, photographed, videotaped, electronically or digitally recorded, painted, drawn, sculpted, or otherwise depicted by persons on the premises, cable-casted, web-casted, broadcasted, transmitted to persons or locations off-site, or otherwise provided for sale.

(9) Nudity or a State of Nudity. “Nudity or a state of nudity,” as used in this section, means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.

(10) Operate an Adult-Oriented Business. As used in this section, “operate an adult-oriented business” means the supervising, managing, inspecting, directing, organizing, controlling, or in any way being responsible for or in charge of the conduct of activities of an adult-oriented business or activities within an adult-oriented business.

(11) Owner. The term “owner” shall mean the following: (i) the sole proprietor of an adult-oriented business; (ii) any general partner of a partnership which owns and operates an adult-oriented business; (iii) the owner of a controlling interest in a corporation which owns and operates an adult-oriented business; and (iv) the person designated by the officers of a corporation to be the permit holder for an adult-oriented business owned and operated by the corporation.

(12) Parks. For purposes of this chapter, the term “parks” means a park, trail, recreation center, sports complex, golf course or athletic field in the City which is under the control, operation or management of the City or other public agency.

(13) Permittee. “Permittee,” as used in this section, means the person to whom an adult-oriented business permit is issued.

(14) “Person” means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, association, joint stock company, corporation, or combination of the above in whatever form or character.

(15) Planning Director. The term “Planning Director” means the Director of Planning of the City of Palmdale, or his or her designee.

(16) Regularly Features. As used in this section, the term “regularly features” with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two or more occasions within a 30-day period; three or more occasions within a 60-day period; or four or more occasions within a 180-day period, shall to the extent permitted by law, be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

(17) Semi-nude. As used in this section, the term “semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

(18) Specified Anatomical Areas. As used herein, “specified anatomical areas” shall mean and include any of the following:

(a) Less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or pubic region; (ii) buttocks; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

(b) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered; or

(c) Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection (B)(18)(a) or (b) of this section.

(19) Specified Sexual Activities. As used herein, “specified sexual activities” shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

(a) The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

(b) Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

(c) Masturbation, actual or simulated;

(d) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections (19)(a) through (c) of this section.

(20) Substantially Enlarged. The term “substantially enlarged” as used in this section means the increase in floor area occupied by an adult-oriented business by more than 10 percent of its floor area as it existed at the time an adult-oriented regulatory permit was issued for the business.

(C) Permits Required.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the City of Palmdale, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a permit from the City of Palmdale as herein required (adult-oriented business regulatory permit).

(2) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of an entertainer at an adult-oriented business unless that person first obtains from the City Council and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult-oriented business entertainer permit.

(D) Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit Required. Every person who proposes to maintain, operate, or conduct an adult-oriented business in the City of Palmdale shall file an application with the business license division of the Planning Department upon a form provided by the City of Palmdale and shall pay a filing fee, as established by resolution adopted by the City Council from time to time, which shall not be refundable. The owner of a proposed adult-oriented business shall be the only person eligible to obtain an adult-oriented business regulatory permit for such business. The owner shall not be eligible to obtain such a permit unless the owner is at least 18 years of age.

(E) Applications. Adult-oriented business regulatory permits are nontransferable, except in accordance with subsection (H) of this section. Therefore, all applications shall include the following information:

(1)(a) If the applicant is an individual, the individual shall state his or her legal name, including any aliases, address, and submit satisfactory written proof that he or she is at least 18 years of age,

(b) If the applicant is a partnership, the partners shall state the partnership’s complete name, address, the names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and attach a copy of the partnership agreement, if any,

(c) If the applicant is a corporation, the corporation shall provide its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service of process;

(2) If the applicant is an individual, he or she shall sign the application. If the applicant is other than an individual, an officer of the business entity or an individual with a 10 percent or greater interest in the business entity shall sign the application;

(3) A copy of the applicant’s photographic identification, as defined in PMC 1.04.100;

(4) If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall file the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business and show proof of registration of the fictitious name;

(5) A description of the type of adult-oriented business for which the permit is requested and the proposed address where the adult-oriented business will operate, plus evidence of legal occupancy of the proposed business location (i.e., trust deed, rental or lease agreement), and the names, business telephone number(s) and addresses of the owners and lessors of the adult-oriented business site;

(6) The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed;

(7) The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by subsection (J) of this section to obtain an adult-oriented business entertainer license (for ongoing reporting requirements, see subsection (J)(1) of this section);

(8) A complete security plan which describes the proposed security measures applicable to the proposed business including, but not limited to, security guards, perimeter and interior alarms, cameras or metal detectors;

(9) A sketch or diagram showing the interior configuration of the premises, including a statement of the total floor area occupied by the adult-oriented business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared, but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches;

(10) A certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within 30 days prior to application depicting the building and the portion thereof to be occupied by the adult-oriented business, and: (a) the property line of any other adult-oriented business within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business for which a permit is requested; and (b) the property lines of any church, school, park, primary alcohol use, excluding convenience stores, residential zone, or residential use within 1,000 feet of the primary entrance of the adult-oriented business;

(11) A diagram of the off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business showing the location of the lighting system required by subsection (I)(3) of this section;

(12) A statement signed by the applicant certifying under penalty of perjury that all of the information submitted in connection with the application is true and correct to the best of the applicant’s knowledge.

(F) Investigation and Action on Application.

(1) If the Planning Director determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the Planning Director shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and, on request of the applicant, grant the applicant an extension of time of 10 days or less to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed 10 days, of the time for the City to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

(2) The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or City permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

(3) Upon receipt of a completed application and payment of the application and permit fees, the Planning Director shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the information contained in the application to determine whether the applicant shall be issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

(4) Within 60 days of receipt of the completed application, the Planning Director shall complete the investigation and forward the application to the City Council, which shall grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and so notify the applicant as follows:

(a) The Planning Director shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

(b) If the application is denied, the Planning Director shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

(c) If the application is granted, the Planning Director shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

(d) The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

(5) The City Council shall grant the application and issue the adult-oriented business regulatory permit upon findings that the proposed business meets the locational criteria of Section 92.05.C.1 of the City of Palmdale zoning ordinance, and that the applicant has met all of the development and performance standards and requirements of subsection (I) of this section, unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection (G) of this section. The permittee shall post the permit conspicuously in the adult-oriented business premises.

(6) If the City Council grants the application or if the City Council neither grants nor denies the application within 60 days after it is stamped as received except as provided in subsection (F)(1) of this section, the applicant may begin operating the adult-oriented business for which the permit was sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and requirements of subsection (I) of this section.

(G) Permit Denial.

(1) The City Council shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

(a) An applicant is under 18 years of age;

(b) The required application fee has not been paid;

(c) The adult-oriented business does not comply with the zoning ordinance locational standards, Section 92.05.C.1;

(d) The building, structure, equipment, or location used by the business for which an adult-oriented business regulatory permit is required do not comply with the requirements and standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the City and the state of California, or with the development and performance standards and requirements of this section;

(e) The applicant, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, shareholder, or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

(H) Transfer of Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permits.

(1) A permittee shall not operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business regulatory permit at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application for the permit.

(2) A permittee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business or transfer an adult-oriented business regulatory permit to another person unless and until the transferee obtains an amendment to the permit from the City stating that the transferee is now the permittee. Such an amendment may be obtained only if the transferee files an application with the City in accordance with subsections (E) and (F) of this section, accompanies the application with a transfer fee in an amount set by resolution of the City Council, and the City Council determines, in accordance with subsection (F) of this section, that the transferee would be entitled to the issuance of an original permit.

(3) No permit may be transferred when the City has notified the permittee that the permit has been or may be suspended or revoked.

(4) Any attempt to transfer a permit either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is hereby declared void, and the permit shall be deemed revoked.

(I) Adult-Oriented Business Development and Performance Standards.

(1) Maximum occupancy load, fire exits, aisles and fire equipment shall be regulated, designed, and provided in accordance with the Fire Department and building regulations and standards adopted by the City of Palmdale.

(2) No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any material or activities depicting, describing, or relating to “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

(3) All off-street parking areas and premises entries of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkways. The required lighting level is established in order to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to reduce the incidence of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.

(4) The premises within which the adult-oriented business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that noise generated inside said premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate unit within the same building.

(5) Except for those businesses also regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, an adult-oriented business shall be open for business only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and midnight on any particular day.

(6) The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under 18 years of age are precluded from entering the premises. The notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the Planning Director or designee. No person under the age of 18 years shall be permitted within the premises at any time.

(7) All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business within which patrons are permitted, except restrooms, shall be open to view by the management at all times.

(8) Any adult-oriented business which is also an adult-oriented motion picture theater shall also comply with PMC 5.04.570(B).

(9) Trash dumpsters shall be enclosed by a screening enclosure so as not to be accessible to the public.

(10) No landscaping shall exceed 30 inches in height, except trees with foliage not less than six feet above the ground.

(11) All areas of the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated at a minimum of the following foot-candles, minimally maintained and evenly distributed at ground level:

Area

Foot-Candles

Bookstores, novelty stores and video stores

20

Theaters and cabarets (except during performances, at which times lighting shall be at least 1.25 foot-candles)

5

Arcades

10

Motels/hotels (in public areas)

20

Modeling studios

20

(12) The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, and female patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for males, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance, and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult material. Restrooms shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording, or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this subsection (I)(12) shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public.

(13) Any adult-oriented business which is also an “adult arcade,” shall comply with the following provisions:

(a) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection must be direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

(b) The view area specified in subsection (I)(13)(a) of this section shall remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials at all times. No patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.

(c) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one time.

(d) The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms.

(e) Customers, patrons, or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or from remaining in the common area of such business, other than the restrooms, who are not actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths.

(f) The floors, seats, walls, and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen, or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls; repeated instances of such conditions may justify suspension or revocation of the adult-oriented business permit.

(14) The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing performances by an entertainer, except for businesses regulated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission:

(a) No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least 24 inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least 10 feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons, and no patron shall be permitted within 10 feet of the stage while the stage is occupied by an entertainer.

(b) The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for entertainers which are exclusively dedicated to the entertainers’ use.

(c) The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for entertainers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons.

(d) The adult-oriented business shall provide access for entertainers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such separate access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three-foot-wide walk aisle for entertainers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence, or other barrier separating the patrons and the entertainers capable of (and which actually results in) preventing any physical contact between patrons and entertainers.

(e) No entertainer, either before, during, or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during, or after performances by such entertainer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

(f) Fixed rail(s) at least 30 inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between entertainers and patrons required by this subsection.

(g) No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any entertainer and no entertainer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron.

(h) No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business (as that term is defined herein) shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This provision may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered.

(15) Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based upon the following standards:

(a) Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall provide at least one security guard at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than 35 persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty.

(b) Security guards for other adult-oriented businesses may be required if it is determined by the Sheriff’s Department that their presence is necessary in order to prevent any of the conduct listed in subsection (M)(1)(b) of this section from occurring on the premises.

(c) Security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons of the requirements of these regulations. Security guards shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, or sole occupant of the manager’s station while acting as a security guard.

The foregoing applicable requirements of this subsection shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business regulatory permit approvals, and failure to comply with all such requirements shall be grounds for revocation of the permit issued pursuant to these regulations.

(J) Adult-Oriented Business Entertainer Permit.

(1) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the activity of an entertainer at an adult-oriented business unless that person first obtains from the Planning Director and continues to maintain in full force and effect, an adult-oriented business entertainer permit. All persons who have been issued an adult-oriented business regulatory permit shall promptly supplement the information provided as part of the application for the permit required by subsection (D) of this section, with the names of all entertainers required to obtain an adult-oriented business entertainer permit, within 30 days of any change in the information originally submitted. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business regulatory permit.

(2) The Planning Director shall grant, deny, and renew adult-oriented business entertainer permits.

(3) The application for a permit shall be made on a form provided by the business license division of the Planning Department. An original and two copies of the completed and sworn permit application shall be filed with the business license division.

(4) The completed application shall contain the following information and be accompanied by the following documents:

(a) The applicant’s legal name and any other names (including “stage names” and aliases) used by the applicant;

(b) Age, date, and place of birth;

(c) Sex, height, weight, hair, and eye color;

(d) Present residence address and telephone number;

(e) Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of either:

(i) Any of the offenses set forth in Sections 315, 316, 243.5, 266a, 266b, 266c, 266e, 266g, 266h, 266l, 415, 647(a), 647(b), and 647(d) of the California Penal Code as those sections now exist or may hereafter be amended or renumbered, or

(ii) The equivalent of the aforesaid offenses outside the state of California;

(f) Whether such person is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution in such other jurisdiction. If any person mentioned in this subsection has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other state to engage in prostitution, a statement shall be submitted giving the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which such person was so licensed, registered, or authorized to engage in prostitution;

(g) A copy of the applicant’s photographic identification, as defined in PMC 1.04.100;

(h) Satisfactory written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age;

(i) The applicant’s fingerprints in the manner determined by the Sheriff’s Department, and a color photograph clearly showing the applicant’s face. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant;

(j) If the application is made for the purpose of renewing a license, the applicant shall attach a copy of the license to be renewed.

(5) The completed application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee. The amount of the fee shall be set by resolution of the City Council.

(6) Upon receipt of an application and payment of the application fees, the Planning Director shall immediately stamp the application as received and promptly investigate the application.

(7) If the Planning Director determines that the applicant has completed the application improperly, the Planning Director shall promptly notify the applicant of such fact and grant the application an extension of time of not more than 10 days to complete the application properly. In addition, the applicant may request an extension, not to exceed 10 days, of the time for the City to act on the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is granted an extension of time.

(K) Investigation and Action on Application for Adult-Oriented Business Entertainer Permit.

(1) Within three days after receipt of the properly completed application, the Planning Director shall complete the investigation and shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows:

(a) The Planning Director shall write or stamp “Granted” or “Denied” on the application and date and sign such notation.

(b) If the application is denied, the Planning Director shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial.

(c) If the application is granted, the Planning Director shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business entertainer permit.

(d) The application as granted or denied and the permit, if any, shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the residence address stated in the application.

(2) The Planning Director shall grant the application and issue the permit unless the application is denied for one or more of the reasons set forth in subsection (K)(4) of this section.

(3) If the Planning Director grants the application or if the Planning Director neither grants nor denies the application within three days after it is stamped as received except as provided in subsection (J)(7) of this section, the applicant may begin performing in the capacity for which the license was sought.

(4) The Planning Director shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:

(a) The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or document required to be filed with the application;

(b) The applicant is under 18 years of age;

(c) The adult-oriented business entertainer permit is to be used for performing in a business prohibited by state or City law;

(d) The applicant has been convicted of any of the offenses enumerated in subsection (J)(4)(e) of this section or convicted of an offense outside the state of California that would have constituted any of the described offenses if committed within the state of California. A permit may be issued to any person convicted of the described crimes if the conviction occurred more than five years prior to the date of the application.

(5) Each adult-oriented business entertainer permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by filing with the business license division a written request for renewal, accompanied by the application fee and a copy of the permit to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least 60 days before the expiration date. When made less than 60 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the permit will not be stayed. Applications for renewal shall be acted on as provided herein for applications for permits.

(L) Suspension or Revocation of an Adult-Oriented Business Regulatory Permit.

(1) Grounds for Suspension or Revocation. The City Council shall suspend or revoke an adult-oriented business regulatory permit for any of the following causes:

(a) The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City;

(b) The permittee, or an employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly failed to comply with any of the requirements of this section;

(c) The permittee, or an employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted the occurrence of criminal activity on the premises of the adult-oriented business;

(d) The permittee, or an employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the adult-oriented business has committed a misdemeanor or felony in the conduct of the business;

(e) The permittee, or an employee, owner, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of the adult-oriented business has failed to abide by any disciplinary action previously imposed by an authorized City official;

(f) The approved use has been substantially enlarged without City approval.

(2) Procedure for Suspension or Revocation.

(a) Notice. On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the Director shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing on the proposed revocation by the City Council, and the ground(s) upon which the proposed suspension or revocation is based. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be personally delivered to the permittee personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.

(b) Hearings. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Director. All parties involved shall have a right to: (1) offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; (2) be represented by counsel; and (3) confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this subsection may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

(3) Penalty. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this subsection, upon determining that there are sufficient grounds for disciplinary action, the City Council shall impose one of the following penalties:

(a) A warning;

(b) Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months;

(c) Revocation of the permit.

The City Council may, in conjunction with the issuance of a warning or the suspension of a permit, order the permittee to take appropriate corrective action.

(M) Suspension or Revocation of an Adult-Oriented Entertainer Permit.

(1) Grounds for Suspension or Revocation. The Planning Director shall suspend or revoke an adult-oriented business entertainer permit for any of the following causes:

(a) The permittee has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the City;

(b) The permittee has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult-oriented business:

(i) Unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation,

(ii) Unlawful solicitation of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation,

(iii) Any conduct constituting a criminal offense which requires registration under Section 290 of the California Penal Code,

(iv) Lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, including any conduct constituting violations of Section 315, 316, or 318 or subdivision (b) of Section 647 of the California Penal Code,

(v) Any act constituting a violation of provisions in the California Penal Code relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors, including, but not limited to, Sections 311 through 313.4,

(vi) Any conduct prohibited by this section;

(c) Failure to abide by a disciplinary action previously imposed by an authorized City official.

(2) Procedure for Suspension or Revocation.

(a) Notice. On determining that grounds for permit revocation exist, the Director shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the permittee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing on the proposed revocation by the Director, and the ground(s) upon which the proposed suspension or revocation is based. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the last known address of the permittee, or shall be personally delivered to the permittee personally, at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.

(b) Hearings. Hearings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures established by the Director. All parties involved shall have a right to: (1) offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence bearing on the issues; (2) be represented by counsel; and (3) confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this subsection may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

(3) Penalty. After holding the hearing in accordance with the provisions of this subsection, upon determining that there are sufficient grounds for disciplinary action, the Director shall impose one of the following penalties:

(a) A warning;

(b) Suspension of the permit for a specified period not to exceed six months;

(c) Revocation of the permit.

The Director may, in conjunction with the issuance of a warning or the suspension of a permit, order the permittee to take appropriate corrective action.

(N) Appeals.

(1) Who May Appeal. Any interested person may appeal the Director’s issuance, denial of issuance, suspension or revocation of an adult-oriented entertainer permit to the City Council in accordance with the provisions of this subsection.

(2) Appeal Period. A written appeal petition must be filed with the City Clerk no later than 14 calendar days after the decision of the Director; provided, however, that if the 14 days expires on a date that City Hall is not open for business, then the appeal period shall be extended to the next business day. Failure to file a timely appeal petition deprives the City Council of jurisdiction to hear the appeal.

(3) Form of Appeal Petition. The appeal petition must indicate in what way the appellant contends the Director’s decision was incorrect or must provide extenuating circumstances which the appellant contends would justify reversal or modification of the Director’s decision.

(4) Director’s Decision Stayed. The effectiveness of any decision of the Director to suspend or revoke an adult-oriented business entertainer permit shall be stayed during: (a) the appeal period set forth in subsection (N)(2) of this section; and (b) the pendency of any appeal.

(5) City Council Consideration. The City Council shall consider an appeal of a decision by the Director at its first available regular meeting following submission of the appeal, unless the appellant consents in writing to an extension. At least 10 days prior to the appeal hearing before the City Council, written notice of such hearing shall be mailed to the appellant. The City Council may continue the appeal hearing as necessary or convenient.

(6) City Council Decision. No later than 45 days from the filing of a timely appeal, unless the appellant consents to an extension, the City Council shall render a decision on the appeal. The City Council may affirm, modify, or reverse the decision of the Director. The decision of the City Council shall be made no later than three City business days after the City Council’s decision. Notice of the decision and a copy of the resolution shall be mailed by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appellant. Such notice shall contain the substance of the following statement: “You are hereby notified that the time within which judicial review of this decision may be sought is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6.”

(7) Judicial Review. The appellant may seek judicial review of the City Council’s decision in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. or as otherwise permitted by law.

(O) Judicial Review of Denial, Suspension or Revocation. After denial of an application for an adult-oriented business regulatory permit, denial of an adult-oriented business entertainer permit, denial of renewal of an adult-oriented business entertainer permit, suspension or revocation of any such permits and the exhaustion of any administrative appeal process set forth in this section, the applicant or person to whom the permit was granted may seek prompt judicial review of such action pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5.

(P) Register and Permit Number of Employees. Every permittee of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or depicting specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all persons so performing on the premises and their permit numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any Sheriff’s Officer or Code Enforcement Officer of the City of Palmdale.

(Q) Display of Permit and Identification Cards.

(1) Every adult-oriented business shall display at all times during business hours the permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for such adult-oriented business in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by all persons entering the adult-oriented business.

(2) The business license division shall provide each adult-oriented business entertainer required to have a permit pursuant to the chapter, with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph, and permit number of such entertainer.

(3) An adult-oriented business entertainer shall have such card available for inspection at all times during which such person is on the premises of the adult-oriented business.

(R) Employment of and Services Rendered to Persons under the Age of 18 Years Prohibited.

(1) It is unlawful for any permittee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to employ, or provide any service for which it requires such permit to, any person who is not at least 18 years of age.

(2) It is unlawful for any permittee, operator or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult-oriented business, any person who is not at least 18 years of age.

(S) Gross Receipts Records.

(1) Maintenance. The owner of an adult-oriented business shall maintain complete records which can be segregated with regard to all transactions involving products, merchandise, services or entertainment which are characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. Such records shall be sufficient to establish the percentage of gross receipts of the business which is derived from such transactions. Such records shall be maintained for at least three years after the end of the calendar year for which the records were created.

(2) Exemption. This subsection (S) shall not be applicable to an adult-oriented business for which such transactions constitute less than 15 percent of the gross receipts of the business.

(T) Inspection. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Sheriff’s Department, Health Department, Fire Department, Planning Department, or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law and the development and performance standards applicable to adult-oriented businesses, at any time it is occupied or opened for business. A person who operates an adult-oriented business or his or her agent or employee is in violation of the provisions of this section if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time it is occupied or open for business.

(U) Regulations Nonexclusive. The provisions of this article regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the City Council of the City of Palmdale.

(V) Employment of Persons without Permits Unlawful. It is unlawful for any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge of or in control of an adult-oriented business which provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or depicting specified sexual activities to allow any person to perform such entertainment who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked adult-oriented business entertainer permit.

(W) Existing Adult-Oriented Businesses.

(1) Any adult-oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section in violation hereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use.

(2) Any adult-oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section which becomes nonconforming due to the location requirements enumerated in zoning ordinance Section 92.05(C)(1) shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the location requirements of this section, not later than 20 years following the effective date of those requirements.

(3) Any adult-oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section which becomes nonconforming due to either the design or performance standards enumerated in subsection (I) of this section shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the design standards and performance standards of this section, not later than one year following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

(4) Any adult-oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section which becomes nonconforming based upon the definitions enumerated in subsection (B) of this section (Definitions) shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the definitions of this section, not later than three years following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

(5) Any adult-oriented business lawfully operating on the date of being annexed by the City which becomes nonconforming due to the location requirements enumerated in zoning ordinance Section 92.05(C)(1) shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the location requirements of this section, not later than 20 years following the effective date of those criteria.

(6) Any adult-oriented business lawfully operating on the date of being annexed by the City which becomes nonconforming due to either the design or performance standards enumerated in subsection (I) of this section shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the design standards and performance standards of this section, not later than one year following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

(7) An adult-oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a nonconforming use by the subsequent location of: (i) a residential use or zone within 1,000 feet of the adult-oriented business; or (ii) a park, primary alcohol use, excluding convenience stores, church or school within 1,000 feet of the adult-oriented business. This exemption shall only apply if the adult-oriented business is continuous, which means that interruptions cannot exceed six months.

(8) Any adult-oriented business lawfully operating on the date of being annexed by the City which becomes nonconforming based upon the definitions enumerated in subsection (B) of this section shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the definitions of this section, not later than three years following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

(X) Conflicts. If the provisions of this section conflict with or contravene any other provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this section shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of this section. (Ord. 1317 §§ 2, 3, 2007; Ord. 1299 §§ 4, 5, 2007; Ord. U-1299 §§ 4, 5, 2006; Ord. 1280 § 2, 2006; Ord. U-1280 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1120 §§ 6, 7, 8, 1998; Ord. 1115 § 3, 1997; Ord. U-1115 § 3, 1997; Ord. 1108 § 2(b), 1997; Ord. 915 § 2, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.410 Ambulances and ambulance drivers.
(A) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Ambulance” means a motor vehicle specially constructed, modified, equipped or arranged for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm or otherwise incapacitated persons whose medical condition requires transportation services.

(2) “Ambulance attendant” means any person who is employed to accompany an ambulance driver while transporting a person whose medical condition requires medical transportation.

(3) “Ambulance driver” means any person who is employed by an ambulance operator to drive an ambulance.

(4) “Ambulance operator” means any person who, for any monetary or other consideration, or as an incident to any other occupation, offers ambulance transportation services from any location in the City.

(B) Exemptions.

(1) Generally. No permit for an ambulance operator, ambulance driver, or ambulance attendant is required where the ambulance operator is:

(a) A public agency; or

(b) A person who maintains ambulances to provide first aid to its own employees.

(2) Exemption for Intercity Transportation. The requirements of this section do not apply where the ambulance operator is transporting persons from a point outside of the City into the City, or where the ambulance operator is merely travelling through the City to reach its destination.

(C) Application Information – Ambulance Operators. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, the application for an ambulance operator shall contain the following information:

(1) A description of any and all judgments awarded against the applicant in all cases arising out of the applicant’s operation of an ambulance service in any other jurisdiction;

(2) The model, age, condition and patient capacity of each ambulance to be used in the operation of the ambulance business, and a description of the premises which are to serve as the base of operations;

(3) The kind and amount of automobile liability, public liability, professional liability, workers’ compensation, and other insurance carried by the ambulance operator applicant;

(4) The color scheme and insignia to be used to identify the applicant’s ambulances;

(5) The applicant’s experience in transporting sick, convalescent or injured persons; and

(6) The schedule of rates to be charged by the applicant.

(D) Vehicle Maintenance.

(1) Odometers. Every ambulance operator making any charges based on mileage shall have the odometer of each ambulance tested and certified by the Sheriff’s Department in accordance with the procedures of that department once every year. The results of such testing shall be reported to the Director by the permittee within 10 days.

(2) Periodic Inspections. Every ambulance operator who transports patients from or within the City shall have all ambulances under its ownership and control inspected yearly by a certified automotive repair dealer. Each ambulance operator shall provide the City with written confirmation, signed by that repair dealer, that the ambulances have been inspected and are in good working order within 10 days of the inspection.

(3) Failure to Make Inspection. If an ambulance operator fails to conduct a periodic inspection or fails to correct any maintenance problem noted in the inspection within 15 days of its discovery, such ambulance operator’s permit shall be subject to immediate suspension pending revocation proceedings in accordance with this chapter.

(E) Insurance Requirements.

(1) Insurance Required. Every applicant for an ambulance operator’s permit shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect general liability insurance and comprehensive automobile liability insurance in conformance with PMC 5.04.240. The liability coverage shall be in the amount of $1,000,000.

(2) Indemnifications. Every person permitted pursuant to this section shall execute an indemnity agreement as required by PMC 5.04.240.

(3) Workers’ Compensation Insurance. In addition to any other insurance requirements contained in this chapter, the applicant shall file with the Director a policy of workers’ compensation insurance, or a certificate of consent to self-insure issued by the State Director of Industrial Relations, applicable to all employees of the applicant. The permittee shall thereafter maintain in full force and effect such coverage during the term of the permit.

(F) Permits – Ambulance Drivers – Ambulance Attendants.

(1) Application Information. The permit application for an ambulance driver or ambulance attendant shall contain the following information:

(a) The applicant’s name, address and home phone number;

(b) A photocopy of a valid California special driver’s certificate (where applicable);

(c) A photocopy of either an Emergency Medical Technician I or IA or II Course Completion Certificate issued by the County of Los Angeles or by a school approved by the County of Los Angeles or a certificate for an emergency medical technician-paramedic issued by the Director of Health Services, unless the applicant is a physician or registered nurse licensed by the state;

(d) The name, address and phone number of the ambulance operator employing or intending to employ the applicant; and

(e) The ambulance operator’s proposed service area.

(2) Effect of Revocation of Certificate. If any applicable certificate required under this section is suspended, revoked, restricted or otherwise ceases to continue in full force and effect, the City permit for which such certification is required may be immediately suspended pending revocation proceedings as mandated by this chapter.

(3) Operator Responsibility. Every ambulance operator shall be responsible for promulgating and enforcing rules which ensure its employees’ compliance with this section. (Ord. 1026 § 2, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.420 Billiards.
(A) Definitions. For the purposes of this section the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Billiards,” “bagatelle,” or “pool” means a game, played on an oblong table, whose object is to hit balls into pockets around the table’s edge by means of a cue or stick.

(2) “Billiard club” means a proprietary club where billiards, bagatelle or pool is played, or in which any billiard, bagatelle or pool table is kept and persons are permitted to play or do play thereon, regardless of whether any fee is charged for the use of such table. “Billiard club” does not include a place having only one coin-operated pool or billiard table, which table is maintained as an incident to some other type of business activity.

(3) “Public billiard room” means any place open to the public where billiards, bagatelle or pool is played, or in which any billiard, bagatelle or pool table is kept and persons are permitted to play or do play thereon, regardless of whether any fee is charged for the use of such table. “Public billiard room” does not include a place having only one coin-operated pool or billiard table, which table is maintained as an incident to some other type of business activity.

(B) General Requirements.

(1) Application Information. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, an application for a permit to operate a billiard club or public billiard room shall state the exact location within the business establishment where the public billiard room or billiard club is to be located if such constitutes only a portion of a more extensive business establishment.

(2) Authorization of Location. Any permit issued to conduct a billiard club or public billiard room shall authorize the operation of such billiard club or public billiard room only at the place described in the application and only by the applicant.

(C) Operating Requirements.

(1) Visibility of Interior of Premises. Every billiard club or public billiard room shall be maintained so as to provide a clear and unobstructed view of the entire interior of the public billiard room or billiard club from the entrance into such room or club. A public billiard room or billiard club may be part of a more extensive business establishment that conducts other business activities and, in that event, need not be visible from the entrance to the more extensive business establishment.

(2) Hours of Operation.

(a) Generally. No public billiard room, billiard club or similar place of business shall be open from 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. of any day, nor shall an owner, manager or other person having charge of any billiard club or public billiard room keep the same open or allow or permit any game to be played therein between 2:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. of any day. No person shall remain on the premises of any public billiard room or billiard club during the hours when such public billiard room or billiard club is closed or required by this section to be closed, except the owner and regular employees.

(b) Exceptions. Notwithstanding subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section, any person having charge of any billiard room may apply to the Director for a permit to keep such room open from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m. The Director may grant such a permit if it finds that:

(i) The operation of the billiard room is on the same premises and is operated in conjunction with any other business that is normally and regularly operated between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.; and

(ii) There is no objection to such operation by the Sheriff’s Department.

(3) Age Restrictions. The owner, manager or other person in charge of any public billiard room or billiard club shall not permit any person under the age of 18 years to be, remain in, enter or visit such place unless:

(a) Such minor is accompanied by one of his parents or by his guardian or by a spouse 18 years of age or older; or

(b) Such parent or guardian personally presents a written consent to the owner, manager or other person in charge that the minor be permitted to enter, and alcoholic beverages are neither sold nor served in such place, and such place has no permit to sell, dispense or serve alcoholic beverages. Such written consent shall be in a form approved by the Director.

(4) Exceptions. Notwithstanding subsections (C)(2) and (3) of this section, if a billiard club or public billiard room is maintained in a segregable and physically separate part of a more extensive business establishment, then its closure does not require the closure of the more extensive business establishment, and the age restrictions do not apply to the more extensive business establishment. The restrictions set forth in subsections (C)(2) and (3) of this section shall only apply to the segregated billiard club or public billiard room.

(5) Disorderly Persons. No owner, manager or other person in charge of any public billiard room or billiard club shall allow or permit any intoxicated, quarreling or disorderly person or persons to be or remain in such place. (Ord. U-1030 § 10, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.430 Bingo.
(A) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conforms to numbers or symbols selected at random. The game of bingo shall include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes.

(2) “Eligible organization” shall be defined as any of the following:

(a) Labor, agricultural or horticultural organizations exempted from the payment of bank and corporation taxes by Section 23701a of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

(b) Fraternal beneficiary societies, orders or organizations exempted from payment of bank and corporation taxes by Section 23701b of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

(c) Religious, charitable, scientific, literary, educational, amateur sports or humanitarian organizations exempted from payment of bank and corporation taxes by Section 23701d of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

(d) Business leagues, chambers of commerce, real estate boards and boards of trade exempted from payment of bank and corporation taxes by Section 23701e of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

(e) Civic leagues, social welfare and employees’ organizations exempted from payment of bank and corporation taxes by Section 23701f of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

(f) Nonprofit pleasure and recreation clubs exempted from payment of bank and corporation taxes by Section 23701g of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

(g) Domestic fraternal societies, orders or associations exempted from payment of bank and corporation taxes by Section 23701l of the State Revenue and Taxation Code;

(h) A mobile home park association whose membership is comprised of the mobile home tenants of a single mobile home park, and which organization was formed for the benefit of the resident tenants; and

(i) A senior citizens organization which has been organized to benefit senior citizens and whose membership is comprised of persons over the age of 54.

(B) General Requirements.

(1) Games Permitted. Pursuant to Article IV, Section 19, of the California Constitution and Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code, this section authorizes the conduct of bingo games for charitable purposes and in conformity with the other requirements imposed herein.

(2) Eligible Organizations. Only an eligible organization may apply for a permit to operate bingo games within the City.

(3) General Procedure. The provisions of this section shall control the permitting of bingo games where in conflict with any other provisions of this chapter.

(a) Application Information. Any eligible organization shall file an application for a business permit to operate a bingo game with the Director upon a form to be provided by the City. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the application shall specify the following information:

(i) The name, address and telephone number of the local applicant organization, the nature of the organization, and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization as defined by this section;

(ii) The names and addresses of all officers and directors of the eligible organization;

(iii) A list of the names of all members of the applicant organization who will operate and staff bingo games, and the date they became members;

(iv) A detailed schedule of the date, hours, location and occupancy capacity of the prospective location where each bingo game is to be held;

(v) A detailed description of the record system to account for the receipts, prizes, expenses and profits of each bingo game;

(vi) The location and signatories of the special bank accounts required by this section;

(vii) The specific charitable purposes which the bingo proceeds will benefit;

(viii) Whether the maximum number of players at any time will be more than 100;

(ix) A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this section as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the permit to conduct bingo games may be revoked upon violation of any such provisions;

(x) The address to which notice, when required, is to be sent or mailed, and the names of any individual or individuals, in addition to those set forth elsewhere in the application, who are authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the permittee;

(xi) The signatures of at least two officers, including the presiding officer of the eligible organization; and

(xii) Any other information that the Director deems necessary.

(b) Fees Required. The fee for a business permit to operate bingo games shall be in an amount established by resolution of the City Council but shall not exceed $50.00 annually for an initial permit or a renewal. If an application for a permit is denied, one-half of any permit fee paid shall be refunded.

(c) Contents of Permit. A business permit to operate bingo games shall include the following information:

(i) The name and nature of the organization to which the permit is issued;

(ii) The address or location of the place where bingo games are authorized to be conducted. No more than one such location shall be authorized;

(iii) The occupancy capacity of the rooms in which bingo games are to be conducted;

(iv) The date of the expiration of the permit;

(v) Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

(d) Notification of Changes in Application Information.

(i) The permittee shall notify the Director in writing of the change of any fact set forth in the permittee’s application within five days.

(ii) The permittee shall notify the Director of any changes in the list of members who will operate and staff bingo games.

(iii) Any notification required by subsections (B)(3)(d)(i) and (ii) of this section shall be made in writing and served upon the Director in one of the following methods:

(A) Personal delivery at least three days prior to the operation of any game. The permittee shall obtain a receipt evidencing such delivery; or

(B) Transmittal of such changes by certified mail bearing a date at least five days prior to the operation of any game.

(iv) The permittee shall retain in its records proof of service of the notifications required by subsections (B)(3)(d)(i) and (ii) of this section.

(C) Operating Requirements.

(1) Games Open to Public. All bingo games conducted in the City shall be open to all members of the public.

(2) Hours of Operation. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall allow the permittee to operate bingo games for only one day during each week. Bingo games shall not be conducted for more than six hours out of the 24-hour period of each day. No bingo game shall be conducted before 10:00 a.m. or after 2:00 a.m. of any day.

(3) Participants Must Be Present to Play. No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted.

(4) Use of Credit Prohibited. No permittee shall issue chips or money to a patron on credit or loan (including but not limited to IOUs and checks to be held) or allow any patron to play on credit.

(5) No Admission Fees. No admission fee, purchase or donation shall be required for entry onto the premises where the bingo game is conducted.

(6) Location Restrictions.

(a) A permittee shall conduct bingo games only on property owned, rented or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned, rented or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. The permit issued under this section shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only at the address which is stated in the application.

(b) The owner of a specific facility at which bingo games are played shall not allow use of the facility for such play for more than three days per week.

(7) Occupancy Limit. Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such games are conducted, as determined by the Fire Department and the Division of Building and Safety, in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The permittee shall not reserve seats or space for any person.

(8) Permit and Rules to Be Posted. Before conducting a bingo game, the permittee shall post its business permit to operate the bingo game in a conspicuous place at the public entrance to the property on which the game is to be conducted. The permittee shall produce and exhibit the same when applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any officer authorized to issue or inspect permits or to enforce the provisions of this chapter or this code. The permittee shall also post the costs, prizes and rules of each game to be played adjacent to the permit during the conduct of the bingo game.

(9) List of Members Operating and Staffing Games. The permittee shall have available on the premises the list of members operating and staffing the game at all times during the conduct of games. If the list is different from the list originally submitted with the permittee’s application, proof of service of the revised list on the Director shall be attached to the current list.

(10) Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited. Alcoholic beverages shall not be served or consumed on the premises at which bingo games are conducted during the hours of operation of a bingo game. No person who is intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game.

(11) Minors Not to Participate. No person under the age of 18 years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

(12) Enforcement. The City, by and through its authorized personnel, may conduct an examination or inspection of any premises in which bingo games are conducted at any reasonable time for the purpose of determining whether the permittee is complying with all of the provisions of this section and all other applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations affecting the permittee or the business activity.

(13) Operation by Permittee.

(a) A bingo game shall be operated, managed, staffed and advertised only by members of the permittee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary, or any other direct or indirect consideration from any bingo game.

(b) All staff members of bingo games shall wear on their outside clothing an identification insignia or badge not less than two inches by three inches in dimension, indicating the name and title of the staff member.

(14) Bingo Game Operators.

(a) All members of eligible organizations who operate the bingo games on behalf of an eligible organization shall apply for a bingo operator’s permit with the Director upon a form provided by the City. A permit fee shall not be required; however, no person shall operate a bingo game on behalf of a permitted eligible organization until such application has been reviewed and approved pursuant to PMC 5.04.180.

(b) The application for a bingo operator shall contain the following information:

(i) The applicant’s name, address and phone number;

(ii) Photographic identification, as defined in PMC 1.04.100, and fingerprints of the applicant;

(iii) A record of the applicant’s employment history for the last three years; and

(iv) The name of the eligible organization for which he or she will operate bingo games.

(D) Accounting Procedures.

(1) Proceeds.

(a) The proceeds derived from the operation of a bingo game shall be used only for charitable purposes.

(b) Organizations exempt from the payment of bank and corporation tax pursuant to Section 23701d of the State Revenue and Taxation Code shall keep all profits derived from a bingo game in a separate fund or account which shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.

(c) All other eligible organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section shall keep all proceeds derived from a bingo game in a special fund or account which shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

(i) Such proceeds may be used for prizes at authorized bingo games;

(ii) A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed 10 percent of the proceeds after the deduction of prizes, or $1,000 per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, including the purchase of bingo equipment, administrative expenses, security equipment, and security personnel.

(d) All proceeds derived from any bingo game shall be deposited in a special account as required by this section, within 24 hours of the completion of the bingo game and shall not be commingled with any other account or funds.

(e) Prizes Awarded.

(i) The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed $250.00 in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. All monetary or cash prizes shall be paid in the form of a check drawn on a financial institution.

(ii) The permittee shall keep a record, on a form approved by the Director, showing the name and written signature, the address, the telephone number of the winner, and the consecutive serial number on the receipt for the prize.

(2) Inspection of Records.

(a) The permittee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, or supervision of bingo games which are authorized by this section. The City, by and through its authorized personnel, may examine and audit such records at any reasonable time, and the permittee shall fully cooperate with the City by making such records available. Such examination may consist of, but is not limited to, the actual counting or examination of players, bingo cards, and equipment, records and funds.

(b) The Director may demand a complete detailed accounting of all income and expenses at any time for good cause. If the permittee fails to render such an accounting within the time limit set by the Director, the bingo permit shall be temporarily suspended until such accounting is rendered.

(E) Bond Requirements.

(1) Terms of Bond. Except as provided in subsection (E)(4) of this section, every eligible applicant organization shall, as a condition of the issuance of a bingo permit, maintain a bond in the sum of $5,000 with the Director, running to the City for the use and benefit of interested persons and parties, executed by the eligible applicant organization and a surety company authorized to do business in the state.

In lieu of such bond, the eligible applicant organization may assign to the City savings and loan certificates or a cashier’s check totalling $5,000.

The bond or assignment shall be required to ensure strict compliance by the eligible applicant organization with the provisions of this chapter and any other applicable statutes, rules, regulations or ordinances and to ensure the repayment of any direct pecuniary loss sustained through any act of grand or petty theft or any other wrongful act on the part of any principal, employee or operator of any bingo game.

(2) Action Upon the Bond. Any person who sustains any injury covered by the bond described in this section may, in addition to any other remedy which that person may have, bring an action in his or her own name upon the bond for the recovery of any damage sustained. The bond shall continue in effect and may be sued upon from time to time until the whole of the penalty shall be exhausted. The Director may require the filing of a new bond, as provided for in this section. Upon failure to file a new bond within 10 days, the Director shall forthwith suspend the bingo permit and any related bingo operator permits.

(3) Action on the Assignment. If, in lieu of a bond, an applicant assigns to the City savings and loan certificates or a cashier’s check, the applicant shall agree in writing that if the Director finds that any person has sustained any pecuniary loss through any act of grand or petty theft or other wrongful act on the part of the eligible organization, employee or bingo operator, the City may redeem a sufficient number of such certificates or may deposit the cashier’s check and, from the proceeds, reimburse such person for loss sustained. The Director may require the assignment of additional funds as provided in this section. Upon failure to make such assignment within 10 days, the Director shall suspend the bingo permit and any related bingo operator permits.

(4) Exemptions from Bond Requirements. The bond requirements set forth in subsection (E)(1) of this section shall not be applicable to mobile home park associations or to senior citizens organizations whose membership is comprised predominately of residents of this City. (Ord. 1408 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1317 § 4, 2007; Ord. U-1030 §§ 11 – 14, 1993; Ord. 929 § 1, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.440 Carnivals and concessions.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Carnival” means a business enterprise consisting of amusements which include, but are not limited to, merry-go-rounds, ferris wheels, or other similar mechanical apparatus or rides; menageries, trained animal acts, circuses, animal rides, petting zoos or similar animal exhibitions; acrobatic shows, boxing exhibitions or other physical feats or demonstrations; sideshows, games or tests of strength, skill or other capacity; and public eating places for which a fee or payment may be charged for entry into the location, viewing of any such entertainment or amusement, participation in any of its activities, or purchase of food, drink or merchandise.

(2) “Concession” means each ride, show, store, booth, game, eating place or other public attraction which is part of a carnival, as defined in this section.

(B) General Requirements.

(1) Scope of Permit. A permit to operate a carnival entitles the permittee to operate and manage the entire carnival. It may also authorize the permittee to operate carnival concessions; provided, that the concessions are specified in the application for the permit, that the proceeds from the concessions are to be disbursed, “split” or otherwise apportioned by or through the permittee to whomever runs the concessions. Otherwise, a separate permit is required for each concession to be operated at any carnival, and every applicant therefor must comply with the application requirements of this section to the extent applicable to any such concession.

(2) Application Information.

(a) In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, every person applying for a business permit to operate, conduct or manage a carnival or concession shall file an application with the Director which shall contain the following information:

(i) If a corporation, the applicant shall provide a copy of its articles of incorporation;

(ii) A detailed description of the dates, location, and hours of operation of the carnival or concession;

(iii) A list of the names of all agents and employees involved in the operation and management of the carnival if the permit application is for a carnival, and a similar list of agents and employees involved in the conduct of the concession if the permit application is for a concession;

(iv) A detailed schedule of the concessions to be presented by the applicant at the carnival, including the various fees to be charged, the names of the persons in charge of each concession, and the rules for the operation of each such concession;

(v) Copies of all contracts, agreements or other written memoranda between the applicant and any other person with respect to the operation of each concession at the carnival, including a statement as to disbursement, “split” or other apportionment of the proceeds between the applicant and any other person;

(vi) A detailed description of the mechanical devices or equipment owned by or under the control of the applicant to be used in the operation of the carnival or concession;

(vii) Copies of all policies and binders of liability insurance, including, but not limited to, vehicle, public, product and professional, and workers’ compensation insurance held by the applicant;

(viii) Copies of the applicant’s rules and regulations governing the operation of the carnival or concession;

(ix) Proposed date, time and location for on-site inspection by interested City or County departments prior to the commencement of the carnival or concession;

(x) A statement that the applicant agrees to operate the carnival or concession in strict accordance with the provisions of this section and all other applicable laws, and assumes full responsibility for the lawful and safe operation of the carnival or concession; and

(xi) Where the applicant for a carnival or concession permit is not the sponsor of the carnival or concession, the name, address and telephone number of each sponsor and a detailed description of the functions, responsibilities and obligations of any such sponsor in the operation of the carnival or concession.

(b) The application for permit shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the commencement of any carnival.

(3) Sponsors. Every person sponsoring a carnival or concession for a charitable purpose shall comply with the provisions of this code regarding charitable solicitors, in addition to the requirements herein, prior to the commencement of such carnival or concession.

(4) Current Supplementary Information Required. The applicant or permittee shall be required to keep current the information required on the application for a carnival or concession permit by supplementing or modifying the information to maintain its accuracy. Supplementary information shall include, but is not limited to, future dates, locations and hours of operation of the carnival or concessions; new or otherwise undisclosed agents and employees involved in the operation of the carnival or concessions; new or otherwise undisclosed sponsors of the carnival or concessions; and new or otherwise undisclosed concessions to be presented at the carnival.

(5) Additional Conditions. In addition to any conditions which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter, the permit shall be subject to the condition that the applicant or permittee satisfactorily undergo an on-site inspection of the location of the permitted activity by interested officers or departments of the City or County prior to commencement of the permitted activity. The Director may impose such other conditions as the Director finds necessary for reasons of health, sanitation, noise, clean-up, and the general welfare of the public. Such conditions shall appear on the permit.

(C) Operating Requirements.

(1) Responsibilities of Permittee. The carnival permittee shall be responsible for the manner in which all rides, exhibits, shows, games and other concessions allowed under the carnival permit are conducted, regardless of whether the permittee is operating independently or in conjunction with, or as an agent for, any religious or charitable organization. A carnival concession permittee is similarly responsible for the conduct of the concessions for which it is permitted.

(2) Posting of Regulations. All rules pertaining to the operation of any ride, game or other concession must be posted conspicuously at the location of the ride, game, or other concession. The fee for viewing, participating or otherwise engaging in any ride, game or other concession must also be conspicuously posted.

(3) Concessions – Operation Requirements.

(a) All players or participants in any game or other concession must be given an equal opportunity to play or participate. Prior to allowing any person to play or participate in any game or other concession, the concession operator shall collect the posted fee and return the proper change to the player or participant. The concession operator shall not collect for more than a single game from any player or participant at one time. The use or employment of “sticks,” “shills,” or any person posing as a patron, when not really a patron, is prohibited. The employment or utilization of minors under the age of 16 years of age in the operation of any rides, games or other concessions is prohibited. Games or other concessions utilizing foul lines wherein any person or persons involved in the operation of the game or concession are the sole determiners as to whether or not a player has fouled are prohibited.

(b) No concessions other than those submitted to and approved by the Director shall be played, conducted, permitted or allowed at the carnival location.

(c) Any packaged merchandise distributed as a prize shall be plainly marked and its contents described conspicuously. Only items of merchandise that can actually be won by any player may be displayed in conjunction with any game or other concession. No other merchandise or prize shall be displayed. Special games or other concessions wherein a player is charged a greater fee than other players are charged in order to win or compete for any special or larger prize are prohibited.

(4) Game of Chance Prohibited. Games of skill may be permitted under a carnival or concession permit. Games of chance are prohibited.

(5) Operating Hours. A carnival or concession may only operate between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

(D) Insurance Requirements. Every applicant for a carnival permit shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect public liability insurance in conformance with PMC 5.04.240. The liability coverage shall be in the amount of $5,000,000.

(E) Conditions of Permit. The Director may issue a permit pursuant to this section upon the following findings:

(1) The zone in which the carnival is proposed to be conducted has been approved by the Planning Department and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare;

(2) The carnival is not located within 500 feet of a residential neighborhood, or the carnival operator has received the written consent of more than 50 percent of the owners and tenants of any residences located within 500 feet of the carnival site; and

(3) The applicant will adequately provide for the maintenance and cleanliness of the carnival site prior to, during, and upon closing of the carnival. (Ord. U-1030 § 15, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.450 Dance halls and dances.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Private dance” means a recreational dance at a private dance hall which is sponsored or conducted by any person other than the permittee of the private dance hall.

(2) “Private dance hall” means a business establishment that provides recreational dancing facilities, either as its main purpose, or as an incident thereto, for its members or their bona fide guests.

(3) “Public dance” means a recreational dance at a public dance hall which is sponsored or conducted by any person other than the permittee of the public dance hall.

(4) “Public dance hall” means a business establishment that is open to the public and that provides recreational dancing facilities, either as its main purpose, or as an incident thereto, for members of the public.

(5) “Recreational dance” or “recreational dancing” means dancing for purposes of amusement or diversion. “Recreational dancing” includes, but is not limited to, social dancing and does not include a dance performance for purposes of entertaining an audience.

(6) “Special dance” means an individual public dance or private dance sponsored or conducted by any person, other than the permittee of a public or private dance hall, which dance, if authorized, will result in not more than three such dances being conducted by such applicant in any three-month period.

(7) “Youth dance” means a public or private dance to which persons between the ages of 15 and 21 are admitted and which is sponsored or conducted by any person other than the permittee of a public or private dance hall.

(B) Application Information.

(1) Procedure. In addition to the information required in PMC 5.04.140, the following information shall also be required of any applicant for a business permit to conduct a public or private dance at a public or private dance hall or to conduct a special dance or a youth dance:

(a) The names and addresses of the persons who have authority or control over the location for which the permit is requested, and a brief statement of the nature and extent of such authority or control;

(b) The name and address of the owner of the premises upon which the permitted activity is to be conducted, if the applicant is leasing such premises from the owner; and

(c) Whether the permittee intends to conduct the private or public dance as a youth dance.

(2) Special Dance Information.

(a) In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, and subsection (B)(1) of this section, an applicant for a business permit to conduct a special dance shall specify the number of dances held within the three-month period immediately preceding the date of the application.

(b) An application for a special dance permit shall be filed within 45 days of the date on which the dance is to be held, unless the Director shortens that period of time upon a showing of good cause.

(c) A special dance permit may only be issued if no more than three such dances will be held in any three-month period. A separate permit shall be issued for each special dance and a separate application shall be filed for each such dance, in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(C) Operating Requirements.

(1) Hours of Operation. A public or private dance may be conducted at a public or private dance hall and a special dance may be conducted at a business establishment only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. of any day unless the City Council specifically authorizes otherwise upon a showing of good cause and that authorization is expressly set forth on the business permit.

(2) Exits. No permit may be issued pursuant to this section to any applicant if the location for which the permitted activity is being sought does not maintain unlocked doors with free and easy access sufficient to assure adequate ingress and egress in the event of an emergency.

(3) Lighting.

(a) Every establishment at which a public, private, special or youth dance is held shall be illuminated throughout at an intensity of at least three foot-candles during all hours of operation except while a floor show is in progress.

(b) If an establishment at which a permitted public, private, special or youth dance is held, owns or operates an adjacent parking lot, that lot shall be illuminated throughout to an intensity of at least two foot-candles.

(4) Manager Required. Any public dance, private dance, special dance or youth dance shall have a responsible person on the premises to act as manager and supervise employees at all times during which the dance is ongoing. Such manager shall be permitted pursuant to PMC 5.04.050.

(5) Number of Employees.

(a) Every establishment at which a public, private, special or youth dance is conducted, having a capacity of 200 persons or less, shall provide at least one employee in constant attendance during the hours of operation of the public, private, special or youth dance. Such establishment shall provide at least one additional employee for each incremental gain in capacity of 100 persons.

(b) These employees shall be responsible for maintaining order during the hours of operation of the public, private, special or youth dance, and checking the admission of minors, where applicable.

(c) The Director may require additional employees at any dance hall or establishment as the Director deems necessary.

(6) Age Restrictions.

(a) Generally. No person under 21 years of age shall be allowed into an establishment permitted for dance under this section unless:

(i) The establishment is a bona fide hotel, cafe or other public eating place where meals are regularly served and where a public dance or entertainment is held; or

(ii) The establishment permitted for dance does not serve or allow to be consumed alcoholic beverages on the premises.

(b) Youth Dances. No alcoholic beverages shall be sold or consumed at any establishment at which youth dances are conducted.

(7) Readmission to Dance. A person permitted under this section shall not readmit into any establishment or event any person who has left such dance unless either:

(a) An admission charge not less than that charged to patrons entering such dance establishment or event for the first time is again paid; or

(b) The permit specifically states that such readmission may be allowed.

(8) Inspection Authority. Any City official or employee authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter or this code may conduct an inspection of the premises permitted under this section at any reasonable time to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

(9) Employee Activities Prohibited. Employees shall not solicit or accept drinks from customers. (Ord. U-1030 §§ 16, 17, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.460 Entertainment.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Entertainment” means and includes, but is not limited to, any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, movie, song, dance act, song and dance act, exhibition, dancing for compensation, or poetry recitation, performed for the benefit of the public, either at a private or public establishment. “Entertainment” as used herein does not include mechanical music alone.

(2) “Adult-oriented entertainment” means any entertainment in an adult arcade, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, or modeling studio, as those terms are defined in PMC 5.04.400(B)(1).

(B) The requirements of this section shall be inapplicable to adult-oriented entertainment which shall be subject to the permit and regulatory requirements of PMC 5.04.400 (adult-oriented business).

(C) Application Information. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, the application for an entertainment permit shall include the following information:

(1) The names and addresses of the persons who have authority or control over the location for which the permit is requested, and a brief statement of the nature and extent of such authority or control;

(2) The name and address of the owner of the premises upon which the permitted activity is to be conducted, if the applicant is leasing such premises from the owner;

(3) Whether the entertainment to be provided is adult-oriented entertainment; and

(4) The duration of the entertainment permit requested by the applicant. The Director is specifically authorized to issue a one-day entertainment permit, subject to the permittee’s compliance with all applicable provisions of this section.

(D) Operating Requirements.

(1) Hours of Operation. Entertainment, excluding adult-oriented entertainment, may be provided at an establishment permitted to provide entertainment in any location for which it is permitted except between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. unless the City Council specifically authorizes otherwise upon a showing of good cause and that authorization is expressly set forth on the business permit for the permitted activity.

(2) Exits. No permit may be issued pursuant to this section to any applicant if the location for which the permitted activity is being sought does not maintain unlocked doors with free and easy access sufficient to assure adequate ingress and egress in the event of an emergency.

(3) Lighting.

(a) Every business establishment at which permitted entertainment, excluding adult-oriented entertainment, may be provided shall be illuminated throughout at an intensity of at least three foot-candles during all hours of operation except while a floor show is in progress.

(b) Every business establishment at which permitted entertainment, excluding adult-oriented entertainment, may be provided shall, if it owns or operates an adjacent parking lot, provide illumination of at least two foot-candles throughout such parking lot.

(4) Manager Required. All business establishments permitted under this section shall have a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the establishment is open. Such manager shall be permitted pursuant to PMC 5.04.040. (Ord. 1108 § 2(c), 1997; Ord. U-1000 § 1, 1992; Ord. 915 § 3, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.470 Escort bureaus and introductory services.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Escort” means:

(a) Any person who, for compensation, acts as a companion to other individuals, accompanying them to social affairs, places of entertainment, amusement, places of public assembly, or within any private quarters located within the City; or

(b) Any person who, for compensation, acts as a companion to other individuals, accompanying them in or about any business or commercial establishment, or part or portion thereof, located within the City.

(2) “Escort bureau” means any business establishment which, for financial compensation, furnishes, or offers to furnish, escorts.

(3) “Introductory service” means a business which, for compensation, provides or offers a service, the principal purpose of which is to aid individuals to become socially acquainted or otherwise assist individuals to meet for social purposes, or which provides information to individuals about others for the purpose of facilitating their meeting.

(B) Permitted Services. Escort bureaus, as defined in this section, are prohibited to operate in the City of Palmdale. Introductory services may be permitted in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(C) Permit Exemption. This section shall not apply to the lawful business of any employment office or employment agency permitted under state law.

(D) Application Information. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, an application for a business permit for an introductory service shall contain the following information, as applicable:

(1) The full names, aliases and residential addresses of all escorts and employees and independent contractors employed by or intended to be employed by the applicant;

(2) The last two previous addresses of the applicant and each employee;

(3) The business, occupation, or employment of the applicant, and each employee for the last three years immediately preceding the application;

(4) The sex, height, weight, hair and eye color of the applicant, and each employee;

(5) Photographs and fingerprints of the applicant and each employee;

(6) If the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the introductory service is or is to be located, the application shall be accompanied by a notarized statement from the owner of record of the property acknowledging that an introductory service is or will be located on the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, business telephone number and business address of the owner of record of the property, as well as a copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the introductory service is or will be located; and

(7) A description of the service to be provided.

(E) Operating Requirements.

(1) Registration of Employees.

(a) Every employee of an introductory service shall register with the business license division and no introductory service shall hire or employ any employee who is not registered with the business license division.

(b) Every introductory service shall, within 24 hours, notify the business license division of every change in personnel of employees.

(2) Manager Required. Every introductory service permitted pursuant to this section shall hire a manager to oversee the operation of the permitted activity at all hours during which the service is open. Such manager shall be permitted pursuant to PMC 5.04.050, and must sign a statement indicating full knowledge of all applicable regulations.

(3) Age Restrictions.

(a) A person conducting an introductory service shall not list or provide any individuals, or their names or addresses, for purposes of introduction or dating, who are less than 18 years of age.

(b) A person who conducts an introductory service shall not employ or date any person under 18 years of age.

(4) Record of Transaction.

(a) Every person managing an introductory service shall keep a record of every transaction showing:

(i) The names of any individuals introduced, as applicable;

(ii) The full name, residence address, and telephone number of the patron or customer for whom introduction is made, as applicable. Every effort shall be made to verify the minimum age of youthful-appearing clients.

(b) The permittee shall keep all such records available for inspection by the Sheriff, any of his deputies, any Police Officer, or any person authorized to enforce the provisions of this code. The permittee shall deliver the records to the City or authorized agent upon request.

(5) Location. An introductory service may be permitted in the C-3 (General Commercial) Zone, pursuant to the applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance.

(F) Bond Required.

(1) At the time of filing an application with the Director, the applicant shall file and thereafter maintain with the City a good and sufficient bond in the aggregate sum of $5,000, running to the City of the use and benefit of interested persons and parties, executed by the applicant and two or more responsible sureties, or a surety company authorized to do business in the state of California, which surety company shall be approved by the Director.

(2) Recovery for Damage. Any individual who sustains any injury covered by the bond may, in addition to any other remedy at law which the individual may have, bring an action in his or her own name upon the bond for the recovery of any damage sustained by that person. Upon such action being commenced, such bond shall not be void upon first recovery thereon but may be sued upon from time to time until the whole of the penalty shall be exhausted.

(3) Damages Covered. The bond shall protect patrons or customers of the introductory service from damages arising from any fraud or theft perpetrated by the owners, operators, or employees of such businesses as a result of the operation thereof.

(G) Suspension or Revocation Conditions. In addition to the grounds specified in PMC 5.04.310, a permit to conduct an introductory service may be suspended or revoked if the Director or the City Council finds:

(1) That the permittee has committed, caused, encouraged, or condoned the commission of any lewd act or any act of prostitution; or

(2) That the business has been conducted, in whole or in part, as a subterfuge to facilitate or to conceal the conduct of any unlawful business or practice. (Ord. 1108 § 2(d), 1997; Ord. 915 § 4, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.480 Fortunetelling.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following term shall have the following meaning:

(1) “Fortunetelling” means the practicing or carrying on of any art, profession or business which shall include, but not be limited to, the telling of fortunes, forecasting of futures, or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by, the ordinary process of knowledge, for or without pay. “Fortunetelling” shall include, but not be limited to, “psychic reading,” “occult reading,” “clairvoyance,” “clairaudience,” “cartomancy,” “psychometry,” “phrenology,” “spirits,” “mediumship,” “seership,” “prophecy,” “augury,” “astrology,” “palmistry,” “necromancy,” “mind reading,” “tarot card readings,” “tea leaves,” “telepathy” or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, gypsy cunning or foresight, crystal gazing, and crystal reading of any kind or nature.

(B) Permit Exemptions.

(1) This section shall not apply to the licensed practice of psychology, psychotherapy, counseling, hypnotherapy, or any other related healing art which is licensed or regulated pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code.

(2) This section shall not apply to any person who is engaged solely in providing fortunetelling services to groups by demonstrations of mind-reading, mental telepathy, thought conveyance, or the giving of horoscopic readings at public places and in the presence of and within the hearing of other persons and at which no questions are answered except in a manner to permit all persons present at such public place to hear such answers.

(C) Application Information. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, application for a permit for fortunetelling shall contain the following information:

(1) The last two previous addresses of the applicant;

(2) Photographs and fingerprints of the applicant and each employee; and

(3) If the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the fortunetelling activity is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the owner of record of the property acknowledging that a fortunetelling business or service is or will be located on the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name and address of the owner of record of the property, as well as a copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the fortunetelling business or activity is or will be located. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.490 Game arcades.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Coin-operated game” means any game or machine, operated by the insertion of money, coin or other object, which is predominately a game of skill or amusement. Such games include, but are not limited to, coin-operated pool tables, pinball machines and video games.

(2) “Game arcade” means any place open to the public where five or more coin-operated games are kept or maintained for use and operation by the public.

(B) General Requirements.

(1) Manager Required. A game arcade permittee shall provide a manager, pursuant to PMC 5.04.050, to oversee the operation and orderly use of the games in the game arcade. Such manager shall be present in the game arcade during all hours that it remains open.

(2) Visibility of Interior.

(a) The permittee shall maintain the interior premises of the game arcade in a manner such that it is clearly visible from the entrance to the establishment in which the game arcade is located.

(b) Notwithstanding subsection (B)(2)(a) of this section, if the game arcade is located in a physically segregated portion of the premises, the permittee shall maintain its interior in a manner such that it is clearly visible from the entrance into the game arcade. (Ord. 919 § 6, 1991; Ord. U-919 § 1, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.500 Gun dealers.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following term shall have the following meaning:

“Gun dealer” means any person who sells or otherwise transfers to members of the public any pistol, revolver or other firearm, new or used, capable of being concealed upon the person.

(B) Application Information.

(1) Permit Form. Any permit issued to operate a gun dealer shall be on a form provided by the State Attorney General.

(2) Application Form. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, every applicant for a gun dealer permit shall fill out the application form provided by the State Attorney General.

(C) Permit Subject to Conditions. All permits issued under this section are subject to the following conditions, breach of any of which subjects the business permit to forfeiture:

(1) The business activity shall be carried on only in the building designated in the permit.

(2) The permit or a copy thereof, certified by the issuing authority, shall be posted in a conspicuous manner on the premises in which the business is being conducted.

(3) No pistol, revolver, or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person shall be delivered:

(a) Within 10 days of the application for the purchase, or, after notice by the Department of Justice (“Department”) pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 12076 of the State Penal Code, within 10 days of the submission to the Department of corrected copies of the register, or within 10 days of the submission to the Department of any fee required pursuant to subdivision (d) of Section 12076 of the State Penal Code, whichever is later:

(i) Unless unloaded and securely wrapped or unloaded and in a locked container;

(ii) Unless the purchaser or transferee either is personally known to the dealer or presents clear evidence of his or her identity to the dealer;

(iii) Whenever the dealer is notified by the Department of Justice that a purchaser is in a prohibited class described in Section 12021 or 12021.1 of the Penal Code or Section 8100 or 8103 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.

(b) No pistol or revolver, or imitation thereof, or placard advertising the sale or other transfer thereof, shall be displayed in any part of the premises where it can readily be seen from the outside.

(c) The permittee shall agree to and shall act properly and promptly in processing transfers of pistols, revolvers, and other firearms capable of being concealed upon the person.

(d) The permittee shall comply with Sections 12073 and 12077 and subdivision (b) of Section 12072 of the State Penal Code. (Ord. 1120 § 9, 1998; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.510 Health clubs.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Health club” means:

(a) Any business which offers or provides to the public on a membership basis, services, facilities, instruction, training or assistance in body building, exercising, weight reduction, figure development, aerobics or any other similar physical activity;

(b) Any business which has therein steam rooms, saunas, shower stalls, swimming pools, soaking facilities such as spas, tubs or any other device in which a person can soak, such as a steam bath.

(2) “Health club contract” means a contract in the form and manner prescribed by California Civil Code Section 1812.80 et seq. between a health club and a consumer for health club services.

(3) “Health club closure” means the discontinuation or relocation of health club services in the manner, and at the location, specified in the health club contract. This shall not include temporary closures for a period of two weeks or less in order to make repairs or alterations to existing facilities.

(4) “Refund” means an amount equal to the pro-rated value of the remaining time on a health club contract at the time of a health club closure. Initiation and processing fees, if any, shall be included if such fees were paid within two years of the date of the health club closure.

(B) Permit Exemptions. The provisions of this section do not apply to:

(1) Health clubs located within a private residence, condominium, townhouse or apartment complex;

(2) A place where primary treatment in the practice of any healing art or profession is administered pursuant to the provisions of the Business and Professions Code or any other statute of the state of California;

(3) A place of employment where bathing facilities for the use of employees are required by law; or

(4) Any business permitted under this chapter as a massage establishment.

(C) Operating Requirements.

(1) Term of Health Club Contract. No health club operating in the City shall contract to provide health club services for a period of time beyond which the health club has an ownership or leasehold interest to operate such health club.

(2) Effect of Closure.

(a) Any health club closure due to repairs or alterations, resulting in the closure of said health club for a period of two weeks or longer, shall result in an extension of the consumer’s health club contract for the period of the health club closure, which extension shall be added to the remaining time period of the initial contract. The health club shall keep a record of all closures lasting for any period exceeding two weeks.

(b) Any health club closure attributable to repairs or alterations, resulting in the closure of said health club for a period of three months or longer, shall comply with one of the following, at the option of the consumer:

(i) The consumer shall be granted an extension of the consumer’s contract for the period of health club closure, which extension shall be added to the remaining time period of the initial contract; or

(ii) The consumer shall be granted a refund of the amount remaining of the health club contract, pro-rated from the first day of the health club closure.

(c) A health club closure due to the relocation of the health club shall result in one of the following:

(i) If the club is relocated within a reasonable distance (a five-square-mile radius) of its current location, then the consumer shall be granted an extension of the health club contract for the period during which the club is closed for relocation; or

(ii) If the club is relocated to a location greater than a five-square-mile radius from the location specified in the consumer’s contract, the consumer shall be given, at his or her option, a refund of the amount remaining on the health club contract, pro-rated from the first day of the health club closure, or an extension of the contract on the terms specified in subsection (C)(1) of this section.

(3) Disclosure Statement. All health club contracts entered into in the City shall be accompanied by a disclosure statement which shall read, in bold face:

NOTICE TO CONSUMERS: In the event of a health club closure, you may have additional protections afforded by local law beyond those provided to you under state law. For more information, contact the City of Palmdale, Director of Finance, 38300 North Sierra Highway, Palmdale, California, 93550.

(4) Compliance Period. All health clubs shall comply with the requirements of this section on or before December 31, 1990.

(5) Sign at Main Entrance. A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance of every health club within the City identifying the establishment. Such sign shall comply with all requirements of this code.

(6) Maintenance of Facilities. All persons permitted to operate a health club pursuant to this chapter shall ensure that:

(a) Hot and cold running water is provided at all times;

(b) Separate closed cabinets are provided for the storage of clean and soiled towels and these cabinets are plainly marked “Clean Towels” and “Soiled Towels”;

(c) All equipment is maintained in a good state of repair and all walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities of the establishment are in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;

(d) Clean and sanitary disposable towels are provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted;

(e) The facility is adequately ventilated and air-conditioned; and

(f) Separate changing and restroom facilities are provided for men and women.

(D) Bond Requirements.

(1) Bond Required. No permit shall be issued or renewed pursuant to this section unless the applicant files with the Director a bond, executed by an admitted surety insurer, which meets all of the following requirements:

(a) The bond filed upon issuance of the permit shall be in an amount equal to the greater of: (i) $10,000, or (ii) an amount equal to the applicant’s estimate of the aggregate amount of prepaid initiation fees and prepaid annual and multi-annual membership fees to be received during the first year of business operations.

(b) The bond filed upon any renewal of the permit shall be in an amount equal to the greater of: (i) $10,000, or (ii) the aggregate amount received during the prior year as prepaid initiation fees and prepaid annual or multi-annual membership fees (less that amount of such fees actually applied to membership privileges), plus an amount equal to the renewal applicant’s estimate of such prepaid fees to be received during the ensuing year of business operations.

(c) The bond shall be for the benefit of, and shall be enforceable by, any person who suffers a loss as a consequence of a health club closure or as a consequence of any wrongful act of the permittee acting in the course and scope of the permittee’s business or by any official, agent or employee of the permittee acting in the course or scope of his or her employment or agency.

(d) The bond shall be maintained in full force and effect in the required amount as a condition of continuing to engage in business. Any permit issued under this section shall be automatically revoked whenever any such bond, for any reason, ceases to be effective.

(e) The bond shall contain an acknowledgement by the admitted surety insurer of its obligations, in the event of a health club closure, to administer and pay claims for refunds as provided for in subsection (E) of this section.

(2) Exemptions from Bond Requirements. A bond shall not be required for the issuance or renewal of a health club permit if the Director, after consultation with the City Attorney, determines that the applicant is eligible for an exemption based upon any one of the following criteria:

(a) The applicant is a nonprofit organization which has qualified for a tax exemption pursuant to the California Revenue and Taxation Code; or

(b) The applicant charges consumers on a monthly or quarterly fee basis (excluding installment plans) and does not charge as an initiation fee an amount greater than the amount of the monthly fee; or

(c) The applicant has continuously provided health club services during the three-year period immediately prior to the date of the permit application, the applicant has unsecured and unencumbered assets in excess of $1,000,000, and the applicant warrants to the City, in a form approved by the City Attorney, that any subsequent sale or transfer of the health club shall be conditioned upon the applicant either providing refunds to consumers or requiring the successor to honor in full the terms and conditions of the applicant’s existing health club contracts. An applicant qualifying for an exemption pursuant to this subsection shall annually file, concurrent with its business permit renewal application, a statement certifying that the applicant continues to maintain unsecured and unencumbered assets in excess of $1,000,000; or

(d) The applicant provides evidence satisfactory to the Director that the sum of $75,000 has been deposited directly into a trust account in a federally insured bank or savings and loan association, that a trust has been created and will be maintained for the benefit of any person who suffers a loss as a consequence of any wrongful act of the permittee acting in the course and scope of the permittee’s business or by any official, agent or employee of the permittee acting in the course or scope of his or her employment or agency, and that the trustee of such trust account is obligated, in the event of a health club closure, to administer and pay claims for refunds as provided for in subsection (E) of this section.

(E) Administration of Refunds Following a Health Club Closure.

(1) Processing and Disbursement of Refunds. If, within 30 days following a health club closure, the permittee fails to refund to its customers all prepaid sums for services not received, then the admitted surety insurer issuing the bond, or the trustee of the trust account, as applicable, shall have the following obligations:

(a) To establish a health club refund account consisting of the bond proceeds or the funds on deposit in the trust account, as applicable;

(b) To receive and review all claims by customers for refunds;

(c) To determine the validity of all claims for refunds and to disburse refunds to those entitled to receive them; provided, however, that if all claims for refunds cannot be paid in full, such claims shall be paid on a pro-rata basis, taking into consideration the period of time remaining on the claimant’s contract with the health club;

(d) Unless otherwise authorized by the City, no claim for a refund shall be accepted for processing more than six months after a health club closure, and no claims shall be paid until the end of said six-month period.

(2) Limitations on Recovery. No person may recover from the bond proceeds or from the funds in the trust account, as applicable, a sum greater than that which such person paid to the permittee; provided, however, that this limitation shall not restrict a person from alternatively pursuing civil remedies available under state or federal law and recovering sums greater than those paid to the permittee from sources other than the bond proceeds or funds in the trust account, as applicable. (Ord. U-1030 § 18, 1993; Ord. 944 § 1, 1991; Ord. 919 § 7, 1991; Ord. U-919 § 1, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.520 House and street numbering.
(A) Definition. For purposes of this section the following term shall have the following meaning:

“House and street numbering” means painting, stencilling or otherwise marking upon any curb, street, roadway, highway, or sidewalk any house number or address.

(B) Application Information. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, an application for a house and street numbering permit shall contain the following information:

(1) The full name, residence address and telephone number of every person proposed to engage in house or street numbering;

(2) The streets and areas where such numbering is to take place and the hours during which it is to take place;

(3) A brief description of the equipment used or to be used for such numbering and the brand of paint used or to be used for such numbering;

(4) Photographic identification, as defined in PMC 1.04.100, of all persons proposed to engage in such numbering; and

(5) The rates to be charged for such numbering.

(C) Exemptions – Fees. A bona fide nonprofit organization customarily holding regular meetings in the City may be exempted from payment of the permit fee.

(D) Permit – Contents. Each permit for house and street numbering shall contain the following information:

(1) The name of the permittee;

(2) The name of the painter, if different from that of the permittee; and

(3) The rates to be charged for such work.

(E) Operating Requirements.

(1) Consent of Owner or Occupant. No person shall engage in house and street numbering without first obtaining the written consent of the owner or occupant of the subject premises.

(2) Hours. No person shall engage in house and street numbering in any area of the City zoned for residential use under this code, from 8:00 p.m. until 9:00 a.m. of the following day.

(3) Numbering. Any numbers or markings shall be painted on the curb immediately fronting the designated premises in black on a white and beaded background. Such numbers or markings shall be eight inches in height and one inch in width.

(4) Identification. Every person engaging in house or street numbering shall have in his or her possession, and exhibit to any occupant or owner of property for which he or she is painting such numbering, the permit required by this section.

(5) Quality Inspection. If the house or street numbering done is of poor quality or appearance, as determined by the Director, the permittee shall, upon notification and within a reasonable time, redo the numbering at no charge. (Ord. 1317 § 5, 2007; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.530 Hypnotist.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Hypnosis” means a state that resembles normal sleep but which is in fact induced by a person with whom the subject remains in rapport and susceptible to suggestion.

(2) “Hypnotist” means one who practices hypnosis.

(B) Exemption. This section shall not apply to licensed psychologists or physicians who practice hypnosis as part of their psychological or medical practice.

(C) Application Information. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, an application for a hypnotist’s permit shall contain the following information:

(1) The applicant’s record of convictions for any violations of law, except minor traffic violations;

(2) The applicant’s employment history for the prior five years;

(3) The names, addresses and phone numbers of at least three references who have known the applicant for more than three years;

(4) The applicant’s fingerprints;

(5) Proof that the applicant is registered with a hypnotist’s organization approved by the Office of Private Post Secondary Education of the California Department of Education, and that the applicant is a member of at least one statewide or nationwide organization of professional hypnotists.

(D) Operating Requirements.

(1) Insurance. Every permittee shall maintain a policy of liability insurance, pursuant to PMC 5.04.240, with liability coverage in the sum of $100,000.

(2) Qualifications. Every hypnotist permittee shall maintain the registration and membership set forth in subsection (C)(5) of this section in full force and effect throughout the term of the permit. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.540 Reserved.
5.04.550 Locksmith.
(A) Definition. For purposes of this section, the following term shall have the following meaning:

“Locksmith business” means the business, trade or occupation of making or fashioning keys for locks or similar devices, whether from a fixed location or otherwise; or constructing, reconstructing, or repairing or adjusting locks, or opening or closing locks for others by mechanical means other than the use of regular keys furnished for that purpose by the manufacturer of the locks. The definition of locksmith business does not include a person who only duplicates keys.

(B) General Requirements.

(1) Identifying Number Requirements. Each permit issued for a locksmith business shall contain an identifying number, which number the Sheriff shall assign. Each locksmith shall stamp such identifying number on every key made, repaired, sold or given away by him, except a key merely duplicated from another key.

(2) State License Required. No permit shall be issued for a locksmith business unless the applicant is duly licensed as a locksmith by the state of California. (Ord. 944 § 2, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.560 Massage establishments and massage technicians.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words and phrases have the following meanings:

(1) “Certificate” means a certificate issued by a recognized school of massage (as defined in this subsection (A)), certifying completion of the required curriculum in massage training.

(2) “Corporate massage” means any massage of the neck, arms, shoulders and back area above the waist where the client is fully clothed and in a sitting position, where the massage is: (i) administered by a licensed and permitted massage technician; (ii) approved as an accessory use in a permitted location; and (iii) where the massage is limited to the upper body and conducted without the use of supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice.

(3) “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes by means of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, other similar preparations commonly used in this practice, or any other system for treatment or manipulation of the human body with or without any form of bath, such as Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, Shiatsu, acupressure, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, fomentation or any other type of bath, including herbal body wraps.

(4) “Massage establishment” means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person provides or attempts to provide, engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any business of providing massages, as defined in this subsection (A), or health treatments involving massage as the principal function, and where more than one massage table or chair will be utilized, or more than one licensed and permitted massage technician will be on duty at any one time.

(5) “Massage technician” includes “masseur,” “masseuse,” “massage practitioner” and “massage therapist,” and means any person who administers to any other person, for any form of consideration or gratuity, a massage as defined in this section.

(6) “Qualified massage association” means any association that meets all of the following criteria:

(a) The association is a nonprofit organization; and

(b) The association has established as minimum education requirements for membership the completion of a minimum of 500 hours of education and training or its equivalent, in anatomy, physiology, hygiene, sanitation, massage therapy and practice, ethics of massage practice, first aid and CPR, from a recognized school of massage and has a written and practical testing of equivalency administered and overseen by its admission committee or by a national certification program endorsed by the National Commission for Certifying Agencies (NCCA), which is required in order to obtain membership; and

(c) The association offers and requires participation and completion by its members of a minimum number of hours of specified continuing education as a condition of continuing membership; and

(d) The association is open to members of the general public who meet the requirements for membership; and

(e) The association has established rules of ethics and has enforcement procedures for the suspension or revocation of membership for violation of those rules.

(7) “Recognized school of massage” means any school or institution of learning that teaches the theory, ethics, practice, profession, and work of massage, which school or institution complies with California Education Code Sections 94310 and 94311, or complies with equivalent regulations from other jurisdictions, and which requires a resident course of study before the student is furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation. No school offering a correspondence course and not requiring actual attendance will be deemed to be a recognized school of massage. A school of massage may not provide massage services to any member of the general public for any form of compensation, gratuity or consideration.

(8) “Sheriff” means the Los Angeles County Sheriff or his or her designee.

(B) Exemptions. This section shall not apply to the following:

(1) The provisions of this section that require a massage technician permit are not applicable to, and may not be construed as applying to, any of the following persons:

(a) Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, physical therapists or any registered or licensed vocational nurse working on the premises of and under the direct supervision of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist duly licensed to practice that profession in the state of California. Practical nurses, or other persons not having a massage technician permit whether or not employed by the physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, may not administer or practice massage;

(b) State-licensed acupuncturists;

(c) Registered nurses and licensed vocational nurses;

(d) Coaches or trainers of amateur, semiprofessional, or professional athletes;

(e) Barbers and beauticians, duly licensed under the laws of the state of California, while engaging in their professions; provided, however, that this exception applies solely to the massaging of the neck, scalp and hair of the customer or client;

(f) State-certified massage technicians pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5, Section 4600 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code who are practicing massage consistent with the requirements therein.

(2) The provisions of this section that require a massage establishment permit are not applicable to, and may not be construed as applying to, any of the following:

(a) Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities licensed by the state of California;

(b) Hospices, including those located in residences, that are licensed by the County of Los Angeles;

(c) The athletic departments of accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment;

(d) Health fairs or similar special events that are reviewed and approved by the Director;

(e) A health club, fitness center, gymnasium, hotel with over 100 rooms, a suntan parlor, a barber or beauty shop where massage is provided as an approved accessory use to the primary business;

(f) Physician’s, surgeon’s, chiropractor’s, osteopath’s, or physical therapist’s medical practice as an approved accessory to the primary business;

(g) Massage establishments or businesses that are sole proprietorships, where the sole proprietor is certified pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5, Section 4600 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code, and to massage establishments or businesses that employ or use only persons certified to provide massage services pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5, Section 4600 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code who are practicing massage consistent with the requirements therein.

(C) Permit Application – Massage Establishments. It is unlawful for any person, to engage in, conduct, or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the City, the operation of a massage establishment as defined in this section without first having obtained a permit issued by the City pursuant to the provisions of this section. A permit is valid as provided for in PMC 5.04.230, unless earlier revoked or suspended. The required permit is in addition to any business license required by this code. The application for a permit does not authorize operation of a massage establishment unless and until the permit has been issued. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, all applications for a permit to conduct a massage establishment business must contain the following information, as applicable:

(1) The nature of the ownership of the business, i.e., whether by an individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation must be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with the state and date of incorporation and the names and residence addresses and telephone numbers, and business addresses and telephone numbers, of each of its current officers and directors, and of each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application must set forth the name, residence and business addresses, and telephone numbers, of each of the partners, including limited partners. If it is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed with the Secretary of the State. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations is applicable. The applicant corporation or partnership must designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. That designated person must complete and sign all application forms required for an individual applicant under this subsection, but only one application fee will be charged;

(2) The precise name or names under which the business of the massage establishment is to be conducted;

(3) The business address and all telephone numbers of the massage establishment;

(4) A list of the names, residence addresses, and telephone numbers of all proposed massage technicians and employees to be employed by the massage establishment, and the name, residence address, and telephone number of the manager or managing employee proposed to be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment;

(5) A description of any other business operated on the same premises, or within the City or the state of California, that is owned or operated by the applicant;

(6) The present address, telephone number, and the previous addresses, if any, of the applicant for the last 10 years immediately preceding the date of the permit application and the dates of each address;

(7) Written proof of the applicant’s or responsible managing officer’s age, height, weight, color of hair and eyes, sex, and date of birth;

(8) Two identification photographs at least two inches by two inches taken in the last six months and fingerprints of the applicant or the responsible managing officer;

(9) The employment history and experience of the applicant in the massage or similar business for the last 10 years immediately preceding the date of application including, but not limited to, the massage or similar business history and experience in this City or any other city or state;

(10) Whether the applicant has had any other permit or license issued by an agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of that permit or license, and whether the permit or license was denied, revoked or suspended; or, if a vocational or professional license or permit was denied, revoked or suspended, the reason therefor;

(11) All criminal convictions, including ordinance violations and pleas of nolo contendere, within the last 10 years, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding traffic violations, and a statement as to the date and place of each such conviction and reasons therefor;

(12) The name and address of the owner or lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and a notarized acknowledgment from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on that property;

(13) Proof of matriculation from a “recognized school of massage,” as defined in subsection (A) of this section. If the applicant is a corporation or partnership, then this proof must be supplied for the member of the corporation or partnership who will actively participate in the management of the massage establishment, and who is designated as the responsible managing officer;

(14) Proof of membership in a “qualified massage association,” as defined in subsection (A) of this section;

(15) A floor plan of the massage establishment indicating all proposed tenant improvements, including the location of each room, massage table and/or chair dedicated to providing massage services. No alterations to the approved floor plan will be permitted unless and until reviewed and approved by the appropriate City departments;

(16) Authorization for the City, its agents and employees, to seek verification of all information contained in the application;

(17) Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director or the Sheriff’s Department;

(18) A statement in writing, signed and dated by the applicant, declaring under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct and that all provisions of this section will be adhered to.

(D) Massage Establishment – Permit Issuance and Denial. Upon receipt of a written application, the Director will have 60 days to conduct an investigation to ascertain whether the permit should be issued. The Director must forward a recommendation to the City Council, which has the authority to issue the permit unless it makes any of the following findings:

(1) The applicant, if an individual, or any officers, directors, or shareholders of the corporation, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, or any person proposed to be engaged or employed in the massage establishment, has within 10 years preceding the date of the application:

(a) Been convicted of a violation of California Penal Code Section 266(h), 266(i), 314, 315, 316, 318, or subsection (a) or (b) of Penal Code Section 647, or any other provisions of law that require a person to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or where the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of violating Penal Code Section 415, or any lesser included offense, in satisfaction of or as a substitute for any of the previously listed crimes;

(b) Been convicted of a violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550, or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution, or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058;

(c) Been convicted of an offense in any other state, which offense is the equivalent of any of the above referenced offenses;

(d) Engaged in conduct that would constitute grounds for suspension or revocation under this section;

(e) Been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conduct or maintenance of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code, or similar provisions of law of a jurisdiction outside the state of California; and

(f) Been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude, or an act of violence, which act or acts are related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the applicant;

(2) The applicant had a massage operator or massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by a licensing authority or by any city, county, or state within 10 years prior to the date of application;

(3) The applicant has made false, misleading, or fraudulent statement(s) or omission(s) of fact to the City in the permit application process;

(4) The application does not contain all of the information required by subsection (C) of this section;

(5) The massage establishment, as proposed by the applicant, would not comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, fire, and safety requirements and standards;

(6) The applicant has not satisfied the requirements of this section within the time specified.

If the application is denied for failure to comply with subsection (D)(3) or (4) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of 12 months from the date the application was denied.

(E) Massage Establishment – General Provisions. All permittees must comply with the following conditions and any other conditions specified by the City Council in connection with the issuance of a permit:

(1) Prior to occupancy of the massage establishment, a final inspection by the appropriate City departments and agencies will be conducted to verify compliance with the approved plans and with all applicable provisions of this section. On-going operation of the massage establishment must be in conformance with this code and the zoning ordinance at all times.

(2) No massage technician, employee, or manager may massage the genital or anal area of any patron, or the breasts of any female patron, nor may any permittee or manager of a massage establishment allow such massage. No massage technician, operator, or manager, while performing any task or service associated with the business of the massage establishment, may be present in any room with another person unless that person’s genitals, anus, or, in the case of a female, her breasts, are completely covered by a fully opaque, nontransparent material.

(3) No permittee may conduct business under any name not specified in the permit.

(4) All massage establishments must have a manager on the premises at all times that the massage establishment is open. The permittee of the massage establishment must file a statement with the Director designating the person or persons who are authorized to act as the manager and to ensure compliance with this section, as well as being the person to whom notices required by this chapter may be delivered to for receipt by the permittee.

(5) No massage establishment may be or remain open for business without having at least one massage technician on duty on the premises who holds a current valid permit.

(6) The permittee and its designated manager(s) must ensure that the permit for each on-duty massage technician is conspicuously displayed in a location visible to the patrons, and that each massage technician is wearing the photo identification required by subsection (J)(2) of this section.

(7) No permittee may employ any person as a massage technician who does not have a valid massage technician permit issued pursuant to this section. Every permittee must report to the Director any change of employees, whether by way of new or renewed employment, discharge or termination. The report must set forth the name of the employee and the date of hire or termination. The report must be made within five days of the hire or termination. The permittee must deliver to the Director the permit and photo identification card of any massage technician no longer employed by the permittee.

(8) All persons employed in the massage establishment must be fully clothed at all times. Clothing must be of a fully opaque, nontransparent material and provide complete covering from mid-thigh to three inches below the collar bone.

(9) Each permittee must conspicuously display the current massage establishment permit in a location within the massage establishment that is visible to patrons.

(10) The permittee must comply with all provisions of this section and all applicable provisions of this code.

(F) Massage Establishment – Facility and Operating Requirements.

(1) Facilities.

(a) Structure. Massage must be conducted in a structure that is located in a zone district where that use is authorized.

(b) Services List. Each permittee must post and maintain in a conspicuous location within the premises, a list, in English, of services available and the cost of those services. No permittee, or responsible managing officer, may permit, and no massage technician may offer or perform, any services other than those posted.

(c) Lighting. Each permittee must provide in each room where massage is conducted sufficient lighting and ventilation that complies with the Uniform Building Code. The lighting in each massage room must be provided by at least one 60-watt white light bulb and must be activated at all times while a patron is in that room or enclosure. No strobe flashing lights may be used. No colored lights may be used nor may any coverings be used which change the color of the primary light source.

(d) Bath Facilities. A minimum of one toilet and one separate wash basin must be provided for patrons in each massage establishment. The basin must provide soap or detergent and hot running water at all times and must be located within close proximity to the area devoted to the conduct of massage services. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single-service towel dispenser must be provided at the restroom hand wash sink. In addition, a separate wash basin must be provided for the use of employees. No bar soap may be used. A trash receptacle must be provided in each toilet room. Showers may be provided at the permittee’s option.

(e) Linen Storage. Closed cabinets must be provided and used for storage of clean linens, and approved receptacles must be provided for the deposit of soiled linen. All cabinets and receptacles must be clearly labeled.

(f) Separate Rooms. If male and female patrons are to be treated simultaneously at the same massage establishment, then separate massage rooms must be provided for male and female patrons.

(g) Maintenance. All facilities of the massage establishment must be in good repair and must be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized each day that the business is in operation. The surfaces of all walls, floors, and ceilings of each restroom and shower area, if provided, must be made smooth so as to be easily cleaned. No carpeting may be installed in any of these areas.

(h) Massage Table. A massage table must be provided in each massage room dedicated for massage services and the massage must be performed on the massage table.

The tables must be a minimum height of 18 inches. Two-inch-thick foam pads, with a maximum width of four feet, may be used on a massage table and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. Beds, floor mattresses, and waterbeds may not be used in the administration of a massage.

(2) Operating Requirements.

(a) Same Use. No massage establishment may operate as a school of massage, or use the same facilities that are used by a school of massage.

(b) Equipment. Each permittee must provide and maintain adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing any instruments used in massage. Instruments used in performing massage may not be used on more than one patron unless they have been sterilized using approved sterilizing methods.

(c) Inspections. The permittee must consent to the inspection of the massage establishment by the City’s Division of Building and Safety, Code Enforcement Department, Fire Department, Sheriff’s Department, and the County Health Department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this section, and all other applicable laws or regulations, are met. Routine inspections may not exceed more than two each year, unless violations are found or complaints are received. During the inspection, verification of the identity of all on-duty massage technicians may occur. Inspections of the massage establishment may be conducted at any time the business is in operation or at any other time that employees are on the premises.

(d) Linen. Common use of towels or linen may not be permitted. Towels and linen must be laundered or changed promptly after each use. Separate enclosed cabinets with doors or covers must be provided for the storage of clean and soiled linen and must be plainly marked “Clean Linen” and “Soiled Linen.”

(e) Living Quarters Prohibited. No person may be permitted to reside within any massage establishment at any time. No kitchen facilities may be provided within any massage establishment, and no food of any kind may be prepared for sale or sold in the massage establishment. The sale of prepackaged herbs and lotions is permitted; provided, that no more than 10 percent of the floor area is dedicated for that use.

(f) Alcoholic Beverages/Drugs. No person may enter, or remain in, any part of a massage establishment while in possession of, consuming, using, or under the influence of, any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. The permittee and manager are responsible to ensure that no such person enters or remains upon the premises of the massage establishment. Service or possession of alcoholic beverages by the establishment or any other person on the premises of the establishment, including the area beyond the reception area, is prohibited.

(g) Recordings. No electrical, mechanical, or other device may be used by the permittee or any employee of a massage establishment for audio or video recording, or for monitoring the conduct of a massage or any conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms.

(h) Employee Records. The permittee or manager of the massage establishment must keep a complete and current list of the names and residence addresses of all massage technicians and employees of the massage establishment, and the name and residence addresses of the manager or managing employee who is designated to be primarily in charge of the operation of the massage establishment. This roster must be kept on the premises for immediate inspection by officials charged with enforcement of this section.

(i) Coverings. Each massage establishment must provide to all patrons clean, sanitary, and opaque nontransparent coverings capable of covering the patron’s specified anatomical areas, including the genital area, anus and female breasts. No common use of these coverings is permitted, and reuse of these coverings is prohibited unless properly cleaned.

(j) Client Records. Every massage establishment must require all patrons to print and sign a register book in a legible manner. Records must be kept of the dates and hours of each massage treatment or service, the name and address of the patron, the name of the massage technician administering that service, and a description of the massage treatment or service rendered. A short medical history form must be completed by the permittee to determine whether the patron has any physical condition which may be adversely affected by the massage. These records must be prepared prior to administering any massage or treatment and must be retained on the premises for a period of 24 months after the treatment or service. These records must be open to immediate inspection only by officials charged with enforcement of this section and for no other purpose. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of that information by any officer or employee of the City constitutes a misdemeanor.

(k) Hours of Operation. No person may operate a massage establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment, or as an accessory use, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. A massage that is commenced anytime before 10:00 p.m. must nevertheless terminate at 10:00 p.m. All customers, patrons, and visitors must be excluded from the massage establishment or the massage area between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(l) Advertising. No massage establishment or other business that is issued a permit under this section may place, publish, distribute, or cause to be placed, published or distributed, any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective clients or customers that any service is available other than those services described in this section, nor may any massage establishment employ language in the text of that advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services authorized by this section.

(m) Persons with Disabilities. All massage establishments must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations relating to persons with disabilities.

(n) Doors. All front, reception, hallway, or front exterior doors (except back or rear exterior doors used for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) must remain unlocked during business hours. No massage may be given within any cubicle, room, booth, or any other area within a massage establishment that is fitted with a door capable of being locked, unless the only door is an exterior door.

(o) Tinted or “One-Way” Glass. No massage establishment may be equipped with tinted or “one-way” glass in any room, office or store front window.

(3) Exception. The provisions of this subsection, facility and operating requirements for a massage establishment, are not applicable to and may not be construed as applying to massage establishments or businesses that are sole proprietorships or to massage establishments or businesses that employ or use only persons certified to provide massage services pursuant to Division 2, Chapter 10.5, Section 4600 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code and who are practicing massage consistent with the requirements therein.

(G) Change of Management or Ownership.

(1) Every permittee of a massage establishment must immediately report to the Director any change of ownership or management of the massage establishment, including, but not limited to, the change of manager or other person primarily in charge, a change in the mailing address of the owner, permittee, manager or other person primarily in charge, a change in stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation, changes in officers, directors or partners, changes in the mailing address of the officers, directors or partners, any change of name, style, or designation under which the business is to be conducted, and all changes of address or telephone numbers of the massage establishment. A change in the location of any premises will require a new application for a massage establishment.

(2) No massage establishment permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons. Any such sale, transfer, or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer, or assignment, will be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of that permit, and that permit will thereafter be null and void; provided, however, that if the permittee is a partnership, and one or more of the partners dies, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of the permit, and, in such case, upon notification to the Director, the permit will be placed in the name of the surviving partners. A massage establishment permit issued to a corporation will be terminated when either: (i) any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred, or assigned after the issuance of a permit; or (ii) any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of the permit is thereafter issued, sold, transferred, or assigned. No massage technician permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons.

(H) Permit Application – Massage Technicians. No person may perform or administer a massage, or advertise to provide massage services in the City, without first obtaining a permit issued by the City pursuant to the provisions set forth below. A permit is valid as provided for in PMC 5.04.230, unless earlier revoked or suspended. The required permit is in addition to any business license required by this code. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, an application for a massage technician permit must include the following information, as applicable:

(1) The primary business location at which the applicant will be working as a massage technician, including the full name of the business, street address, and all telephone numbers associated with that business location. If the massage technician will be providing massage at more than one location, the primary business location must be identified as well as all other locations, including the names, addresses, and telephone numbers of those other locations;

(2) The full true name and any other name used by the applicant;

(3) The present address and telephone number, and all previous addresses of the applicant for the last 10 years immediately prior to the date of application;

(4) Written proof of the applicant’s age, height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair, and date of birth;

(5) Two identification photographs at least two inches by two inches taken in the last six months, and the applicant’s fingerprints;

(6) The employment history or experience of the applicant in the massage or similar business for the last 10 years immediately preceding the date of application, including, but not limited to, the massage or similar business history and experience in this City or any other city or state;

(7) Whether the applicant has had any other permit or license as a massage technician issued by an agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of that permit or license, and whether the permit or license was denied, revoked or suspended, and the reason therefor. That information must include the business activity or occupation engaged in by the applicant subsequent to any suspension or revocation;

(8) All criminal convictions, including ordinance violations and pleas of nolo contendere, within the last 10 years, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding for traffic violations, and a statement as to the date and place of each such conviction and reasons therefor;

(9) Documentation of the applicant’s experience as a practicing massage technician, as applicable;

(10) Proof of matriculation from a “recognized school of massage,” as defined in subsection (A) of this section;

(11) Proof of membership in a “qualified massage association,” as defined in subsection (A) of this section;

(12) Authorization for the City, its agents and employees, to seek verification of all information contained in the application;

(13) Such other information as may be deemed necessary by the Director or the Sheriff’s Department;

(14) A statement in writing, signed and dated by the applicant, declaring under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct and that all provisions of this section will be adhered to.

(I) Massage Technician – Permit Issuance and Denial. Upon receipt of a written application, the Director will have 60 days to conduct an investigation to ascertain whether the permit should be issued. The Director must forward a recommendation to the City Council, which has the authority to issue the permit unless it makes any of the following findings:

(1) The applicant has, within 10 years preceding the date of the application, been convicted of any of the following:

(a) A violation of California Penal Code Section 266(h), 266(i), 314, 315, 316, 318, or subsection (a) or (b) of Penal Code Section 647, or any other provisions of law that require a person to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or where the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge violating Penal Code Section 415, or any lesser included offense, in satisfaction of or as a substitute for any of the previously listed crimes,

(b) A violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550, or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution, or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058,

(c) Conviction for an offense in any other state, which offense is the equivalent of any of the above referenced offenses;

(2) The applicant has been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude, or an act of violence, which act or acts are related to the qualifications, functions or duties of a massage technician;

(3) The applicant has had a massage operator or massage technician permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by a licensing authority or by any city, county, or state within 10 years prior to the date of application;

(4) The applicant has made false, misleading or fraudulent statement(s) or omission(s) of fact to the City in the permit application process;

(5) The application does not contain all of the information required by subsection (H) of this section;

(6) The applicant has not satisfied the requirements of this section within the time specified.

If the application is denied for failure to comply with subsection (I)(4) or (5) of this section, the applicant may not reapply for a period of 12 months from the date the application was denied.

(J) Massage Technicians – General Provisions. All massage technicians must comply with the following conditions and any other conditions specified by the City Council in connection with the issuance of a permit:

(1) No massage technician may massage the genital or anal area of any patron, or the breasts of any female patron. No massage technician, while performing any task or service associated with the massage business, may be present in any room with another person unless that person’s genitals, anus, or, in the case of a female, her breasts, are completely covered by a fully opaque nontransparent material.

(2) The massage technician must wear a photo identification card issued by the City at all times when acting as a massage technician in the massage establishment or other approved place of business. The identification card must be worn on the outer clothing with the photo side facing out. If a massage technician changes his or her business address, he or she must, prior to that change, obtain from the Director a new photo identification card and advise the Director in writing of the new business address.

(3) Massage technicians may not perform any massage at any location other than the location specified in the permit.

(4) While on duty, the massage technician may not use any name other than that specified on the photo identification card.

(5) Massage technicians must be fully clothed at all times. Clothing must be of a fully opaque, nontransparent material and provide complete covering from mid-thigh to three inches below the collar bone.

(6) The massage technician shall consent to the inspection of the massage establishment and occupied massage rooms by the City’s Division of Building and Safety and Code Enforcement Department, Fire Department, Sheriff’s Department and the Health Department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this article and other applicable laws or regulations are met.

(7) The massage technician must consent to the inspection of the occupied massage room or areas by the City’s Division of Building and Safety, Code Enforcement Department, Fire Department, Sheriff’s Department, and the Health Department for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this section and other applicable laws or regulations are met.

(8) No massage technician permit may be sold, transferred, or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person or persons.

(9) The massage technician must comply with all provisions of this section and any applicable provisions of this code.

(K) Corporate Massage Businesses.

(1) Any person desiring to perform corporate massage, as defined in subsection (A) of this section, must first be conducting business at a fixed location that has a massage establishment permit or that is authorized to provide massage as an accessory use.

(2) Corporate massage may be performed only by a person who possesses a valid massage technician permit issued by the City.

(3) The massage technician or massage establishment offering corporate massage must have a signed contract for service at each location where the service is to be provided, and copies of all contracts must be provided to the City for review upon submittal of the business permit application. The contract must specify the location, days and times the service is to be offered.

(4) Corporate massage must be conducted at a commercial or industrial place of business and must be administered only to the employees of that business.

(5) Corporate massage must be provided only in a public area, to which all employees are provided free access.

(6) Corporate massage must be offered at a specified time and day at each location and may not be offered at any other time. In no event may corporate massage be permitted or offered between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

(L) Fees.

(1) The City Council will establish by resolution, and may from time to time amend, the fees for the administration of this section. Fees required by that resolution are in addition to any other fees required under other sections of this code.

(M) Existing Permits/Compliance.

(1) Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance amending this section, permits will be issued in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(2) All persons holding existing massage establishment permits or massage technician permits will have one year from the effective date of the ordinance amending this section to comply with all requirements of this section.

(N) Duration of Permits.

(1) Permits for massage establishments and massage technicians will be renewed to coincide with the duration of permits issued as provided for in PMC 5.04.230; provided, that the applicant continues to meet the requirements of this section.

(2) A renewal application for an existing permit must be filed with the Director before the expiration date of the existing permit. Temporary permits will not be issued, and renewal applications must be filed no later than 60 days prior to the expiration of the permit to prevent a lapse of the permit.

(3) Renewal applications will require such information as may be required by the Director to update the information contained in the original permit application and to conduct an investigation to ascertain whether a renewal should be issued. The Director must forward a recommendation to the City Council, which has the authority to renew a permit, as provided for in subsections (D) and (I) of this section. The appropriate filing fee must accompany the application for renewal.

(O) Suspension, Revocation and Nonrenewal.

(1) Revocation, Suspension and Nonrenewal of an Operator’s Permit.

(a) The City Council may suspend a massage establishment permit for a period of 30 days for each violation of the provisions of subsection (E) (massage establishments – general provisions) or (F) (massage establishment – facility and operating requirements) of this section or on the grounds that the applicant or permittee has failed to comply with any of the permit conditions or other requirements of this section as determined by the Director and recommended to the City Council by the Director. If a suspended permit lapses during the suspension period, a new application must be filed at the end of the suspension period.

(b) The City Council may revoke or refuse to renew a massage establishment permit under the following circumstances: (i) facts exist that would support findings for denial of a permit under any provision of subsection (D) of this section; or (ii) there is a subsequent violation of any provision of subsection (E) or (F) of this section within one year following suspension of the permit under subsection (O)(1)(a) of this section; or (iii) the permittee has demonstrated its inability to operate or manage the massage establishment in a lawful manner, thereby necessitating one or more responses by Law Enforcement Officers.

(c) The Director must notify the applicant, permittee, or manager in writing, delivered either by personal service or by certified mail, addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant, permittee, or manager with a notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a permit. This notice must state the reasons for the recommendation and date the City Council will consider the recommendation.

(2) Revocation, Suspension and Nonrenewal of a Massage Technician’s Permit.

(a) The City Council may suspend a massage technician permit for a period of 30 days for each violation of the provisions of subsection (J) (massage technician – general provisions) of this section or on the grounds that the applicant or permittee has failed to comply with any of the permit conditions or other requirements of this section as determined by the Director and recommended to the City Council by the Director if a suspended permit lapses during the suspension period, a new application must be filed at the end of the suspension period.

(b) The City Council may revoke or refuse to renew a massage technician permit under the following circumstances: (i) facts exist that would support findings for denial of a permit under any provision of subsection (I) of this section; or (ii) there is a subsequent violation of any provision of subsection (J) of this section within one year following suspension of the permit under subsection (O)(2)(a) of this section; or (iii) the permittee has demonstrated its inability to conduct massage services within a massage establishment in a lawful manner, thereby necessitating one or more responses by Law Enforcement Officers.

(c) The Director must notify the applicant or permittee in writing, delivered either by personal service or by certified mail, addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant or permittee, with a notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew a permit. This notice must state the reasons for the recommendation and date the City Council will consider the recommendation.

(3) Notice.

(a) If the City Council determines that grounds exist for the suspension, revocation, or nonrenewal of a permit, the Director must serve the applicant, permittee, or manager in writing, delivered either by personal service or by certified mail, addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant, permittee or manager, with a notice of denial or notice of suspension, revocation or refusal to renew permit. This notice must state the reasons for the action and the effective date of the decision.

(4) Violation and Penalty.

(a) Every person, who is subject to this section, and who violates any of the provisions of this section by administering a massage, or by operating a massage establishment, or by advertising the availability of massage, without first obtaining a permit and a business license from the City to do so, or who violates any other provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(b) Any massage establishment that is operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this section may be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the City, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action, may commence an action or proceeding to abate that public nuisance in the manner provided by law, and to restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1408 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1382 §§ 1, 2, 2009; Ord. 1090 § 10, 1997; Ord. 915 § 5, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.570 Motion picture theater.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Motion picture theater” means a building, structure, or establishment at which motion pictures are played or exhibited and for which a fee is charged.

(2) “Adult motion picture theater” shall mean the same as the definition given in PMC 5.04.400(B)(1)(f).

(B) Operating Requirements.

(1) Remodeling or Enlargement of Theater. Any motion picture theater that has been closed for a continuous period of 30 days, and any theater that has been erected or structurally altered or enlarged, shall not be opened to the public without first having an inspection by, and the written permission of, the Division of Building and Safety and the Fire Department.

Upon application by the owner, agent or lessee, the Division of Building and Safety shall cause an inspection to be made of all the public safety devices of the theater building, and if they are found to comply with the requirements hereof, shall cause such written permission to be issued forthwith. In the event the public safety devices, appurtenances, exits, or stairways are not in a secure and safe condition, they shall be put into such condition before any motion picture is exhibited and before the building is opened to the public. The Division of Building and Safety shall have the right to close any theater building when any owner, lessee, manager, or agent refuses to comply with the provisions hereof, and such theater building shall remain closed until all such requirements applicable thereto shall have been complied with.

(2) Smoking in Motion Picture Theaters. Smoking shall not be permitted in the auditorium or balcony of any theater nor in any place where motion pictures are exhibited, except lounges, dressing rooms, or offices.

(3) Fire Extinguishers Required. In addition to the fire extinguishing equipment required in all occupancies, as defined by the building codes of the City, there shall be installed not less than two class A fire extinguishers, as defined in the State Fire Marshal’s Code, on each floor, including the basement. Adjacent to main switchboards, there shall be maintained not less than two class C fire extinguishers as defined in the State Fire Marshal’s Code. In addition thereto, there shall be installed such number of fire axes and fire hooks as the Fire Department may order.

(4) Rewinding Film in Closed Cabinet. All rewinding of film shall be done in an enclosed cabinet of a type approved by the Fire Department. All film, records, and other combustible material used in connection with the projection of pictures shall be kept in metal lockers or cabinets, except when in actual use.

(5) Smoking or Open Flame in Booth Prohibited. No person shall smoke or maintain any open flame or other source of ignition within any motion picture machine booth. A sign bearing the words “No Smoking Permitted” shall be displayed in a conspicuous location within such motion picture machine booth.

(6) Automatically Operated Safety Devices – Testing. The Division of Building and Safety may require that all automatically operated safety devices be tested not less than once every 30 days to determine that they are in proper working condition.

(7) Projection Rooms and Booths.

(a) No unauthorized person shall be allowed inside any motion picture machine booth when it is being used for the projection of motion pictures.

(b) The requirements for projection rooms shall be those requirements which are enumerated in the latest edition of the Uniform Building Code as adopted and amended by the City.

(8) Hazardous Conditions. It is unlawful to admit or allow the admission of the public to a theater after receiving notice or obtaining knowledge of the existence of any hazardous condition within the theater which is injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare. Such hazardous conditions may include, but are not limited to, loose or improperly attached fixtures, unsanitary conditions, damaged or defective seats, defects in or damage to the floor, floor covering or carpeting, obstructions in aisles, and insufficient illumination or inoperative light bulbs. (Ord. 1408 § 4, 2010; Ord. 1108 § 2(e), 1997; Ord. 915 § 6, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.580 Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Builders’ tools” means all tools customarily used in the construction, alteration, or repair of buildings.

(2) “Coin dealer” means any person, firm, partnership, or corporation whose principal business is the buying, selling, and trading of coins, monetized bullion, or commercial-grade ingots of gold, or silver, or other precious metals.

(3) “Pawnbroker” means any person engaged in the business of receiving goods, including motor vehicles, in pledge as security for a loan.

(4) “Secondhand dealer” means and includes any person, copartnership, firm or corporation whose business includes buying, selling, trading, accepting for sale or consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. A “secondhand dealer” does not include a coin dealer or participants at gun shows or events, as defined in Section 478.100 of Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or its successor, who are not required to be licensed pursuant to Section 12071 of the Penal Code, who are acting in compliance with the requirements of Section 12070 and subdivision (d) of Section 12072 of the Penal Code, and who are not gun show traders, as described in paragraph (5) of subdivision (b) of Section 12070 of the Penal Code.

(5) “Tangible personal property” has the same meaning as set forth in Section 21627 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California.

(B) Application Information. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, every applicant for a business permit to operate as a pawnbroker or a secondhand dealer shall provide the following information, as applicable:

(1) The applicant’s age, height, weight, sex, and color of hair and eyes;

(2) The applicant’s current address and prior addresses within the 12 months preceding the date of the application;

(3) Whether the applicant has ever conducted a similar business in the City or elsewhere and the name under which the applicant conducted such similar business;

(4) Fingerprints and photographic identification, as defined in PMC 1.04.100; and

(5) A copy of the applicant’s current secondhand dealer or pawnbroker license issued by the state of California.

(6) Security Plan Required. The applicant shall submit a security plan. The plan should detail systems that the tenant intends on installing to protect patrons, visitors, employees, and company property/assets on site. The plan shall address issues such as safes to be installed, alarm systems, deployment of any security personnel, funds-transportation measures, hours of operation, shift personnel staffing, CCTV applications, type of loss-prevention/crime-prevention training provided to employees, and any other applicable measures.

(C) Operating Requirements.

(1) Hours of Operation. No pawnbroker or secondhand dealer, nor any employee thereof, shall accept any pledge, or loan any money for personal property, or purchase or receive any goods, wares or merchandise, or any article or thing, or in any manner whatsoever engage in or conduct business as a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.

(2) Reporting. Every permittee under this section shall comply with Section 21628 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code or Section 21208 et seq. of the Financial Code.

(3) Any business who buys or receives as a pledge any builders’ tools, as defined by this section, shall comply with Sections 21550 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code.

(4) Disposal of Property. Every permittee under this section shall be subject to and shall comply with the requirements of state law for holding and inspection of property.

(5) No transactions that require reporting under Section 21628 of the Business and Professions Code shall be engaged in with any person under 18 years of age. (Ord. 1402 § 8, 2010; Ord. 1317 § 6, 2007; Ord. 944 § 3, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.590 Peddlers and commercial solicitors.
(A) Findings. The City has set forth operational requirements regulating commercial peddling within the City in this section with the intent to protect the public’s health, safety, and welfare while also promoting entrepreneurship and supporting individuals who engage in the business of commercial peddling. The City Council finds:

(1) Limiting peddlers’ hours of operation within residential neighborhoods to daylight hours consistent with a residential atmosphere is necessary to protect the safety of peddlers and residents who would be more vulnerable to criminal activities during evening hours, and to promote the welfare of the residents by prohibiting commercial activities and associated noise and traffic during hours when residents should be able to enjoy peace and quiet.

(2) Preventing peddlers from peddling or soliciting from residences with “no solicitation” or “Do Not Disturb” signs protects the health and welfare of those who wish to avoid commercial activities while in their residences.

(3) Preventing peddlers from physical contact without permission, from persistently soliciting a person after the person rejects the offer, and from threatening injury or damage to a person while peddling or soliciting is necessary to protect the safety and health of persons who may feel threatened or in physical danger if these activities occur.

(4) Preventing peddlers and solicitors from intentionally obstructing the free movement of people on any street, sidewalk, or other place open to the public is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of those who may be seeking emergency services or who are otherwise uninterested in the goods or services offered and desire to pass through the public area unimpeded.

(5) Preventing peddling or soliciting from a captive audience is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of those people who are not able to walk away or otherwise retreat from an unwanted solicitation.

(6) Prohibiting peddling or soliciting within 1,000 feet of schools during the hours when children are present is necessary to protect the health and safety of the school children, because peddlers operating at close proximity to schools may attract unsupervised children to run into traffic in order to reach them and be injured or killed in the process. Such activity would also pose a hazard to motorists who may stop suddenly or swerve to avoid hitting children resulting in injury to those motorists.

(7) Requiring persons engaged in the business of peddling, selling or delivering liquids or edibles for human consumption to provide a means to collect and properly dispose of trash and recycling materials is necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the community by preventing the dispersion of trash, rubbish and unused food products which contribute to blight and attract rodents and other vermin.

(B) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Commercial” means and includes the sale of goods, wares and merchandise for profit, whether or not a profit is made, and not for any charitable purpose.

(2) “Peddle” and “peddling” mean hawking or selling any merchandise, including liquids or edibles for human consumption, by traveling or going from place to place, house to house, or business to business, and concurrently taking an order and making a delivery of such merchandise, or by transporting such merchandise upon any vehicle, or by any means whatsoever, when it is intended to be offered for sale and delivery to members of the public. “Peddle” and “peddling” shall include selling food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, peddle-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. “Peddle” and “peddling” shall not mean the sale or delivery of food or merchandise by a person engaged in the business of selling such merchandise at a fixed place of business in the City, or elsewhere, which food or merchandise has been ordered to be so delivered prior to such delivery.

(3) “Solicitation” means a request, directly or indirectly, for money, credit, property, financial assistance or other items of value for the retail sale of goods, wares, or merchandise by taking an order for delivery and promising later delivery of such goods, wares, or merchandise. Individuals engaged in commercial solicitation for future delivery solely as an incident to engaging in a business otherwise permitted under this chapter, and for which the employer has a current, valid permit, shall not be deemed to be engaged in the business of commercial solicitation.

(C) Permit Fee Waivers. Veterans, as defined by Sections 16001 and 16001.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, shall not be required to pay a permit fee to hawk, peddle or sell goods, wares or merchandise owned by them, except alcoholic beverages.

(D) Application Requirements.

(1) Peddlers. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, an application for a peddler’s permit shall include the following information, as applicable:

(a) The applicant’s fingerprints and two one-inch by one-inch photographs; and

(b) Evidence of a permit from the County Health Department for the sale of food or beverages.

(2) Solicitors. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, an application for a commercial solicitor’s permit shall include the following information, as applicable:

(a) An outline of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation;

(b) The time when such solicitation will be made, giving the preferred dates and hour of day for the commencement and termination of the solicitation;

(c) If the applicant intends to engage employees to conduct commercial solicitation, the name, address and phone number of each employee, and proof of fingerprinting and photographic identification, as defined in PMC 1.04.100, for each employee;

(d) The names of any other cities in which the applicant has engaged in commercial solicitation within the past two years; provided, however, if the applicant has solicited in more than 10 other cities, the applicant may list the 10 cities in which the most recent solicitations occurred; and

(e) The applicant’s fingerprints and two one-inch by one-inch photographs.

(E) Operating Requirements.

(1) Generally.

(a) No person shall peddle or commercially solicit for the sale of any merchandise in any area of the City zoned for residential use under this code, from 8:00 p.m. until 9:00 a.m. of the following day.

(b) No person shall peddle or solicit for commercial purposes at any dwelling, including but not limited to a house, apartment, or condominium, where there is a sign indicating “No Solicitations,” “Do Not Disturb,” or otherwise indicating that the occupants do not wish to be solicited or in any other way have their privacy disturbed.

(c) No peddler or commercial solicitor shall touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to any member of the public, without first receiving express permission therefor from such member of the public.

(d) No peddler or commercial solicitor shall persistently solicit any member of the public after such member of the public expresses his or her desire not to be solicited.

(e) No peddler or commercial solicitor shall intentionally obstruct the free movement of any member of the public on any street, sidewalk or other place open to the public generally.

(f) No peddler or commercial solicitor shall solicit from a captive audience. “Captive audience” shall be defined as purposefully stationary persons, such as persons in line or seated in public areas.

(g) No peddler or commercial solicitor shall threaten any injury or damage to any member of the public who declines to be solicited.

(h) Any sidewalk vendor must allow ample sidewalk space to allow for the safe movement of pedestrian traffic.

(i) Any person engaged in the business of peddling, selling or delivering liquids or edibles for human consumption shall provide a means to collect and properly dispose of all trash and recycling materials, including owning and making available appropriate trash and recycling receptacles. Trash and recyclables collected in this manner shall not be deposited in City-owned trash and recycling receptacles.

(j) No peddler or commercial solicitor shall solicit in, or within the immediate vicinity of, any area designated for a special event. For purposes of this section, “special event” shall mean any city event and any community event subject to an event permit. This prohibition shall only be effective for the limited duration of the event.

(k) No peddler shall peddle in any area located within the immediate vicinity of a permitted certified farmers’ market or a permitted swap meet during the limited operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or swap meet. A “certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter. A “swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article.

(2) Schools. No commercial peddler shall peddle or vend on weekdays between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., within 1,000 feet of any school grounds in the City.

(3) Commercial Solicitors.

(a) Identification Cards.

(i) All commercial solicitors permitted pursuant to this chapter shall obtain an identification card from the City which shall include the permit number, the name and street address of the permittee, a statement describing the permittee’s purpose and activity, the signature of the permittee’s chief executive officer (if applicable), the signature of the solicitor to whom the card is issued, the specific period of time during which the solicitation is authorized, and a statement printed prominently on the card which shall state: “This identification card is not an endorsement by the city of Palmdale of any solicitation.”

(ii) A copy of the proposed identification card shall be filed by the applicant with the Director at the time the application for a permit is filed, and shall be approved by the Director as conforming to the requirements of this section before the permit is issued.

(iii) All agents and employees of the permitted commercial solicitor shall carry an approved identification card at all times when soliciting. No person shall solicit for commercial purposes unless he or she exhibits an identification card in a form approved by the Director. Before commencing the solicitation, the solicitor shall read it to the person solicited, or present it to the person solicited, allowing sufficient time for examination.

(iv) No person shall solicit without a permit and identification card issued pursuant to this section.

(v) No person shall solicit within the City after the permit issued by the City has expired.

(b) Advertising Solicitations. When any solicitation pursuant to this chapter is made by printed matter or published article, or over radio, television, telegraph or by any other means of communication known or hereafter devised, such publication shall contain the data and information required to be set forth in the identification card approved by the Director.

(F) Enforcement of This Chapter.

(1) Administrative Citations Exclusive Remedy. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Palmdale Municipal Code, this section shall be enforced exclusively through the City’s administrative citation process, and citation fees shall not exceed the limits set forth in state law (Government Code Section 51039 and as may be amended from time to time). No other civil or criminal remedies may be used to enforce the provisions of this chapter unless allowed by state law.

(2) City’s Determination of Violators’ Ability to Pay Administrative Fines. When assessing an administrative fine for a violation of this chapter, if the citee meets the criteria contained in Government Code Section 68632(a) or (b), the City shall accept 20 percent of the administrative fine imposed in full satisfaction of the fine. The City’s Enforcement Officer shall give notice to the citee of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination by including the notice and a checklist for eligibility of the reduced fine amount under Government Code Section 68632, together with the administrative citation. If eligible for the reduced fine, the citee must indicate, by signing under penalty of perjury, which criteria he or she meets and return the form together with the payment of the fine to the City. If the citee fails to return the form to the City prior to any hearing requested under PMC 1.20.080, he or she may claim eligibility for the reduced fine amount at adjudication or while the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a comprehensive collection program. (Ord. 1516 § 3, 2018; Ord. 1317 § 7, 2007; Ord. U-1025 § 1, 1993; Ord. 944 § 4, 1991; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.610 Private patrol service.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Patrol service” means a business establishment in which the operator agrees to furnish, for consideration, any watchman, guard, patrol officer, or other individual, either uniformed or otherwise, to patrol any portion of the City, to guard against or prevent theft, unlawful taking, loss, misappropriation of property of any kind, or to act as an escort for a funeral procession. Patrol service does not include a service provided to protect a single individual’s property where the person furnishing such service is employed solely by such individual.

(2) “Patrol officer” means a person engaged by a private patrol service to perform the functions described in subsection (A)(1) of this section.

(B) Permit Exemptions. Private patrol officers shall not be required to obtain a permit or to pay a permit fee. However, they must register with the Director and provide the Director with a photostatic or certified copy of their registration with the state pursuant to the State Private Investigator Act. If a private patrol officer does not have proof of current registration, then he or she must register with the City upon a form prescribed by the Sheriff’s Department. No fee shall be charged for such registration.

(C) Application Information. In addition to the requirements set forth in PMC 5.04.140, an application for a private patrol service permit shall include the following information, as applicable:

(1) A map of the district, territory or area proposed to be served by the patrol service;

(2) A description of the proposed methods of operation;

(3) A description of any criminal offenses, other than traffic violations, committed by the applicant;

(4) A photostatic or certified copy of the applicant’s state identification card issued pursuant to the State Private Investigator Act;

(5) A description of the areas of public or private property upon which the applicant intends to park vehicles used in the operation of the business;

(6) A description of the color scheme and insignia to be used on any patrol vehicles along with color photographs depicting the front, rear and both sides of such vehicles;

(7) A description of the color and design of the uniforms to be worn by any patrol officer employed by the applicant, along with color photographs depicting the front and sides of such uniform;

(8) A description of the badge to be worn by any patrol officer employed by the applicant, along with color photographs depicting the color, shape and size of the badge;

(9) A statement regarding the number of vehicles the applicant intends to use for patrol, their make, model, vehicle identification number, and license number; and

(10) A current list of the names, addresses and physical descriptions of all of the applicant’s employees.

(D) Operating Requirements.

(1) Badges.

(a) Each patrol service permittee shall issue a patrol officer’s badge to each of its patrol officers. Every patrol officer shall wear the badge while acting as a patrol officer and shall wear no other badge of any kind, character or description.

(b) The permittee shall not sell, or permit the sale of, any patrol officer’s badge or any badge of a design that is the same as, or so similar to, the patrol officer’s badge that the buyer thereof would be mistaken for a private patrol officer employed by the permittee when, in fact, the buyer is not.

(2) False Identification.

(a) No patrol officer shall wear any uniform which is an imitation of, or can be readily mistaken for, an official Sheriff’s uniform or an official uniform of the police department of any city within the County, or an official uniform of any state officer, nor shall the words “POLICE” or “SHERIFF” appear on any badge, emblem, or uniform worn by such patrol officer.

(b) No patrol officer shall assume or use a rank or title identical, or similar to, any rank or title used by the Sheriff or by any police department within the County.

(c) No patrol service shall use, bestow or permit any patrol officer to assume or use any rank or title identical or similar to any rank or title used by the Sheriff or by a police department within the County.

(3) Motor Vehicle Markings. Motor vehicles used by a private patrol service or private patrol officer shall not bear markings or insignia that resemble the markings or insignia on official Sheriff’s Department or Police Department motor vehicle, nor shall the words “POLICE” or “SHERIFF” appear on such markings or insignia.

(4) Conduct.

(a) An operator, partner, agent or patrol officer shall not, either alone or through the action of another, harass, annoy or commit a nuisance against or injure the property, or unnecessarily enter or otherwise trespass upon the property, of any person whose property the private patrol service or private patrol officer is not employed to protect.

(b) All complaints regarding the activities of a patrol service or of a patrol officer employed by such service shall be investigated by the Sheriff. Reports of such complaints shall be retained in the files of the Sheriff and shall be subject to inspection by the City Manager, the Director, or the City Council at all times.

(5) List of Customers. Each private patrol service shall keep a list of all customers and the private patrol officers assigned to guard or patrol such customers’ premises. Such list shall be open to inspection by the Sheriff’s Department.

(6) Report of Law Violations. No permittee under this section shall perform official police duties. The permittee shall ensure that every violation of law and every unusual occurrence coming to the permittee’s attention or to the attention of its patrol officers in the performance of their duties is immediately reported to the Sheriff’s Department. (Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.620 Family entertainment center.
(A) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Concession” means each ride, arcade booth, game, eating place, or other public attraction which is part of a family entertainment center, as defined in this section.

(2) “Family entertainment center” means a business enterprise providing one or more amusement rides or activities provided to the general public for which a fee or payment may be charged for entry into the location, or participation on any of its rides, or in any of its activities, which is a permanent use rather than a temporary use as included in Section 27.03 of the Palmdale zoning ordinance. These rides and activities include but are not limited to the following: mini-car racing, bumper boats, bumper cars, carousels, ferris wheels, roller coasters or other similar mechanical apparatus or rides; water slides and similar water rides; ice skating or roller rinks; batting cages, miniature golf, or miniature soccer fields; BMX race tracks or bicycle course facilities; skateboard, roller blading or skating facilities; lazer tag and other interactive or virtual reality games (excluding video games and video arcades); games or tests of strength, skill or other capacity (excluding games of chance).

(B) General Requirements.

(1) Scope of Permit. A permit to operate a family entertainment center entitles the permittee to operate and manage the entire family entertainment center. It may also authorize the permittee to operate family entertainment center concessions; provided, that the concessions are specified in the application for the permit, or in an addendum thereto.

(2) Application Information.

(a) In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, every person applying for a business permit to operate, conduct, or manage a family entertainment center shall file an application with the Director which shall contain the following information:

(i) If a corporation, the applicant shall provide a copy of its articles of incorporation;

(ii) A detailed description of the type of family entertainment center, manner of operation and hours of operation of the family entertainment center, including concessions;

(iii) A list of the names of all agents and employees involved in the operation and management of the family entertainment center or in the conduct of any concession;

(iv) A detailed schedule of the concessions to be operated by the applicant at the family entertainment center, including the various fees to be charged, the names of the persons in charge of each concession, and the rules for the operation of each such concession;

(v) Copies of all contracts, agreements, or other written memoranda between the applicant and any other person with respect to the operation of each concession;

(vi) A detailed description of the mechanical devices or equipment owned by or under the control of the applicant to be used in the operation of the family entertainment center or concession;

(vii) Copies of all policies and binders of liability insurance, including, but not limited to, vehicle, public, product and professional, and workers’ compensation insurance held by the applicant;

(viii) Copies of the applicant’s rules and regulations governing the operation of the family entertainment center or concession;

(ix) A statement that the applicant agrees to operate the family entertainment center or concession in strict accordance with the provisions of this section and all other applicable laws, and assumes full responsibility for the lawful and safe operation of the family entertainment center or concession.

(b) The application for permit shall be filed at least 60 days prior to the commencement of any family entertainment center.

(3) Security Plan Required. The applicant shall submit a detailed security plan which describes the proposed interior and exterior security measures applicable to the proposed business including, but not limited to, security guards, alarms, surveillance cameras and/or metal detectors.

(4) Emergency Plan Required. The applicant shall submit a detailed emergency plan which describes the actions to be taken in the event of a disaster or accident, including emergency medical care and evacuation procedures.

(5) Manager Required. A family entertainment center shall provide one or more managers, pursuant to PMC 5.04.050, to oversee the operation and orderly use of the games in the game arcade. Such manager(s) shall be on the premises of the family entertainment center during all hours that it remains open.

(6) Current Supplementary Information Required. The applicant or permittee shall be required to keep current the information required on the application for a family entertainment center or concession permit by supplementing or modifying the information to maintain its accuracy. Supplementary information shall include, but is not limited to, revised hours of operation of the family entertainment center or concessions; new or otherwise undisclosed agents and employees involved in the operation of the family entertainment center or concessions; and new or otherwise undisclosed concessions to be presented at the family entertainment center.

(7) Prior to Commencing Operation. The applicant shall obtain all City approvals, including approval of an occupancy review form and issuance of a business permit, prior to commencing operation of the family entertainment center.

(C) Operating Requirements.

(1) Responsibilities of Permittee. The family entertainment center permittee shall be responsible for the manner in which all rides, games and other concessions allowed under the family entertainment center permit are conducted. A family entertainment center concession permittee is similarly responsible for the operation of each concession for which it is permitted.

(2) Posting of Regulations. All rules pertaining to the operation of any ride, game, or other concession must be posted conspicuously at the location of the ride, game, or other concession. The fee for participating or otherwise engaging in any ride, game, or other concession must also be conspicuously posted.

(3) Maintenance of Equipment. All equipment, including mechanical equipment and rides, racing and obstacle courses shall be maintained in a good state of repair. No equipment shall be used unless fully operational and/or functional.

(4) Alcoholic Beverages or Drugs. No person may enter, remain in, or engage in any ride, game or other concession while in possession of, consuming, using or under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance. With respect to alcoholic beverages, consumption of alcoholic beverages may only be permitted within designated locations, as approved by the City, subject to all applicable permits for alcohol uses.

(5) Concessions – Operation Requirements.

(a) All players or participants in any game or other concession must be given an equal opportunity to play or participate. Prior to allowing any person to play or participate in any game or other concession, the concession operator shall collect the posted fee and return the proper change to the player or participant, if applicable. The concession operator shall not collect for more than a single game from any player or participant at any one time.

(b) No concessions other than those submitted to and approved by the Director shall be played, conducted, permitted, or allowed at the family entertainment center location.

(c) Any packaged merchandise distributed as a prize shall be plainly marked and its contents described conspicuously. Only items of merchandise that can actually be won by any player may be displayed in conjunction with any game or other concession. No other merchandise or prize shall be displayed.

(6) Game of Chance Prohibited. Games of skill may be permitted under a family entertainment center or concession permit. Games of chance are prohibited.

(D) Operating Hours. A family entertainment center or concession may only operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday, and no later than 12:00 midnight on Friday and Saturday, unless otherwise approved by the City.

(E) Insurance Requirements. Every applicant for a family entertainment center permit shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect public liability insurance in conformance with PMC 5.04.240. The liability coverage shall not be less than the amount of $1,000,000. (Ord. 1117 § 5, 1997; Ord. U-1117 § 5, 1997; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.650 Solicitation for charitable purposes.
(A) Defined Terms. The following terms and phrases are defined in subsection (G) of this section: “charitable organization,” “charitable purpose,” “contribution,” “sales solicitation for charitable purposes,” “solicit,” and “solicitation for charitable purposes.”

(B) Applicability of Exceptions.

(1) Any person who solicits any contribution, admission fee, or payment of any kind, even if exchanged for items or services of value, in any manner that would lead a reasonable person to believe that any portion of the contribution, admission fee, or payment solicited will be used for the benefit of or on behalf of any law enforcement, fire, paramedic or other governmental agency, or for or on behalf of employees of those agencies or their dependents, must comply with the provisions of this section as if those solicitations were for contributions for charitable purposes, or in the name of, or on behalf of, a charitable organization.

(2) Any person who for compensation received, or to be received, solicits, or is engaged in the business of, or represents to the public it is engaged in the business of soliciting contributions, admission fees, or payments in a manner described in subsection (B)(1) of this section on behalf of any other person or organization must comply with the provisions of this section as if that person was a commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes.

(3) The provisions of this section do not apply:

(a) To activities which the City is preempted from regulating by state law;

(b) To any solicitation made upon premises owned or regularly occupied by the organization upon whose behalf the solicitation is made;

(c) To any organization soliciting contributions solely from persons who are members of that organization at the time of the solicitation;

(d) To any organization soliciting contributions solely from members, guests, or invitees attending a charitable fundraising event sponsored by or on behalf of that organization;

(e) To any solicitation for the assistance or relief of any individual specified by name at the time of the solicitation where the solicitor represents in each instance that the entire amount collected, without any deduction or offset, will be delivered to the named beneficiary;

(f) To funds raised as authorized by Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code relating to bingo games;

(g) To the activities of any organization, or any person engaged by or under its authority, in soliciting donations of salvageable personal property solely from members of that organization, or in selling salvageable personal property obtained from the organization’s members by that soliciting, or the soliciting and sale of salvageable personal property by an organization for occasional rummage sales or bazaars where that activity does not constitute a major part of the organization’s activities and is not conducted as a permanent or continuous operation. This exemption also applies to an association which is exempt under Section 23701d or 23701f of the Revenue and Taxation Code if the membership of the association is comprised of persons with physical, mental or developmental disabilities and the primary purpose of the association is to provide services to persons with those disabilities.

(C) Application for Permit – Filing of Notice of Intention.

(1) No person may solicit in the City, and no person may authorize another person to solicit, any contribution for any charitable purpose, or in the name of, or on behalf of, any charitable organization, unless at least 15 days prior to the commencement of that solicitation a written notice of intention to solicit charitable contributions is filed with the Director on a form provided by the Director. The Director may, for good cause shown, allow the filing of a notice of intention less than 15 days prior to the commencement of the solicitation. The notice of intention may identify multiple solicitations of charitable contributions that are proposed to be made during any period of time not exceeding 12 months. The notice of intention must be accompanied by any filing fee in the amount established by resolution of the City Council.

(2) The notice of intention must contain the following information:

(a) The full legal name, principal business address, local business address (if any) and telephone number of the charitable organization by or on behalf of which the solicitation will be conducted. The notice of intention must be signed under penalty of perjury by an officer, employee or authorized agent of the named charitable organization. If the authorized agent is a commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes, as defined in subsection (G) of this section, the following supplemental information must be submitted:

(i) The original or a certified copy of the resolution, agreement, letter of consent, or similar documentation which authorizes the agency relationship between the named charitable organization and the commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes,

(ii) A statement as to whether the authorized agent is currently registered with the California Attorney General’s Registry of Charitable Trusts and is in compliance with the financial reporting requirements of Government Code Section 12599 and has posted the cash deposit or surety bond in the sum of $25,000 as required by Government Code Section 12599.5,

(iii) A statement as to whether the authorized agent has obtained a City business license under Chapter 3.44 PMC;

(b) A proposed form of information card or, in the alternative, a copy of other printed material, such as a solicitation brochure, which the applicant will exhibit or distribute to prospective donors or purchasers during the course of the solicitation. Information on that card or other printed material must be presented in at least 10-point type and must include the following, as applicable:

(i) The name and principal business address of the organization, on behalf of which all or any part of the contributions collected will be used for charitable purposes. If there is no organization, the manner in which the contributions collected will be used for charitable purposes,

(ii) The non-tax-exempt status of the organization or fund, if the organization or fund for which the contributions are being solicited does not have a charitable tax exemption under both federal and state law,

(iii) The estimated percentage of the total contribution which may be deducted as a charitable contribution under both federal and state law. If no portion is deductible, a statement must appear that: “This contribution is not tax deductible.”,

(iv) The estimated amount, stated as a percentage of the total contribution, that will be used for charitable purposes,

(v) If a commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes is to be engaged, and is to be paid a set fee rather than a percentage of the total amount raised, a statement of the estimated total cost to be incurred for direct fundraising expenses,

(vi) If the solicitation is not a sales solicitation, the applicant may include a statement, in lieu of estimating the total amount of fundraising expenses to be incurred, that an audited statement of these fundraising expenses may be obtained by contacting the organization or fund at the address disclosed;

(c) Documents from the Internal Revenue Service and the California Franchise Tax Board which establish the tax-exempt status of the named charitable organization;

(d) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the principal officers and members of the board of trustees or board of directors of the named charitable organization;

(e) The purpose for which the solicitation is to be made, the total amount of contributions proposed to be raised, and the use or disposition to be made of the contributions received from the solicitation;

(f) A description of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation;

(g) The name, residence address and telephone number of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of and responsible for conducting the solicitation;

(h) The name, residence address and telephone number of each solicitor who, for monetary compensation, will participate in the solicitation and to whom an identification card will be issued by the Director in accordance with subsection (D)(8) of this section. If these solicitors are employed by or under the control of a commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes registered with the California Attorney General, evidence must be submitted that the named solicitors and the commercial fundraiser for commercial purposes possess a City business license under Chapter 3.44 PMC. If the solicitation will be conducted solely by regular employees of the named charitable organization, or by members or volunteers of that charitable organization who will not be paid any monetary compensation, then the Director may waive the disclosure requirement of this subsection and may authorize the named charitable organization to issue its own identification cards to its solicitors in the format specified in subsection (D)(8) of this section;

(i) A description of the nature and extent of charitable work being performed in the City by the named charitable organization.

(3) If, during the period for review of the notice of intention, or during the terns of any permit issued for the solicitation, there is any significant change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information set forth in the notice of intention, the applicant must notify the Director in writing within 48 hours after that change.

(4) All information set forth in the notice of intention, and any additional information provided by the applicant relating to that notice, will be a matter of public record and will be open to public inspection.

(D) Issuance of Permit and Identification Cards – General Provisions.

(1) Review of Notice of Intention. The Director must review the notice of intention filed under subsection (C) of this section. The applicant must make available for inspection, upon the Director’s request, all of the applicant’s financial books and records at any reasonable time before the permit is issued, during the time the permit is in effect, or after the permit has expired. The Director may inspect those financial books and records solely for the purpose of verifying the truth and accuracy of the information contained in the notice of intention, or the truth and accuracy of any representation made by the permittee with regard to any solicitation conducted under this section.

(2) Issuance of Permit. The Director must issue a permit to the applicant no later than 15 days after the filing of a notice of intention unless any of the following deficiencies exist which have not been corrected following written notification by the Director to the applicant of that deficiency:

(a) The notice of intention is incomplete or otherwise fails to disclose the information required by subsection (C)(2) of this section;

(b) A statement made in the notice of intention is factually incorrect.

(3) Authority of the Director. Nothing in this section is to be construed as conferring upon the Director, or upon any other person, the authority to grant, deny, revoke, renew or suspend any permit by reason of either approval or disapproval of the philosophy, opinions, or beliefs of the applicant, their permittee, or the person represented by the applicant or permittee, or for any other reasons not specifically set forth in this section.

(4) Form of Permit. Permits issued under this section must bear the name, address and telephone number of the person to whom the permit is issued, the name and address of the charitable organization by or on behalf of which the solicitation is to be conducted, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permittee may solicit, and a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement of the solicitation by the City, or by any of its departments, officers or employees. The Director must sign all permits.

(5) Term of Permit. Unless renewed, revoked or suspended in accordance with the provisions of this section a permit is valid for a period of 30 days, and if the permit authorizes multiple solicitations, it may be valid for a period of up to 12 months.

(6) Permit Nontransferable. No permit issued under this section is transferable or assignable.

(7) Renewal of Permit. Upon the expiration of any permit, and if requested in writing so to do, the Director will renew the permit within 10 days of that request if the factual information upon which the original permit was granted remains unchanged, and no violation of this section has occurred. The Director may require that a new notice of intention be filed in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(8) Identification Cards.

(a) Form of Identification Card. Upon issuance of the permit, the Director will issue an identification card to each solicitor named in the application who, for compensation, will participate in the solicitation. The identification card must bear the permit number, the expiration date of the permit or the name and address of the permittee, the name and address of the charitable organization which is represented (if different from the named permittee), and the photograph, name of the solicitor, and state that the solicitation is not in any manner an endorsement by the City, or by any department, officer or employee of the City. If the solicitation will be conducted solely by regular employees of the named charitable organization, or by members or volunteers of that charitable organization who will not be paid any monetary compensation, then the Director may authorize the permittee to issue its own identification cards to its solicitors. Unless otherwise authorized by the Director, these identification cards must bear the permit number, the expiration date of the permit, the name of the solicitor and the name and address of the permittee.

(b) Display of Identification Cards. No person may solicit any contributions unless the identification card is affixed to the solicitor’s clothing in a conspicuous manner so that any person being solicited may observe the identification card and its contents. The identification card must either be read to or presented for inspection by the person solicited before any contribution is requested, offered or accepted.

(c) Disposal of Identification Cards. Upon expiration of the permit, or upon the earlier termination of the authorized solicitation, the permittee must collect and destroy all identification cards previously issued by the City to the permittee’s solicitors. At all times, these identification cards remain the property of the City. Identification cards issued by an authorized permittee to its employees, members or volunteers must be collected from the solicitors and disposed of.

(E) Operating Requirements.

(1) Time of Solicitation. It is unlawful for a solicitor, agent or representative of any permittee to go upon any residential premises after 8:00 p.m., or earlier than 9:00 a.m., for the purpose of solicitation, unless the permittee has been explicitly requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of the residential premises. Nothing herein may be construed to grant any person permission to enter upon any private property at any time without the express consent of the owner or occupant of that property.

(2) Written Receipts Required. Any permittee, or any solicitor, agent or representative of a permittee, receiving money or any other contribution having a value of $5.00 or more from any donor or purchaser following a solicitation authorized by a permit must deliver to the donor or purchaser, upon request, a written receipt signed by the solicitor, showing plainly the name and permit number of the permittee conducting the solicitation, the date, and the amount received; but this requirement does not apply to contributions from anonymous donors collected by means of a closed receptacle or collection box used in a solicitation authorized by a permit issued by the Director if (i) there is attached to the receptacle or box a copy of the information card or other written material approved by the Director; and (ii) the receptacle or box bears a number or other identification mark; and (iii) a written list showing the location and name of the solicitor in charge of each receptacle or box has previously been filed with the Director in connection with an authorized solicitation.

(3) Manner of Solicitation. It is unlawful for a permittee, or for a solicitor, agent or representative of a permittee, to engage in any of the following activities:

(a) To solicit members of the public by direct personal contact without an identification card duly issued by the Director to a solicitor named in the permittee’s notice of intention, or by a charitable organization authorized by the Director to issue identification cards to its solicitors;

(b) To solicit members of the public by direct personal contact without exhibiting or distributing the information card, or other printed material, such as a solicitation brochure, in the form set forth in the notice of intention and authorized by the permit issued by the Director;

(c) To solicit a contribution for or on behalf of any charitable organization which does not maintain financial records on the basis of generally accepted accounting principles;

(d) To allow any child under the age of 10 years to solicit a charitable contribution unless accompanied by a person who is 18 years of age, or older, and who keeps that child at all times within that person’s sight and hearing;

(e) To solicit a contribution by telephone unless the solicitor delivers to any person who so requests, a copy of the information card or other printed material, approved by the permit issued by the Director;

(f) To solicit upon or within any private property, dwelling, house, apartment, condominium, place of abode, or place of business, where there is a posted sign stating, in effect, that its owners or occupants do not desire to be solicited or to have their privacy disturbed, such as “No Solicitors or Canvassers,” “No Solicitations,” or “Do Not Disturb”;

(g) To touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to the person of any prospective contributor, or other member of the public, in furtherance of any solicitation authorized by this section, without first obtaining explicit permission to do so from that prospective contributor or member of the public;

(h) To continue the solicitation of any prospective contributor or other member of the public after that person, by verbal or nonverbal means, expresses a desire not to make a contribution;

(i) To obstruct or impede the free movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or public right-of-way, or in any place generally open to the public, including parking lots;

(j) To solicit from a “captive audience,” which term includes intentionally stationary persons, such as persons standing in lines or seated in public areas;

(k) To intimidate, coerce, force or extort a contribution from any person, or to threaten any injury or damage to a person who declines to be solicited or declines to make a contribution;

(l) To solicit a contribution from any person by means of a misrepresentation of any kind concerning the solicitor’s name, occupation, physical or mental condition, financial condition, residence, or principal place of business;

(m) To make or cause to be made any misstatement of fact or fraudulent misrepresentation in connection with the solicitation of any contribution in the City, or in connection with any application or report required to be filed under this section;

(n) To solicit a contribution using a name, symbol, trademark, logo, service mark, or other identification so closely related to, or similar to that used by, another charitable organization that its use would tend to confuse or mislead a prospective contributor or any other member of the general public;

(o) To solicit a contribution using statements, materials, or other means of inducement which indicate that contributions are being raised for any charitable organization which has not, in fact, provided to the Director evidence of its express written consent to the solicitation of those contributions;

(p) To stand upon or within any public street, highway or median, for the purpose of soliciting or attempting to solicit a contribution from the driver or passengers of any vehicle;

(q) To solicit, or attempt to solicit, any contribution in any manner prohibited by the provisions of Chapter 10.04 PMC, or any other applicable ordinances or statutes;

(r) To place or to leave at any residence or place of business any solicitation brochures, fliers, or other printed matter, or any bags, containers, or other receptacles for new or used goods or merchandise, without adequately securing that printed matter or those receptacles in such a manner as to prevent them from creating litter or visual blight in the immediate vicinity.

(4) Disclosure by Commercial Fundraisers for Charitable Purposes. A permittee, or any solicitor, agent or representative of a permittee who, for compensation, solicits contributions in the City for charitable purposes must disclose prior to an oral solicitation or sales solicitation made by direct personal contact, radio, television or telephone, or at the same time as a written solicitation or sales solicitation:

(a) That the solicitation or sales solicitation is being conducted by a commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes; and

(b) The name of the commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes as registered with the California Attorney General pursuant to Section 12599 of the Government Code.

(5) Report May Be Required from Permittee. The permittee may be requested to file with the Director a financial report setting forth the amount raised by the solicitation, the amount expended in conducting the solicitation, including a report of the wages, fees, commissions, and expenses paid to any person in connection with the solicitation, and the actual or proposed disposition of the balance of any funds collected during the solicitation. The permittee may also be required by the Director to make available for inspection all financial books, records, receipts and other documents whereby the accuracy of the required financial report may be verified. The filing requirement must be imposed by the Director, if at all, within 60 days after the earlier of the expiration of the permit or the termination of the authorized solicitation. The required financial report must be filed within 60 days after the Director’s request.

(F) Summary Suspension of the Permit. Whenever it is shown that any person to whom a permit has been issued is in violation of any provision of this section, or that any solicitor, agent or representative of a permittee has misrepresented the purpose of the solicitation, the Director is authorized to immediately suspend the permit. The Director must either send by registered mail or personally deliver to the permittee written notice of the suspension, stating with specificity the reasons for suspension. The Director must forthwith notify the Sheriff’s Department, and also report the suspension to the City Council at the next regular meeting of that body following the action. The permittee may appeal the suspension in the manner specified by PMC 5.04.340.

(G) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms have the following meanings:

“Charitable organization” means and includes any individual who, or any nonprofit community organization, patriotic, philanthropic, benevolent, educational, religious, fraternal, civic, cultural or service organization, or governmental employee organization which, solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for charitable purposes or holds any assets for charitable purposes.

“Charitable purpose” means and includes an activity, function or objective which would qualify an organization, association, corporation, or other legal entity for tax-exempt status under Article 1, Chapter 4, Part 11, Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code (Section 23701 et seq.), regardless of whether that tax-exempt status has actually been established.

“Commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes” means any individual who, or any corporation or other legal entity which, for compensation does either of the following: solicits funds, assets, or property in the City for charitable purposes; or as a result of a solicitation of funds, assets, or property in the City for charitable purposes, receives or controls the funds, assets, or property solicited for charitable purposes. This term does not include: (i) a “trustee” as defined in Section 12582 or 12583 of the Government Code; (ii) a “charitable corporation” as defined in Section 12582.1 of the Government Code, or any employee thereof; (iii) an individual who is employed by or under the control of a commercial fundraiser for charitable purposes registered with the California Attorney General; or (iv) any federally insured financial institution which holds as a depository funds received as a result of a solicitation for charitable purposes.

“Contribution” means and includes a pledge, gift or donation of food, clothing, money or property, as well as any donation under the guise of a loan of property or money.

“Sales solicitation for charitable purposes” means the sale of, offer to sell, or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon device, magazine subscription, membership, merchandise, ticket of admission, or any other thing or service in connection with which: (i) any appeal is made for charitable purposes; or (ii) the name of any charitable organization is used or referred to in that appeal as an inducement for making the sale; or (iii) any statement is made to the effect that all or any part of the proceeds of the sale will go to any organization or be used for any charitable purposes.

“Solicit,” or any of its derivatives, means to request, directly or indirectly, a contribution of money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other things of value upon the plea or representation, express or implied, that such money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other things of value will be used by a charitable organization or for a charitable purpose. The term “solicit” also means any of the following methods of obtaining money, credit, property, financial assistance, or other things of value upon the plea or representation, express or implied, that such will be used by a charitable organization or for a charitable purpose: (i) any verbal or written request; (ii) an announcement to the media for further dissemination by it concerning an appeal, assemblage, athletic or sports event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, contest, dance, drive, entertainment, exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale, or social gathering, which the public is requested to patronize, or to which the public is requested to make a contribution for any charitable purpose connected with that event; (iii) the distribution, circulation, mailing, posting or publication of any handbill or other written advertisement which, directly or by implication, seeks contributions from the public for one or more charitable purposes, unless that handbill or other written advertisement has been placed within a business open to the public generally and with the express permission of the owner or operator of that business; or (iv) the placement in any public or private place of any box or receptacle for the purpose of receiving contributions. A solicitation, as herein defined, is deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making it receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this section.

“Solicitation for charitable purposes” means any request, plea, entreaty, demand, or invitation to give money or property, in connection with which: (i) any appeal is made for charitable purposes; or (ii) the name of any charitable organization is used or referred to in that appeal as an inducement for making the gift; or (iii) any statement is made to the effect that the gift, or any part of it, will go to any charitable organization or be used for any charitable purpose. (Ord. 1069 § 2, 1995)

5.04.660 Taxicab business.
(A) Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Director” means the Director of Economic and Community Development or his or her designee.

(2) “Owner” or “taxicab owner” means the person, firm, association or corporation who is registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles (“DMV”) as the owner of a vehicle or vehicles used in the transportation of persons for compensation, or who has a legal right to possession of such vehicle pursuant to a lease or rental agreement. The act or omission of any owner’s officer, agent, employee or independent contractor, or of any driver whose services are engaged by any of the above, is for all purposes the act or omission of the owner operating the for-hire transportation services regulated by this chapter.

(3) “Person” means any natural person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, or association of persons.

(4) “Stand” or “taxicab stand” means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the City, which has been designated by the City Engineer, or his or her designee, to be reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs.

(5) “Substantially located” shall have the same meaning as defined in Government Code Section 53075.5, as amended from time to time.

(6) “Taxicab” means a passenger vehicle, designed for carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, used to transport persons for compensation on public streets; the compensation for which is determined by a taximeter or flat rate which determines a charge for distance traveled and/or time expended.

(7) “Taximeter” means any instrument or device approved for use under the applicable laws of the state, which mechanically or electronically calculates the charge for the use of a taxicab.

(B) Taxicab Business Permit Requirements.

(1) No owner of a taxicab business that is substantially located in the City shall operate or permit the operation of a taxicab as a vehicle for hire on the streets of the City without having obtained from Director a taxicab permit pursuant to the provisions of this section.

(2) A taxicab company substantially located and permitted by another city within Los Angeles County or by the County of Los Angeles may only provide prearranged trips in the City. “Prearranged trip” means a trip requested using an online enabled application, dispatch, or internet website.

(C) Application. In addition to the information required by PMC 5.04.140, applications for a taxicab business permit shall contain the following information, as applicable:

(1) The name, residence, business address and telephone number of the applicant;

(2) The fictitious business name, if any, under which the applicant does business or proposes to do business;

(3) The name and address of all directors, officers, shareholders, partners, employees or other individuals who are financially interested in the proposed operation of the taxicab business or who are involved or proposed to be involved, directly or indirectly, with the management of the business;

(4) Data verifying that the taxicab company is substantially located within the City to include the business address and the trip data showing that the total number of prearranged and non-prearranged trips that originate within City’s jurisdiction account for the largest share of the taxicab company’s total number of trips over the previous calendar year;

(5) The number of vehicles for which a permit is desired, the description of each vehicle, giving the license number, vehicle identification number, model, make, year of manufacture and passenger seating capacity;

(6) The color scheme, name, monogram or other distinguishing insignia proposed to be used on each vehicle;

(7) The make and type of taximeter intended to be used in each taxicab;

(8) The street number and exact location of each taxicab stand which the applicant proposes to use (if any);

(9) The proposed schedule of rates or fares to be charged;

(10) Evidence of participation in, and compliance with, a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program, as required in subsection (G) of this section;

(11) The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers;

(12) Whether any license, permit or certificate issued to the applicant has been denied, revoked or suspended by any public organization. The circumstances of said denial, revocation or suspension shall be fully explained;

(13) Whether the applicant has been convicted of a crime within five years prior to the date of the application, including the nature of the crimes; and

(14) Such additional information as the Director deems necessary.

(D) Investigation by Sheriff’s Department. The following procedure shall be followed prior to the approval of a taxicab permit:

(1) Referral to Sheriff’s Department. Following receipt by the Director of a completed application for a taxicab permit, the Director shall refer the application to the Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff’s Department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and submit a report to the Director concerning the following:

(a) The character, reputation and integrity of the applicant and those individuals named in the application who are or will be affiliated with the applicant.

(b) Whether the vehicles proposed to be operated are adequate for the purpose intended, are equipped with all safety devices required by law, and will have an approved make of taximeter.

(2) The Director shall not issue a taxicab permit unless the applicant demonstrates:

(a) That the vehicles described in the application and proposed to be used as taxicabs are adequate and safe for such purpose;

(b) That the color scheme, monogram, name or insignia proposed to be used upon such taxicabs is not in conflict with and does not imitate any color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used by any other person in such manner as to mislead or tend to deceive or defraud the public; and that no other color scheme, monogram, name or insignia has heretofore been designated for the applicant;

(c) That the location of the proposed taxicab stand or stands for such business is such that it or they will not congest or interfere with travel on any street or the use thereof by the public, and that the proposed stands are not within 300 feet of any other stand on the same street.

(3) Grounds for Denial of Permit. In addition to the grounds for denial set forth in PMC 5.04.200, the Director may deny a permit if any of the standards required by subsection (D)(2) of this section are not met.

(E) General Procedures.

(1) Modification of Permit. A permit holder may request a modification to their permit by submitting a new permit application pursuant to this chapter.

(2) Transfer of Permits Prohibited. No taxicab permit may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the prior consent of the Director.

(3) Duration of Permits. The initial taxicab permit issued hereunder to any applicant shall be valid for a period of one year. Thirty days prior to the expiration of the one-year period, the permittee may submit an application for a new permit, accompanied by all applicable fees, which application shall likewise be subject to the requirements of this section.

(4) Discontinuance of Service Automatically Cancels Permit. If the service for which a permit is granted hereunder is discontinued for a period of 45 days, the permit granted hereunder shall automatically be null and void and shall be reissued only in accordance with the provisions of this section.

(F) Taxicab Driver’s Permit Required.

(1) No person shall operate any taxicab in the City unless the person has a valid taxicab driver’s permit to do so as hereinafter provided. The taxicab driver’s photo permit shall be posted in a place conspicuous from the passenger’s compartment of the taxicab.

(2) A taxicab driver substantially located and permitted by another city within the County or by the County may operate in the City on a prearranged basis only. That driver may pick up trips originating through online enabled application, phone dispatch, or internet website.

(3) Application Information. Notwithstanding PMC 5.04.140, the application for a taxicab driver’s permit shall contain the following information, as applicable:

(a) The applicant’s full name, address, telephone number and age;

(b) The applicant’s last two previous addresses;

(c) The applicant’s business, occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the application, including a statement of any similar permit held in another city or state;

(d) The applicant’s height, weight and color of eyes and hair;

(e) Information necessary for a criminal background check;

(f) Certification that applicant has tested negatively for controlled substances and alcohol under a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program as required by subsection (G) of this section;

(g) A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor, or violation of any municipal, state or federal law, the nature of the offenses, and the punishment or penalty assessed therefor;

(h) The number and expiration date of the applicant’s California driver’s license;

(i) The endorsement of the owner of the taxicab business for which the applicant will be operating a taxicab;

(j) Such other identification and information as the Director may require.

(4) Investigation. Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 5.04.180, following receipt by the Director of the completed application for a taxicab driver’s permit, the application shall be referred to the Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff’s Department shall conduct an investigation of the applicant and recommend approval or denial based upon the character, reputation and integrity of the applicant.

Notwithstanding the preceding paragraph, the Director may issue a taxicab driver’s permit to an applicant upon being provided with an authenticated copy of a current license or permit issued by another governmental entity located in Los Angeles County; provided, that the Director determines that a satisfactory investigation of the applicant’s qualifications has been made.

(5) Grounds for Denial of Taxicab Driver’s Permit. In addition to the grounds of denial set forth in PMC 5.04.200, the Director may deny a taxicab driver’s permit if:

(a) The applicant is not of good moral character, or is under the age of 18 years, or is not competent to operate a taxicab safely on the City streets, or is otherwise not a fit or proper person to be in charge of, or to operate, any such motor vehicle;

(b) The applicant does not possess a valid Class C driver’s license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles;

(c) The applicant has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of reckless driving or driving under the influence of alcohol or narcotics;

(d) The applicant has, within the preceding 12 months, been convicted of, or pleaded guilty to, more than one moving violation under the California Vehicle Code; or

(e) The applicant has been convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude.

(6) Termination of Employment or Contract.

(a) The taxicab driver’s permit shall be automatically revoked upon the termination of the driver’s employment or contract with the owner who endorsed the permit application as required by subsection (F)(3)(i) of this section.

(b) Within 24 hours after any termination of employment or contract, the owner and driver shall jointly notify the Director in writing of such termination and surrender any taxicab driver’s permit in their respective possessions. If said permit is unavailable, the owner and driver shall state on the notification the unavailability of the permit and the reasons therefor.

(G) Controlled Substances and Alcohol Program.

(1) No taxicab business license shall be issued or renewed unless the holder at the time of permit issuance or renewal files with the Director a certification that the holder maintains a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program conforming to 49 CFR Part 40 (Section 40.1 et seq.) and Part 382 (Section 382.101 et seq.) and California Government Code Section 53075.5 for all drivers of vehicles operated under the certificate.

(2) No taxicab driver’s permit shall be issued or renewed unless the holder at the time of the permit issuance or renewal files with the Director a certification that the driver operating under the permit has tested negatively for controlled substances and alcohol under a mandatory controlled substance and alcohol testing certification program conforming to Parts 40 and 382 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations and California Government Code Section 53075.5.

(3) An applicant that receives a positive test result during a pre-employment drug screening procedure may not resubmit an application for a taxicab driver’s permit for a period of five years.

(4) If a taxicab driver tests positive during a random drug screening process, the taxicab driver’s permit will be suspended until the driver has successfully completed all the requirements placed on him/her by the Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). If this same taxicab driver tests positive again during a random drug screening process, his/her taxicab driver’s permit will be revoked for a period of not less than five years.

(H) Taxicab Equipment and Operating Requirements.

(1) Public Liability Insurance. Each permittee shall file with the Director a policy of liability insurance pursuant to PMC 5.04.240. The policy(ies) of insurance shall be in the following amounts:

(a) Commercial general liability: combined single limit of $1,000,000 per occurrence;

(b) Commercial automobile liability: $300,000 combined single limit including owned, non-owned and hired automobile coverage (or comparable as approved by Director).

(2) Taximeters Required. The taxicab owner shall equip all taxicabs operating in the City with a device or technology approved by the Division of Measurement Standards to calculate fares, including the use of Global Positioning System metering; provided, that the device or technology complies with Section 12500.5 of the Business and Professions Code and with all regulations established pursuant to Section 12107 of the Business and Professions Code (“taximeter”). It shall be the duty of every taxicab owner to keep such taximeter accurate at all times so that it indicates the correct charge for the distance traveled and waiting time. All taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by Code Enforcement Officers and the Sheriff’s Department. The Sheriff’s Department and Code Enforcement Officers are authorized to inspect any taximeter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person owning or operating the taxicab in which the defective taximeter exists to cease operation of that taxicab. Thereupon, such taxicab shall not be used until the taximeter is repaired and restored to proper working condition.

(3) It shall be the duty of the driver to cause the taximeter to begin calculating the fare at the start of each trip and stop calculating the fare at the termination of each trip; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for the driver to clear or remove from the taximeter the amount of the charges prior to payment of the amount indicated.

(4) Rates, Fares and Charges for Taxicab Service.

(a) The rates, fares and charges for taxicab service originating in the City shall in no event exceed the highest rates, fares and charges for taxicab service approved by the city of Los Angeles.

(b) The permittee shall disclose fares, fees, or rates to the customer. A permitted taxicab company may satisfy this requirement by disclosing fares, fees, or rates on its internet website, mobile telephone application, or telephone orders upon request by the customer. The rates, fares and charges for the transportation of passengers in taxicabs operated in the City shall be as indicated on the taximeter, and it shall be unlawful for the driver of any taxicab to charge, demand or collect an amount in excess of that computed and shown by the taximeter. The taximeter shall be adjusted to accurately compute the current rates, fares and charges, but not in excess of the limits authorized in this section. The taximeters shall be placed so that the amount to be charged shall be well-lit and readily discernible by the taxicab passenger.

(c) The permittee shall notify the passenger of the applicable rate prior to the passenger accepting the ride for walkup rides and street hails. The rate may be provided on the exterior of the vehicle, within an application of a mobile telephone, device, or other internet-connected device, or be clearly visible in either print or electronic form inside the taxicab.

(d) The City Council shall have the power, following a hearing upon its own motion or upon a complaint, to investigate a single rate or fare or the entire schedule of rates and fares in effect, which are charged, demanded or collected for taxicab service and to authorize new rates or fares or new schedules thereof.

(5) Direct Route of Travel. No driver of a taxicab hired to carry passengers to a definite point shall take any route other than the most direct route possible, consistent with passenger safety and expeditious transportation to such destination.

(6) Receipts. Every driver of a taxicab shall, upon request of a passenger, issue a receipt evidencing payment of the correct fare.

(7) Interior Displays in Taxicabs. Every taxicab shall display in the passenger’s compartment, permanently affixed to the rear of the driver’s seat and in full view of the passengers, the following items:

(a) A card not less than four inches by six inches in size which shall have printed thereon the taxicab owner’s name or fictitious business name, the business address and telephone number of the taxicab owner, the rates to be charged for conveyance in the taxicab (including rates for minimum flag drop, mileage and waiting time), and a statement that such rates are applicable to all trips originating in the City; and

(b) A cardholder for the placement of a taxicab driver’s permit. Such cardholder shall contain a notice which, upon the removal of the taxicab driver’s permit, shall be visible to passengers and which states that the taxicab driver’s permit is required to be displayed at all times while the taxicab is in operation.

(8) Manifests.

(a) Each taxicab driver shall maintain a separate manifest for every service rendered, which manifest shall include the following information:

(i) Location where passengers entered the taxicab;

(ii) Time of entry;

(iii) Location where passengers were discharged;

(iv) Number of passengers; and

(v) Amount of fare collected.

(b) The taxicab owner shall retain all manifests at its principal office for a period of 90 days after the date of service rendered, and the same shall be made available for inspection during normal business hours by any authorized representative of the City.

(9) Safety Inspection.

(a) All taxicab companies shall maintain motor vehicles used in taxicab transportation services in a safe operating condition, and in compliance with the Vehicle Code, subject to annual inspection at a facility that is certified by the National Institute for Automotive Service Excellence or a facility registered with the Bureau of Automotive Repair. The inspection shall be completed prior to the issuance of the taxicab business permit. If the taxicab successfully completes the safety inspection, a taxicab safety permit sticker shall be issued and shall be displayed on the left side of the taxicab’s rear bumper.

(b) The registered owner of a taxicab, who is aware of or should have been aware of any unsafe condition of the taxicab, shall not allow the taxicab to be used until necessary repairs are made.

(10) Safety and Cleanliness of Taxicabs. Each taxicab subject to this section shall be maintained in a safe, clean and sanitary manner. No person shall operate a taxicab which is unsafe, unsuitable for service, or which contains defective equipment. The following conditions shall, without limitation, be deemed to make a vehicle unsuitable or unsafe for taxicab service:

(a) Excessive leakage of oil, grease, gas or any other substance from any part of the vehicle;

(b) The existence of any defects in the frame of the vehicle;

(c) The failure of any movable parts of the vehicle, including doors, windows, hood, trunk, lights, etc., to function properly;

(d) Failure to maintain the tires, lights, turning signals, or brakes in safe operating condition;

(e) Failure to maintain the motor and other mechanical parts of the vehicle in safe operating condition;

(f) Failure to have an adequate exhaust system, in compliance with state law, properly installed and in good working condition;

(g) The existence of excessive dents or scratches in the body of the vehicle;

(h) Improper maintenance of the exterior paint in the authorized color scheme;

(i) The existence of excessive wear and tear on the upholstery, floor mats and other parts of the interior of the vehicle; and

(j) Failure to have adequate interior lighting in proper working condition.

(11) Taxicab Stands.

(a) Designation of Taxicab Stands.

(i) Upon granting a permit to engage in the taxicab business, the Director of Public Works shall designate the exact location of each stand which the permittee may use. Such stands, and any additional or alternate stands subsequently authorized hereunder, shall be prepared, marked and maintained by the Public Works Department, and the costs thereof shall be collected from the permittee.

(ii) Any permittee hereunder may apply for a change in the location of any taxicab stand or for the use of additional taxicab stands. Such application shall be filed with the Director of Public Works. The application shall set forth the proposed new location, shall be accompanied by an application fee in such amount as may be fixed by resolution of the City Council for each stand to be established or relocated, and shall have attached thereto the written consent of all persons owning, leasing or occupying the ground floor or surface of any premises or property in front of which the proposed stand is to be located. Such application shall include a request and agreement on the part of the applicant that the City prepare, mark and maintain such location for use as a taxicab stand at the applicant’s expense, such costs to be paid by the applicant immediately upon being billed therefor by the City. Such application shall be reviewed by the Director pursuant to this section.

(I) Suspension and Revocation Procedures.

(1) Temporary Suspension by the Director.

(a) The Director shall have the authority to temporarily suspend any permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this section if an emergency situation exists wherein the immediate cessation of activities or operations under such permit is necessary to protect the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, including if a taxicab driver tests positive during a screening required by subsection (G) of this section. Such suspension shall become effective 24 hours after the permittee has received written notice of intent to suspend and the grounds therefor. Prior to imposition of any suspension, the permittee may appear before the Director and present any information concerning the proposed suspension. Following the 24-hour time period, the Director may impose a temporary suspension for a period not to exceed 60 days pending a hearing before the City Council. Such hearing shall be scheduled by the City Clerk pursuant to this section.

(b) If a taxicab driver’s permit is proposed to be temporarily suspended by the Director, the taxicab permittee shall be notified of the proposed temporary suspension and shall be sent copies of all hearing notices which are sent to the taxicab driver.

(2) Suspension or Revocation Hearing by the City Council. Whenever a permit granted or issued under the provisions of this section is temporarily suspended by the Director, a written report of such action or recommended action shall be filed by the Director with the City Clerk for submission to the City Council. Concurrently, a copy of such report shall be mailed to the permittee, together with a notice that the matter will be set for hearing by the City Council at its next regular meeting, giving the date, time and place of such meeting. The City Clerk shall set the matter for hearing by the City Council at its next regular meeting, and the City Council shall, at such hearing or continuance thereof, hear such evidence as may be offered, and, in its discretion, affirm, modify or reverse the action taken or recommended.

(3) Surrender of Permit. If the City Council finds that sufficient justification exists for the suspension or revocation of a permit, then the City Council may suspend or revoke such permit. The permit shall forthwith be surrendered to the Director, and the operation of any taxicab or taxicabs covered by such permit shall thereupon cease and be unlawful.

(J) Authority to Inspect and Order Repairs. The Sheriff’s Department or the Director of Neighborhood Services may order any person owning or operating a taxicab which is unsuitable or unsafe for taxicab service, including any condition specified in subsection (H)(10) of this section, to remove such taxicab from service. Such order shall be in writing. The vehicle shall not be operated on the streets of the City unless and until satisfactory proof is presented to the Sheriff or the Director of Neighborhood Services that the taxicab is safe and complies with the requirements of this section.

(K) Penalties.

(1) The fine for operating a taxicab in the City of Palmdale without a permit from the city or county in which the taxicab company is substantially located shall be $5,000.

(2) Any other violation of this section shall be punished pursuant to Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 1518 § 1, 2019; Ord. U-1030 §§ 19 – 24, 1993; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990)

5.04.670 Tobacco/smoking product retailer.
(A) Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Arm’s length transaction” means a sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, corporate or other entities which have some or all of the same directors and/or principals, or any sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this section, is not an arm’s length transaction.

(2) “Drug paraphernalia” shall have the definition set forth in California Health and Safety Code Sections 11014.5 and 11364.5, as those sections may be amended from time to time.

(3) “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a 10 percent or greater interest in the stock, assets or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have, or can or does share, ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business.

(4) “Self-service display” means the open display or storage of tobacco products, smoking products or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.

(5) “Smoking product” means any substance produced or sold to be used for smoking, ingestion or consumption in cigarettes, cigars, pipes, hookahs, or other similar objects.

(6) “Tobacco product” means (a) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, snus, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (b) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product dependence.

(7) “Tobacco/smoking paraphernalia” means cigarette papers or wrappers, blunt wraps as defined in Section 308 of the Penal Code, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other instrument or paraphernalia designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, ingestion or consumption of tobacco and other smoking products.

(8) “Tobacco/smoking product retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, in public view, tobacco, tobacco/smoking products or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia. Any person who distributes free or low cost samples of tobacco products, smoking products or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia shall be deemed to be a tobacco/smoking product retailer under this chapter. “Tobacco/smoking product retailing” shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco or smoking product, or tobacco or smoking paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged or offered for exchange.

(9) “Vending machine” as used in this section shall mean a machine, appliance, or other mechanical device operated by currency, token, debit card, credit card, or any other form of payment that is designed or used for vending purposes, including, but not limited to, machines or devices that use remote control locking mechanisms.

(10) “Youth decoy” means a person under the age of 18 who is used by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department or any City official or employee authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter to conduct random on-site sting investigations to determine compliance with tobacco retailing laws.

(B) Permits Required.

(1) Any person intending to act as a tobacco/smoking product retailer shall, within one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, obtain a tobacco/smoking product retailer permit for each location at which tobacco/smoking product retailing is to occur. This applies to all existing and future tobacco/smoking product retailers in the City.

(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco/smoking product retailer in the City without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit pursuant to this section for each location at which that activity is to occur.

(3) The sale of tobacco/smoking products or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia from other than a fixed location, including but not limited to tobacco/smoking product retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles, is prohibited and no permit shall be issued under this section to any such activity.

(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco/smoking product retailer at the location in the City identified in the permit application and/or on the face of the permit. Nothing in this chapter is intended to be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or affect any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to any provision of this code, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5.

(5) No permit shall be issued to authorize a tobacco/smoking product retailer at a location that is permitted under state law to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises (e.g., an “on sale” license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control) and no permit shall issue to authorize a tobacco/smoking product retailer at any location offering food for sale for consumption by guests on the premises.

(C) Applications. In addition to the information requirement by PMC 5.04.140, the application for a tobacco/smoking product retailer permit shall contain the following information:

(1) Proof that the location for which a tobacco/smoking product retailer permit is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit by the California Board of Equalization.

(2) A signed affirmation by each proprietor that the proprietor is informed of the laws affecting tobacco/smoking product retailer permits. No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a permit as a determination by the City that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco/smoking product retailing.

(3) Whether or not any proprietor or any agent admitted violating or has been found to have violated this section and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five years.

(4) Each permit application must be accompanied by the required permit fee, established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the total cost of both permit administration and permit enforcement, including, for example, issuing the permit, administering the permit program, retailer education, retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the costs of the regulatory program authorized by this section. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law.

(5) Such other information as the Director deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this section as specified on the application form required by this section.

(6) A permitted tobacco/smoking product retailer shall inform the Director in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit within 10 business days of a change.

(7) All information specified in an application pursuant to this section shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act

(California Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law, subject to the law’s exemptions.

(8) A statement signed by each proprietor that no drug paraphernalia is or will be sold at the business seeking the permit.

(D) Issuance and Renewal of Permit.

(1) Except as otherwise provided herein, upon receipt of a complete application for a tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit and the payment of the applicable permit fee, the Director shall issue a permit unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists:

(a) One or more of the bases for denial listed in PMC 5.04.200 exists.

(b) The application seeks authorization for tobacco/smoking product retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this section (e.g., mobile vending), that is unlawful pursuant to this code, including without limitation the zoning ordinance, building code, business license ordinance, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law.

(c) The application seeks authorization for tobacco/smoking product retailing for a proprietor to whom this section prohibits a permit to be issued.

(d) Suspension or revocation proceedings have been initiated by any local, state or federal agency for violations of local, state or federal tobacco control laws within the preceding 60-day period.

(2) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and permit ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless:

(a) The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor or fully transferred to entirely new proprietors; and

(b) The new proprietor provides the City with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor has acquired the location in an arm’s length transaction.

(3) Every permit issued under this chapter shall be posted in accordance with PMC 5.04.100.

(4) A tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit is valid only for the location for which it has been issued and may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another.

(5) The duration of a tobacco/smoking product retailer permit shall be consistent with the provisions of PMC 5.04.230 and shall be renewed consistent with the provisions of PMC 5.04.250 except that any permit that is suspended, has been permanently revoked, or is subject to suspension or revocation proceedings shall not be renewed.

(6) A tobacco/smoking product retailer permit which is not timely renewed pursuant to PMC 5.04.250 is an expired permit. The tobacco/smoking product retailer shall not engage in tobacco/smoking product retailing at the permitted location until a new permit has been issued for that location.

(7) A denial by the Director of a tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit may be appealed pursuant to PMC 5.04.340. An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the appealed action.

(8) A valid City business license is required before a tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit may be issued.

(E) Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco/smoking product retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco or smoking product or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of 27 years, without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco or smoking product or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia.

(F) Minimum Age to Sell Tobacco Products. No tobacco/smoking product retailer shall permit any person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco or smoking products to engage or participate in the sale of tobacco or smoking products or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia.

(G) Compliance Monitoring and Enforcement.

(1) Compliance with this section shall be monitored by any City official or employee authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter or this code. Compliance checks shall determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco/smoking product retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with tobacco laws regulating youth access to tobacco. When appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco/smoking product retailing. Nothing in this subsection shall create a right of action in any permit or other person against the City or its agents.

(2) Youth decoys may be utilized during enforcement of this chapter. The City shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of such person’s age (herein “youth decoy”) if the potential violation occurs when the youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by any City official or employee authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter or this code.

(H) Permit Violations and Penalties.

(1)  It shall be a violation of this section for a permittee, or his/her agents or employees, to violate any federal, state, or local law or regulation, including any provision of this chapter, applicable to tobacco or smoking products, tobacco/smoking paraphernalia or tobacco/smoking product retailing.

(2) Tobacco/smoking product retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited.

(3) It shall be a violation of this section for a permittee or any permittee’s agents or employees to violate any local, state or federal law regulating controlled substances or drug paraphernalia, such as, for example, California Health and Safety Code Section 11364.7.

(4) Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this section shall constitute a violation.

(5) Failure to prominently display the tobacco/smoking product retailer permit in a publicly visible location at the permitted premises shall constitute a violation.

(6) The failure of the permittee to allow any law enforcement service, the Director, or any authorized City official to conduct unscheduled inspections of the premises of the business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with any federal, state, or local tobacco law or regulation, including any provision of this chapter, at any time the business is open for business shall constitute a violation.

(7) Any continuing violation shall constitute a separate offense for each day of the violation.

(8) Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

(9) Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be unfair business practices and are presumed to at least nominally damage each and every resident of the community in which the business operates.

(10) In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this section may be remedied by a civil action brought by the City Attorney in the name of the City, including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil or criminal code enforcement proceedings and suits for injunctive relief.

(I) Revocation of Permit.

(1) In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit may be revoked by the City Council in accordance with PMC 5.04.280 through 5.04.300.

(2) Upon a finding by the City Council of a first violation of any provision of this chapter within any five-year period the City shall:

(a) Issue a written warning to the permittee.

(b) Advise the permittee of the penalties for further violations of this section.

(c) Require the permittee to provide documentation to the City that all employees engaged in the retail sales of tobacco or smoking products and/or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia have received training in a City-approved program within 60 days after the warning, or such other time as shall be set by the Director of Planning.

(d) Revoke said tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit for 90 days.

(3) Upon a finding by the City of a second permit violation of any provision of this chapter, within any five-year period, the tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit may be revoked for up to one year.

(4) Upon finding by the City of a third permit violation of any provision of this section, within any five-year period, the tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit may be permanently revoked.

(5) A tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit may be revoked by the City Council if one of the following conditions exist:

(a) One or more of the grounds for denial listed in PMC 5.04.200 existed before the permit was issued; or

(b) A permittee is convicted of a misdemeanor or felony violation of any federal, state, or local tobacco law or regulation, including any provision of this section, or in a different legal proceeding has pleaded guilty, “no contest” or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in this section.

(6) A tobacco/smoking product retailer whose permit has been revoked may not apply for a new tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit until 30 days prior to the expiration of the revocation period.

(7) During any period of permit revocation, the tobacco/smoking product retailer must remove from public view all tobacco or smoking products, tobacco/smoking paraphernalia and tobacco-related advertising. Failure to do so may be considered a subsequent violation.

(8) A decision of the City Council to revoke a permit is final.

(J) Tobacco Retailing without a Permit.

(1) In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if the Director finds that any person has engaged in tobacco/smoking product retailing at any location without a valid tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit, either directly or through the person’s agent or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for or be issued a tobacco/smoking product retailer’s permit for that location as follows:

(a) After the first violation of this section at a location within any 18-month period, no new permit may issue for the person at the location until 120 days have passed from the date of the violation.

(b) After the second violation of this section at a location within any 18-month period, no new permit may issue for the person at the location until six months have passed from the date of the violation.

(c) After the third violation of this section at a location within any 18-month period, no new permit may issue for the person at the location until one year has passed from the date of the violation.

(2) The display of any advertisement relating to tobacco or smoking products or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco/smoking products retailer’s location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be obtained at that location without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco/smoking products retailer’s permit pursuant to this section for each location at which the advertisement is displayed is prohibited.

(3) Tobacco or smoking products and tobacco/smoking paraphernalia offered for sale or exchange in violation of this section are subject to seizure by any City official or employee authorized to enforce provisions of this chapter or this code and shall be forfeited after the permittee and any other owner of the tobacco or smoking products or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia seized is given reasonable notice and an opportunity to demonstrate that the tobacco or smoking products or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia were not offered for sale or exchange in violation of this section. The decision by law enforcement services may be appealed pursuant to the procedures set forth in PMC 5.04.340. Forfeited tobacco or smoking products and tobacco/smoking paraphernalia shall be destroyed after the time in which to seek judicial review pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or other applicable law has expired without the filing of a lawsuit or, if such a suit is filed, after judgment in that suit becomes final.

(4) For the purposes of the civil remedies provided in this section, whichever of the following is greater shall constitute a separate violation of this section:

(a) Each day on which a tobacco or smoking product or tobacco/smoking paraphernalia is offered for sale in violation of this section; or

(b) Each individual retail tobacco or smoking product and each individual retail item of tobacco/smoking paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this section. (Ord. 1384 § 9, 2010)

5.04.680 Tow truck.
(A) Definition. For purposes of this section, the following term shall have the following meaning:

“Tow truck” means a motor vehicle which has been altered or designed and equipped to tow another motor vehicle by means of a crane, hoist, tow bar, tow line or dolly.

(B) Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to tow trucks or vehicles licensed pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 11500 et seq. and California Business and Professions Code Section 7500 et seq.

(C) Application Information. In addition to the information set forth in PMC 5.04.140, an application for a tow truck service operator’s permit shall include the following information:

(1) A map of the district, area or territory to be served by the tow truck service;

(2) A schedule of rates proposed to be charged in those areas of the City which the applicant proposes to service; and

(3) A description of the location and the operational facilities of the applicant.

(D) Operating Requirements.

(1) Service Records to Be Kept. A tow truck service operator shall maintain the following records for each service order:

(a) Location where tow service requested;

(b) Date and time request made;

(c) Description of vehicle towed;

(d) Location to which vehicle was towed;

(e) Identification of dispatcher;

(f) Identification of driver; and

(g) Time of dispatch.

(2) Inspection. Such records shall be available for inspection by the Director and the Sheriff for a period of at least six months.

(3) Driver’s License Requirements. A tow truck service operator shall not allow any person to operate a tow truck authorized under its permit unless such driver has, in his or her possession, a valid driver’s license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles.

(4) Insurance Requirements. The Director shall not issue a tow truck service operator’s permit until the applicant has filed a policy of liability insurance pursuant to PMC 5.04.240 covering every tow truck to be operated pursuant to the operator’s permit. The policy of liability insurance shall be in not less than the following amounts:

(a) One hundred thousand dollars for death or injury to any one person in any one accident or occurrence;

(b) Three hundred thousand dollars for death or injury to two or more persons in any one accident or occurrence;

(c) Fifty thousand dollars for damages to property of others.

(5) Indemnification. Every operator permitted pursuant to this section shall execute an indemnification agreement pursuant to PMC 5.04.240.

(6) Tow Truck Facility Security. If the tow truck service provides storage for towed vehicles, the operator shall provide security for such vehicles during all business hours.

(7) Locking of Vehicles. If the tow truck service provides storage of towed vehicles, the operator shall lock each ignition, remove the key, and place the key in a safe place.

(8) Sign Requirements.

(a) The operator shall install and maintain a sign on the business premises, plainly visible from the street, showing the operator’s name, the address of the business, the time when the premises are closed and the towing and storage fees, if any.

(b) All signs shall be installed pursuant to this section in compliance with this code.

(9) Rates Charged. A copy of the rates charged for utilizing a tow truck’s services shall be posted or carried in each tow truck. (Ord. 1384 § 10, 2010; Ord. 898 § 2, 1990. Formerly 5.04.670)

Chapter 5.05
CANNABIS
Sections:

5.05.010    Purpose and findings.

5.05.020    Definitions.

5.05.030    Commercial cannabis activities prohibited.

5.05.040    Cannabis delivery prohibited.

5.05.050    Cannabis cultivation prohibited.

5.05.060    Use or activity prohibited by State or Federal law.

5.05.070    Public nuisance.

5.05.080    Enforcement.

5.05.010 Purpose and findings.
(A) The City Council finds that prohibitions on commercial cannabis activities, including, but not limited to, cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, delivery and sale of cannabis, are necessary for the preservation and protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the City and its citizenry. The City of Palmdale is authorized by its charter and State law to prohibit such activities.

(B) The City Council finds that it is the intent of the City Council, in adopting these prohibitions, to retain local control over all commercial cannabis activities.

(C) The City Council finds that this chapter expressly prohibits the cultivation, possession, manufacture, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, transporting, distribution, delivery and sale of cannabis within the City of Palmdale.

(D) It is the intent and desire of the City Council of the City of Palmdale that the State of California Department of Food and Agriculture not approve, pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 26055(d), any application for a State license for any commercial cannabis activity within the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1504 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1480 § 2, 2016)

5.05.020 Definitions.
Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(A) “Cannabis” means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

(B) “Cannabis products” means cannabis that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated cannabis, or an edible or topical product containing cannabis or concentrated cannabis and other ingredients.

(C) “Commercial cannabis activity” means the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis or cannabis products.

(D) “Cultivate” or “cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis. For purposes of this chapter, “cultivate” or “cultivation” shall not include the indoor personal cultivation of cannabis pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.1(a)(3); provided, that such activity is done in compliance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2 and any other applicable State or local regulations.

(E) “Deliver” or “delivery” means the commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. “Deliver” or “delivery” also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer. (Ord. 1504 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1480 § 2, 2016)

5.05.030 Commercial cannabis activities prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to own, manage, conduct, or operate any commercial cannabis activity or to participate as an employee, contractor, agent or volunteer, or in any other manner or capacity, in any commercial cannabis activity in the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1504 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1480 § 2, 2016)

5.05.040 Cannabis delivery prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to deliver cannabis or cannabis products in the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1504 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1480 § 2, 2016)

5.05.050 Cannabis cultivation prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to cultivate cannabis in the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1504 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1480 § 2, 2016)

5.05.060 Use or activity prohibited by State or Federal law.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or authorize any use or activity which is otherwise prohibited by any State or Federal law. (Ord. 1504 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1480 § 2, 2016)

5.05.070 Public nuisance.
Any violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. (Ord. 1504 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1480 § 2, 2016)

5.05.080 Enforcement.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in PMC Title 1. Where the conduct constituting the violation is of a continuing nature, each day that the conduct continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. (Ord. 1504 § 1, 2017; Ord. 1480 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 5.10
SYNTHETIC DRUGS
Sections:

5.10.010    Purpose and intent.

5.10.020    Definitions.

5.10.030    Provision, sale and/or distribution of substances claimed or represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited.

5.10.040    Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited.

5.10.050    Public nuisance.

5.10.060    Summary abatement.

5.10.070    Revocation of business license.

5.10.080    Penalties.

5.10.090    Seizure of evidence.

5.10.100    Exclusions.

5.10.010 Purpose and intent.
Recreational use of psychoactive bath salts, psychoactive herbal incense and similar products commonly known as “synthetic drugs” has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, and death. While State and Federal laws and regulations prohibit some synthetic drugs, the makers of these drugs continually alter the composition of the compounds in their products so as to escape the purview of these laws and regulations. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide the City with reasonable measures to address the dangers to the community posed by synthetic drugs that are not regulated by State or Federal law. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.020 Definitions.
(A) “Business” shall mean an establishment engaged in one or more commercial or mercantile activities for the purpose of earning, in whole or in part, a profit or livelihood whether or not a profit or livelihood is actually earned thereby.

(B) “Consume,” “consuming” or “consumption” shall mean to ingest, inhale, inject, smoke or snort (insufflate).  

(C) “Distribute,” “distributing” or “distribution” shall mean to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply, whether for monetary gain or not.

(D) “Enforcement Officer” shall mean any individual authorized by PMC 1.16.010, or any other local, State or Federal law, to enforce the Palmdale Municipal Code.

(E) “Person” shall mean any individual, partnership, corporation, or joint venture which conducts or purports to conduct a business activity within the City.

(F) “Possess,” “possessing” or “possession” shall mean to have for consumption, distribution or sale in one’s actual or constructive custody or control, or under one’s authority or power, whether such custody, control, authority and/or power be exercised solely or jointly with others.

(G) “Provide,” “providing” or “provision” shall mean offering to distribute or sell a product or substance to any person.

(H) “Psychoactive bath salts” shall mean any crystalline or powder product that contains a synthetic chemical compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects. The term “psychoactive bath salts” includes without limitation:

(1) Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds:

(a) Cathinone (2-amino-1-phenyl-1propanone), 4-methylmethcathinone (2-methylamino-1-(4-methylphenyl)propan-1-one), 4-methoxymethcathinone (1-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2-(methylamino)propan-1-one), MDVP (methylenedioxypyrovalerone), MDMA (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylamphetamine), methylone (3,4-methylenedioxy-N-methylcathinone), methcathinone (2-(methylamino)-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), flephedrone (4-fluoromethcathinone), 3-FMC (3-fluoromethcathinone), ethcathinone (2-ethylamino-1-phenyl-propan-1-one), butylone (ß-keto-N-methylbenzodioxolylbutanamine), a-PPP (a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MPPP (4’-methyl-a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), MDPPP (3’,4’-methykenedioxy-a-pyrrolidinopropiophenone), a-PVP (1-phenyl-2-(1-pyrrolidinyl)-1-pentanone) or naphyrone (1-naphthalen-2-yl-2-pyrrolidin-1-ylpentan-1-one);

(b) Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;

(c) Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed compounds;

(d) Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; or

(e) Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and

(2) Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names: Bliss, Blizzard, Blue Silk, Bonzai Grow, Charge Plus, Charlie, Cloud Nine, Euphoria, Hurricane, Ivory Snow, Ivory Wave, Lunar Wave, Ocean, Ocean Burst, Pixie Dust, Posh, Pure Ivory, Purple Wave, Red Dove, Scarface, Snow Leopard, Stardust, Vanilla Sky, White Dove, White Night and White Lightning.

The term “psychoactive bath salts” shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture or preparation that is specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (“UCSA”) (Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s schedules of controlled substances (Health and Safety Code Sections 11053 through 11058), regulated by one of the UCSA’s synthetic drug laws (Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5, and 11401), regulated by the Federal Controlled Substances Act (the “CSA”) (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.) or approved by the Food and Drug Administration (“FDA”).

(I) “Psychoactive herbal incense” shall mean any organic product consisting of plant material that contains a synthetic stimulant compound that, when consumed, elicits psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects. The term “psychoactive herbal incense” includes without limitation:

(1) Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and contain any of the following intoxicating chemical compounds:

(a) Cannabicyclohexanol (2-[(1 R, 3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methylnonan-2-yl)phenol), JWH-018 (naphthalene-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-073 (naphthalene-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl)methanone), JWH-200 ((1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)-naphthalen-1-ylmethanone), HU-210 ((6aR, 10aR)-9-(Hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol), CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5- (2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol) or AM-2201 (1-[(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(naphthalene-1-yl)methanone);

(b) Any derivative of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;

(c) Any synthetic substance and its isomers with a chemical structure similar to the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds;

(d) Any chemical alteration of the above listed intoxicating chemical compounds; or

(e) Any other substantially similar chemical structure or compound; and

(2)  Products that elicit psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects and are marketed under any of the following trade names: K2, K3, Spice, Genie, Smoke, PotPourri, Buzz, Spice 99, Voodoo, Pulse, Hush, Mystery, Earthquake, Black Mamba, Stinger, Ocean Blue, Serenity, Fake Weed.

The term “psychoactive herbal incense” shall not include any product, substance, material, compound, mixture, or preparation that is specifically excepted by the UCSA (Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq.), listed in one of the UCSA’s schedules of controlled substances (Health and Safety Code Sections 11053 through 11058), regulated by one of the USCA’s synthetic drug laws (Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401), regulated by the CSA (21 U.S.C. 801 et seq.) or approved by the FDA.

(J) “Psychoactive or psychotropic stimulant effects” shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cocaine, methylphenidate or amphetamines.

(K) “Psychoactive or psychotropic euphoric effects” shall mean affecting the central nervous system or brain function to change perception, mood, consciousness, cognition and/or behavior in ways that are similar to the effects of cannabis.

(L) “Sell,” “selling” or “sale” shall mean to furnish, exchange, transfer, deliver or supply for monetary gain.

(M) “Synthetic drug” shall include psychoactive bath salts and psychoactive herbal incense, as those terms are defined hereinabove. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.030 Provision, sale and/or distribution of substances claimed or represented to be synthetic drugs prohibited.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the City of Palmdale.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to claim or represent that a product that person is providing, distributing or selling is a synthetic drug within the City of Palmdale.

(C) To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a product is a synthetic drug, the Enforcement Officer may consider any of the following evidentiary factors:

(1) The product is not suitable for its marketed use (such as a crystalline or powder product being marketed as “glass cleaner”);

(2) The business providing, distributing or selling the product does not typically provide, distribute or sell products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as a liquor store selling “plant food”);

(3) The product contains a warning label that is not typically present on products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as “not for human consumption,” “not for purchase by minors,” or “does not contain chemicals banned by Section 11357.5”);

(4) The product is significantly more expensive than products that are used for that product’s marketed use (such as half of a gram of a substance marketed as “glass cleaner” costing $50.00);

(5) The product resembles an illicit street drug (such as cocaine, methamphetamine, or marijuana); or

(6) The product’s name or packaging uses images or slang referencing an illicit street drug (such as “Eight Ballz” or “Green Buddha”).

(D) Merely disclaiming a substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug as “not safe for human consumption” will not avoid the application of this section. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.040 Possession of synthetic drugs prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to possess any synthetic drug within the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.050 Public nuisance.
(A) It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug within the City of Palmdale.

(B) It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, distribution or sale of any synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the City of Palmdale.

(C) It is a public nuisance for any person to provide, distribute or sell any substances claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug within the City of Palmdale.

(D) It is a public nuisance for any person to allow the provision, distribution or sale of any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug on property owned, controlled or managed by such person within the City of Palmdale.

(E) To determine if a person is claiming or representing that a substance or product is a synthetic drug, the Enforcement Officer may consider any of the evidentiary factors set forth in PMC 5.10.030(C). (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.060 Summary abatement.
Because the use of synthetic drugs has been documented to cause hallucinations, agitation, psychosis, aggression, suicidal and homicidal ideations, and death, any violation of this chapter presents a grave and imminent danger not only to the person consuming the synthetic drug, but also to the public at large. If the Enforcement Officer, based on the facts then known, determines that a violation of this chapter presents an imminent danger or hazard or is imminently injurious to the public health or safety, then that violation is subject to the emergency abatement procedures set forth in PMC 8.10.170. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.070 Revocation of business license.
No person holding a validly issued City business license and owning or operating a business in the City may use that business to provide, distribute or sell any synthetic drug or any substance claimed or represented to be a synthetic drug. A violation of this section by the holder of a validly issued City business license shall constitute grounds for modification, suspension and/or revocation of said license in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 5.04 PMC. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.080 Penalties.
In addition to any penalty or remedy specifically authorized by this chapter, any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in PMC Title 1. Where the conduct constituting the violation is of a continuing nature, each day that the conduct continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.090 Seizure of evidence.
Any product(s) or substance(s) possessed, provided, distributed or sold in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be seized by the enforcing officers and removed and stored in accordance with law. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

5.10.100 Exclusions.
(A) This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances lawfully prescribed or to intoxicating chemical compounds which have been approved by the Federal Food and Drug Administration or which are specifically permitted by California law, including without limitation intoxicating chemical compounds that are specifically excepted by the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11000 et seq.).

(B) This chapter shall not apply to drugs or substances which are prohibited by State or Federal law, including without limitation California Health and Safety Code Sections 11357.5, 11375.5 and 11401 and the Federal Controlled Substances Act.

(C) This chapter shall not be deemed to proscribe any act which is positively permitted, prohibited or preempted by any State or Federal law or regulation. (Ord. 1445 § 2, 2014)

Chapter 5.12
STATE VIDEO FRANCHISES
Sections:

5.12.010    Purpose and application.

5.12.020    State video franchise and PEG fees.

5.12.030    Audit authority.

5.12.040    Customer service penalties.

5.12.050    City response to State video franchise.

5.12.010 Purpose and application.
This chapter is designed to regulate video service providers holding State video franchises and operating within the City pursuant to that franchise. On January 1, 2007, the State of California became the sole authority with power to grant State video franchises pursuant to the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006 (“DIVCA”). Pursuant to DIVCA, the City of Palmdale shall receive a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and/or government (PEG) purposes from all State video franchise holders operating within the City. Additionally, the City intends to exercise its authority to establish and enforce penalties, consistent with State law, against all State video franchise holders operating within the City for violations of customer service standards. (Ord. 1496 § 1, 2017; Ord. U-1496 § 1, 2017)

5.12.020 State video franchise and PEG fees.
(A) Any State video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City shall submit a fee to the City equal to five percent of the “gross revenue” of that State video franchise holder. “Gross revenue,” for the purposes of this chapter, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5660.

(B) Any State video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the City shall submit a PEG fee to the City, or the City’s designee, for support of public, educational, and/or governmental (PEG) purposes that are consistent with State and Federal law. The PEG fee shall be one percent of the “gross revenue” of that State video franchise holder. (Ord. 1496 § 1, 2017; Ord. U-1496 § 1, 2017)

5.12.030 Audit authority.
Not more than once annually, the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a State video franchise to ensure compliance with PMC 5.12.020. (Ord. 1496 § 1, 2017; Ord. U-1496 § 1, 2017)

5.12.040 Customer service penalties.
(A) The holder of a State video franchise shall comply with all applicable State and Federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

(B) The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, shall monitor the compliance of State video franchise holders with respect to State and Federal customer service and protection standards. The City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee, will provide the State video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer service standards, and will allow the State video franchise holder 30 days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the 30-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the City:

(1) For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of up to $500.00 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $1,500 for each violation.

(2) For a second violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of up to $1,000 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $3,000 for each violation.

(3) For a third or further violation of the same nature within 12 months, a fine of up to $2,500 may be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed $7,500 for each violation.

(C) A State video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the City Manager to the City Council within 60 days of the initial assessment. The City Council shall hear all evidence and relevant testimony and may uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The City Council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 1496 § 1, 2017; Ord. U-1496 § 1, 2017)

5.12.050 City response to State video franchise.
(A) Applications. Applicants for State video franchises within the boundaries of the City must concurrently provide complete copies to the City of any application or amendments to applications filed with the California Public Utilities Commission (PUC). One complete copy must be provided to the City Manager.

(B) Within 30 days of receipt, the City Manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a State video franchise. (Ord. 1496 § 1, 2017; Ord. U-1496 § 1, 2017)

Chapter 5.28
GAMBLING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
Sections:

5.28.010    County provisions adopted.

5.28.020    Definitions.

5.28.010 County provisions adopted.
(A) Except as provided in this chapter, Ordinance No. 461 of the County as amended and in effect on April 9, 1975, being the “prohibiting gambling and related activities ordinance of the County of Los Angeles” is adopted as the “prohibiting gambling and related activities ordinance” of the City.

(B) Three copies of Ordinance No. 461 of the County as amended and in effect on April 9, 1975, have been filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 259 § 2, 1975)

5.28.020 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in Ordinance No. 461 of the County as amended and in effect on April 9, 1975, each such name or term shall be deemed or construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

(A) “Board of Supervisors” means the City Council.

(B) “County” or “County of Los Angeles” or “unincorporated area” means the City.

(C) “County Treasury” means the City Treasury.

(D) “Sheriff” means the Chief of Police. (Ord. 259 § 3, 1975)

Chapter 5.44
MOBILE HOME SPACE RENT CONTROL
Sections:

5.44.010    Short title.

5.44.011    Purpose and findings.

5.44.020    Definitions.

5.44.030    The Mobile Home Park Rental Review Board.

5.44.040    Base rent.

5.44.041    Lease regulations.

5.44.050    Registration.

5.44.060    Rent increases upon vacancies.

5.44.070    Annual permissive rent increases.

5.44.080    Special rent increases by application to the Board.

5.44.090    Hearing procedures.

5.44.100    Appeal to hearing officer.

5.44.110    Fees.

5.44.120    Permissible reasons for termination of or refusal to renew a residency.

5.44.130    Refusal of resident to pay illegal rent.

5.44.140    No retaliation.

5.44.150    Posting of chapter.

5.44.160    Remedies.

5.44.170    City Council review of this chapter.

5.44.180    Exemptions.

5.44.190    Park inspections and audits.

5.44.200    Regulations and forms.

5.44.010 Short title.
This chapter may be cited as the “mobile home space rent control ordinance” of the City. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.011 Purpose and findings.
(A) Complaints by residents of mobile home parks concerning excessive rents led the City Council to conduct hearings and, eventually, to adopt an ordinance stabilizing the rents charged for spaces in mobile home parks. The conditions in the City of Palmdale which gave rise to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter still are in existence and are set forth below.

(B) Mobile home owners, unlike apartment residents or residents of other rental stock, are in the unique position of having made a substantial investment to purchase a mobile home for which they must rent a space in a mobile home park. They have also made investments in maintaining and improving those homes, as well as landscaping and exterior improvements to the mobile homes and the rental spaces on which they are located. Alternative sites for the relocation of mobile homes are difficult to find due to the restrictions on the age, size, or style of mobile homes permitted in many parks, and requirements related to the installation of mobile homes, including permits, landscaping and site preparation. Additionally, the cost of moving a mobile home is substantial and the risk of damage in moving is significant. Thus, moving a mobile home is not a feasible option if rent becomes excessive.

(C) The result of these conditions is the creation of a captive market of mobile home owners and residents. Their immobility creates an imbalance in the bargaining relationship between park owners and mobile home park residents. Because mobile homes are often owned by senior citizens, persons on fixed incomes, and persons of low and moderate income, excessive rent increases fall upon these individuals with particular harshness.

(D) The purpose of this chapter is to protect mobile home park residents from excessive rent increases, prevent exploitation of the shortage of available mobile home lots in the City, and enable mobile home owners to preserve their equity in their mobile homes, while at the same time providing a just and reasonable return to park owners. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases are defined to mean:

(A) “Amortizable capital expenses” means expenses for improvements and replacements which have a useful life of at least five years and can be depreciated pursuant to U.S. or California tax codes.

(B) “Board” means the Mobile Home Park Rental Review Board of the City.

(C) “Camping trailer” means a vehicular portable unit mounted on wheels and constructed with collapsible partial sidewalls which fold for towing by another vehicle and unfold for occupancy and is designed for human habitation for recreation or emergency occupancy.

(D) “City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Palmdale, or his/her designee.

(E) “Consumer Price Index” or “CPI” means the Consumer Price Index – All Items for All Urban Consumers index published by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County Metropolitan Area.

(F) “Day” means calendar day, except as otherwise expressly stated in this chapter.

(G) “Department” means the Housing Department of the City of Palmdale.

(H) “Hearing officer” means the hearing officer selected to hear appeals of decisions of the Mobile Home Park Rental Review Board on special rent increase applications pursuant to PMC 5.44.100.

(I) “Housing Manager” means the Housing Manager of the Housing Department of the City of Palmdale, or his/her designee.

(J) “Mobile home” means a vehicle, designed or used for human habitation including a camping trailer, travel trailer, motor home and slide-in camper, when used as the principal place of habitation for the occupants thereof, and any recreational vehicle defined as a mobile home under state law.

(K) “Mobile home park” or “park” means any area of land within the City where two or more mobile home spaces are rented, or held out for rent, to accommodate mobile homes used for human habitation.

(L) “Mobile home park housing services” or “housing services” means services connected with use or occupancy of a rental space in a mobile home park that are provided to residents for the rent charged for a space including, but not limited to, utilities, ordinary repairs, replacement and maintenance, laundry facilities, recreational facilities, a resident manager, refuse removal, parking, street cleaning and maintenance, and other benefits, privileges, facilities or terms and conditions of the residency.

(M) “Mobile home space” or “space” means the site within a mobile home park intended, designed or used for the location or accommodation of a mobile home and any accessory structures or appurtenances attached thereto or used in conjunction therewith.

(N) “Motor home” means a vehicular unit built on or permanently attached to a self-propelled motor vehicle chassis, chassis cab or van, which becomes an integral part of the completed vehicle, designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.

(O) “Operate the park in a manner that is designed to protect the safety of its residents” means the circumstance when an owner reasonably cooperates with local law enforcement to reduce or prevent crime within the park. A rebuttable presumption that the owner is reasonably cooperating with local law enforcement to reduce or prevent crime within the park shall be established if the owner either has authorized, in writing, the Sheriff’s Department to conduct patrols within the park or has agreed in writing to participate in the City’s partners against crime program or any other similar program.

(P) “Owner” means the owner or operator of a mobile home park or an agent or representative authorized to act on behalf of the owner or operator in connection with the maintenance or operation of such park.

(Q) “Rehabilitation work” means any renovation or repair work completed on or in a mobile home park which was performed in order to comply with the direction or order of a public agency or to repair damage resulting from fire, earthquake or other casualty.

(R) “Rent” or “space rent” means the consideration paid for the use or occupancy of a mobile home space and the provision of mobile home park housing services.

(S) “Residency” means the right or entitlement of a mobile home owner, or subresident of a mobile home owner, to use, occupy, and place a mobile home on a rental space in a mobile home park and to related housing services.

(T) “Resident” means a person who has a residency in a mobile home park, including an owner of a mobile home, a subresident of a mobile home, or any other person with a lawful residency in a mobile home.

(U) “Resident, prospective” means a prospective purchaser of a mobile home in a mobile home park who has applied for park residency. “Prospective resident” also means a prospective subresident of a prospective purchaser of a mobile home park who has applied for a park residency.

(V) “Serve” or “service” means, except as otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, the date of personal delivery of any notice on the addressee, or two business days after deposit of notice in the U.S. mail, by first class mail, postage prepaid. “Serve” or “service” also means any other method of delivery mutually agreed upon by the parties.

(W) “Slide-in camper” means a portable unit, consisting of a roof, floor and sides, designed to be loaded onto and unloaded from the bed of a pickup truck, and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy, and includes a truck camper.

(X) “Subresident” means any person who sub-rents or leases a mobile home from any resident in a park.

(Y) “Travel trailer” means a portable unit, mounted on wheels, of such size and weight as not to require special highway movement permits when drawn by a motor vehicle, and for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy.

(Z) “Vacancy” means the existence of a space on which no mobile home is located or a transfer of ownership of a mobile home which remains in a park; provided, however, that transfer of ownership shall not include transfers to a spouse, former spouse, parent, child, trustee, conservator, heir, joint resident or personal representative of a homeowner’s estate who acquires ownership of a mobile home through the death of a homeowner; and provided further, that a space shall not be deemed vacant if it is unoccupied solely because a mobile home has been removed so that a resident may replace it with a new mobile home. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.030 The Mobile Home Park Rental Review Board.
(A) The Mobile Home Park Rental Review Board is hereby established and shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. No member of the Board shall be a resident or owner of a mobile home park, or an employee of a park owner; and no member shall have a financial interest (as defined by state law) in any mobile home or mobile home park, or have a parent, child, spouse or sibling with any such financial interest. Each member shall file a declaration to this effect with the City Clerk prior to his/her appointment to the Board. All members shall be residents of the City.

(B) Four members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting a hearing or meeting. Decisions of the Board shall be made by a majority vote of the members present.

(C) The terms of the Board members shall be staggered with three members serving a coextensive term and the other two members serving another coextensive term. Appointments shall be made in accordance with and subject to the following procedures:

(1) The initial Board shall contain three members who shall each be appointed for a three-year term to end on June 30th of the third year following appointment, or until a successor is appointed. The other two members shall each be appointed for a two-year term to end on June 30th of the second year following appointment, or until a successor is appointed. Thereafter, each member shall be appointed for a two-year term to end on June 30th of the second year following the appointment or until a successor is appointed.

(2) All members serve at the pleasure of the City Council, and any member may be removed, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the City Council. Should a vacancy exist, an appointment shall be made for the unexpired portion of the term.

(D) If a member of the Board is absent from two successive meetings without being excused by the Board, the office of such member shall be vacated and the Chairperson shall immediately notify the City Manager, who shall notify the Mayor and City Council that said office is vacant. Upon such notification, a successor shall be appointed for the remainder of the term of such member.

(E) The Board shall conduct an annual meeting not later than the last day of February of each year to hear public comments and a report on the prior calendar year’s actions. The Board shall hold such other hearings or meeting as often as may be necessary for the Board to discharge its duties hereunder. The Board shall establish the time of any hearings or meetings held pursuant to this chapter, and such hearings or meetings shall be held in City Hall.

(F) The Board shall elect one of its members as Chairperson at the annual meeting.

(G) The duties and responsibilities of the Board shall include the following:

(1) The Board shall make any recommendations it deems appropriate to the City Council regarding the implementation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

(2) The Board shall hear special rent increase applications and determine whether to approve or disapprove a rent increase in the manner provided in PMC 5.44.080 and 5.44.090.

(H) Board members may be compensated for their services in an amount established by resolution of the City Council and may receive reimbursement as provided by the City Council for traveling and other reasonable expenses incurred while on official duty. (Ord. 1449 § 1, 2013; Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.040 Base rent.
(A) Except as provided in this chapter, an owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for a mobile home space exceeding the rent in effect for the space on November 12, 1981. If a previously rented mobile home space was not rented on November 12, 1981, the owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for the space exceeding the rent in effect during the last month the space was rented prior to November 12, 1981. If a mobile home space is rented for the first time after November 12, 1981, the owner shall not demand, accept or retain rent for the space exceeding the rent first charged for the space. No owner shall send a notice containing the specific amount of a proposed rental increase prior to receiving approval of a rent increase from the Board.

(B) For purposes of determining a permissive rent increase pursuant to PMC 5.44.070, “base rent” shall have the meaning set forth in PMC 5.44.070(D) and (E).

(C) For purposes of determining a special rent increase pursuant to PMC 5.44.080, “base rent” shall have the meaning set forth in PMC 5.44.080. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.041 Lease regulations.
(A) No owner may require, directly or indirectly, that any resident or prospective resident sign a lease or rental agreement that provides that a space shall be exempt from the rent control provisions of this chapter, or provides for space rent in excess of the amount permitted by this chapter as a condition of residency in the park, and no owner may deny residency to a prospective purchaser of a mobile home in the park on the grounds that the prospective purchaser will not sign such a lease or rental agreement.

(B) No owner shall misrepresent any rent increase approved by the City under this chapter, or misrepresent the status of any rent increase application submitted by the owner to the City, as an inducement to cause a prospective resident to enter into a lease or rental agreement that will be exempt from the rent control provisions of this chapter.

(C) No owner shall directly or indirectly threaten a prospective resident with a rent increase not permitted under this chapter as an inducement to cause the prospective resident to enter into a lease or rental agreement that will be exempt from the rent control provisions of this chapter.

(D) No owner shall withhold or conceal the existence of this chapter upon any written or verbal inquiry by any prospective resident. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.050 Registration.
(A) Every mobile home park shall file an initial registration statement and annual registration statement, on a form provided by the Housing Manager.

(B) Initial Registration. No later than March 1, 2009, each owner shall file an initial registration statement with the Department, under penalty of perjury, on a form approved by the City, which sets forth the following information:

(1) The complete name, address (including street address, and mailing address if different from street address), telephone number, and fax number (if any) of the owner of record of the park. As used in this subsection, “owner” means the individual, firm or entity that actually owns the park;

(2) The complete name, address (including street address, and mailing address if different from street address), telephone number, and fax number (if any) of the management company or other operator of the park (if different from the owner);

(3) The complete name, address (including street address, and mailing address if different from street address), telephone number, and fax number (if any) of the on-site manager of the park;

(4) The space rent charged for each space in the park, including rents for spaces subject to this chapter and rents for spaces exempt from local regulation under Civil Code Section 798.17;

(5) Each type of utility and service included in the space rent;

(6) Each type of utility and service separately charged from the space rent, the amount charged per space as of the date of the initial registration, and if the amount varies from month to month, the methodology for setting the utility charges and services;

(7) A list of each space exempt from local rent regulation pursuant to a long-term lease or rental agreement under Civil Code Section 798.17 (including the lease terms, and execution and expiration dates for each lease or rental agreement);

(8) A list of amenities provided in the park;

(9) A list of spaces that became vacant over the prior 12 months, the date that each space last became vacant and the rent charged commencing upon such vacancy;

(10) Copies of the rent rolls for the park for the preceding 12 months; and

(11) Any other information or documentation deemed necessary by the Housing Manager for administration of this chapter.

(C) Annual Registration. No later than January 31st of each subsequent year, each owner shall file an annual registration statement with the Department, under penalty of perjury, on a form provided by the City, setting forth complete information for each of the categories listed in subsection (B) of this section, which covers the time period since the prior registration statement.

(D) Registration upon Change of Park Ownership. Within 30 days of a change of ownership of the park, the new owner shall file a registration statement with the Department, under penalty of perjury, on a form approved by the City, setting forth the information required by subsections (B)(1), (2) and (3) of this section for the new owner, and any other changed information from the prior registration statement.

(E) The Housing Manager shall have the authority to request any additional information or documentation from the owner upon review of the registration form, should the registration form be incomplete, or indicate a potential violation of this chapter. No registration shall be deemed complete until the Housing Manager issues a written determination to the owner that the owner submitted all information required by this chapter. Within 30 days after a registration form is submitted, the Housing Manager shall either notify the owner that the registration form is complete, or notify the owner as to what information or documentation is required in order to complete the registration process.

(F) No owner shall impose or receive approval of a permissive rent increase under PMC 5.44.070 or a special rent increase under PMC 5.44.080, unless the park has satisfied the registration requirements and is fully registered pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.060 Rent increases upon vacancies.
(A) Commencing on May 1, 1993, and every six months thereafter, the owner of any mobile home park in the City shall post in a conspicuous location in the park, which is accessible to all park residents, a notice setting forth the maximum rent which will be charged for any space in the park which becomes vacant during the following six months. If the park charges different rents depending upon the type of space or the size of the coach which occupies the space, the notice shall contain the maximum rent which will be charged for each such category. The notice shall be on a form approved or provided by the Department.

(B) At least 15 days prior to the posting of the notice referred to in subsection (A) of this section, the owner shall provide to the Department a copy of the notice which is to be posted in the park. At that time, the park owner also shall submit to the Department the following information in a form acceptable to the City:

(1) All of the spaces in the park which became vacant during the preceding six-month period;

(2) The rent level which is being charged for any space which has been re-rented;

(3) The date(s) that each space was re-rented, and the complete name of each signatory to the lease or rental agreement for each space that was re-rented;

(4) The type and duration of the lease or rental agreement for each space which has been re-rented;

(5) Whether the residents are billed separately for any utilities and, if so, which utilities are billed separately from the rent; and

(6) Whether there are any other fees or charges which are billed separately from the rent and, if so, the identity and amount of such charges. (The fact that other fees or charges are being billed separately from the rent shall not imply that the City has approved such additional fees or charges.)

(C) The rent for a mobile home space may be increased by any amount upon a vacancy; provided:

(1) That the residency is terminated voluntarily by the resident(s) or lawfully terminated for just cause pursuant to State law;

(2) That the owner has complied with the requirements of subsections (A) and (B) of this section;

(3) That the rent which is charged does not exceed the maximum amount for the applicable category of space as set forth in the notice which was last posted by the park owner or operator pursuant to subsection (A) of this section. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.070 Annual permissive rent increases.
(A) Subject to the requirements of this section, the rent for a mobile home space may be increased once every 12 months by the lesser of (1) 75 percent of the increase in the CPI over the prior calendar year, or (2) five percent of the current space rent, in accordance with the following provisions. This space rent increase shall be known as a “permissive rent increase.”

(B) Limitations.

(1) A permissive rent increase application for one or more mobile home spaces shall not be noticed to residents or approved more frequently than once in any 12-month period.

(2) A permissive rent increase shall not be implemented on any space or spaces in a park more frequently than once in any 12-month period.

(3) If a space was previously exempt from rent regulation under this chapter pursuant to a long-term lease or rental agreement, and the City authorizes or approves a permissive rent increase during the calendar year in which the lease or rental agreement expires, the permissive rent increase shall not be imposed on or collected from that previously exempt space. In such a circumstance, a permissive rent increase shall not be imposed on that previously exempt space unless the permissive rent increase is approved or authorized on or after January 1st in the calendar year which commences at least 12 months after date of expiration of the lease or rental agreement. No retroactive imposition of any previously approved permissive rent increase shall be allowed.

(4) An owner shall not impose a permissive rent increase on any space or spaces within 12 months of a rent increase imposed on any of the spaces pursuant to a vacancy. In such a circumstance, a permissive rent increase shall not be imposed on the space that received a vacancy increase unless the permissive rent increase is approved or authorized on or after January 1st in the calendar year which commences at least 12 months after imposition of the vacancy increase. No retroactive imposition of any previously approved permissive rent increase shall be allowed.

(5) A permissive rent increase shall not be imposed on a space or spaces less than 12 months after imposition of a permissive rent increase pursuant to this section or a special rent increase pursuant to PMC 5.44.080.

(6) Banking of permissive rent increases is prohibited.

(a) An owner may charge less than the permissive rent increase authorized by this section. However, if an owner fails to implement the full amount of a permissive rent increase in the calendar year in which it was authorized or approved by the City pursuant to this section, the owner shall be prohibited from demanding, charging, implementing or collecting the full permissive rent increase in any subsequent year. During the calendar year in which the permissive rent increase was authorized or approved, the owner may, upon proper notice pursuant to state law, implement the full amount of the approved permissive rent increase at any time, which such permissive rent increase shall operate in a prospective manner only. If an owner fails to charge the full amount of an authorized or approved permissive rent increase at any time, no retroactive recovery of any portion of that permissive rent increase not previously collected from the resident shall be recoverable at any time.

(b) Following approval of an initial permissive rent increase under subsection (D) of this section, or an annual permissive rent increase under subsection (E) of this section, for purposes of determining a subsequent annual permissive rent increase under subsection (E) of this section, the space rent actually charged during the prior 12 months shall be the base rent to be used for purposes of determining the new annual permissive rent increase for each space.

(i) If an owner receives approval of a permissive rent increase but thereafter charges only a portion of the authorized or approved permissive rent increase during that same calendar year, the actual rent charged shall be the base rent used in determining the subsequent permissive rent increase.

(ii) If an owner receives approval of a permissive rent increase and charged the full amount of the authorized or approved permissive rent increase for only a portion of the calendar year in which the permissive rent increase was approved, the space rent in effect as of December 31st of that calendar year shall be the base rent for purposes of determining the subsequent permissive rent increase.

(c) Following approval of an initial permissive rent increase under subsection (D) of this section, or an annual permissive rent increase under subsection (E) of this section, for purposes of determining a special rent increase under PMC 5.44.080, the space rents actually charged in the base year and current year shall be the space rents used in determining the park’s gross income for the base year and current year under PMC 5.44.080.

(d) Following the City’s approval of a permissive rent increase under this section, if the new space rent actually charged to a resident by the owner is less than the authorized or approved permissive rent increase, the owner shall also include that actual rent charged in the rent schedule provided to the City under subsection (E) of this section and in the park’s registration statement provided pursuant to PMC 5.44.050.

(C) Any application submitted under this section for a permissive rent increase shall be accompanied by the filing fee as may be set by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

(D) Initial Permissive Rent Increase.

(1) Within 45 days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, the Housing Manager shall notify all owners of the initial permissive rent increase determined under this subsection (D).

(2) Method of Calculation.

(a) The Housing Manager shall determine the CPI increase. As used herein, “CPI increase” means 75 percent of the percentage increase in the CPI over the prior 12 months. The CPI increase shall be determined by measuring the percentage increase in the CPI from December 31, 2007, to December 31, 2008, in accordance with the following procedure: the December 31, 2007, CPI shall be subtracted from the December 31, 2008, CPI. The resulting sum shall then be divided by the December 31, 2007, CPI. The resulting fraction shall then be multiplied by 100, and then by 75 percent.

(b) The “December 31, 2008, CPI” means the CPI last reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, as of that date.

(c) The “December 31, 2007, CPI” means the CPI last reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, as of that date.

(d) The amount determined under subsection (D)(2)(a) of this section shall be known as the “CPI increase.”

(3) New Space Rent. Subject to the limitations contained in subsection (B) of this section, each owner shall thereafter be entitled to increase the base rent for each space regulated under this chapter by the lesser of (a) the CPI increase or (b) five percent of the base rent for each space. This rent increase shall be referred to as the “initial permissive rent increase.”

For purposes of determining an initial permissive rent increase under this subsection (D), the base rent shall be the lawful rent in effect as of December 3, 2008.

(E) Annual Permissive Rent Increase.

(1) Not later than January 31st of each subsequent year, the Housing Manager shall notify all owners of the annual permissive rent increase determined under this subsection (E).

(2) Method of Calculation.

(a) The Housing Manager shall determine the CPI increase. As used herein, “CPI increase” means 75 percent of the percentage increase in the CPI over the prior 12 months. The CPI increase shall be determined by measuring the percentage increase in the CPI over the prior 12 months in accordance with the following procedure: the prior CPI shall be subtracted from the current CPI. The resulting sum shall then be divided by the prior CPI. The resulting fraction shall then be multiplied by 100 and then by 75 percent.

(b) The “current CPI” means the CPI most recently reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, as of December 31st of the prior year.

(c) The “prior CPI” means the CPI used in approving the prior initial permissive rent increase or the prior annual permissive rent increase pursuant to this section. If a special rent increase was the most recent rent increase approved under this chapter, the “prior CPI” means the CPI used in approving a special rent increase under PMC 5.44.080. If the most recent rent increase was based on a vacancy increase pursuant to PMC 5.44.060, the “prior CPI” means the CPI in effect on the date of any rent increase upon vacancy.

(d) The amount determined under subsection (E)(2)(a) of this section shall be known as the “CPI increase.”

(3) New Space Rent. Subject to the limitations contained in subsection (B) of this section, each owner shall thereafter be entitled to increase the base rent for each space regulated under this chapter by the lesser of (a) the CPI increase or (b) five percent of the base rent for each space. The lesser of these two numbers shall be referred to as the “annual permissive rent increase.”

(4) Base Rent to Determine Annual Rent Increase. For purposes of determining an annual permissive rent increase pursuant to this subsection (E), the space rent actually charged for each space as of December 31st of the prior calendar year shall be the base rent for purposes of determining the new permissive rent increase, as determined in accordance with this section.

(F) Notice of the initial permissive rent increase or annual permissive rent increase determined in accordance with this section shall be sent to the affected residents by the owner in accordance with applicable law.

(G) Concurrently with service of notice to the residents of the initial permissive rent increase or the annual permissive rent increase, the owner shall also serve notice of the permissive rent increase imposed on each space to the City, by filing a rent schedule with the City setting forth:

(1) The space rents in effect for the subject spaces immediately prior to the owner’s determination of the permissive rent increase;

(2) The dollar amount of the permissive rent increase for each space; and

(3) The new rent actually charged for each space.

(H) Any resident may file a protest against the proposed initial or annual permissive rent increase for which notice has been received from the owner. The protest must be filed with the Housing Manager, on the City-approved form and accompanied by all supporting documentation, within 15 days of service of notice of the proposed rent increase by the owner on the resident. The resident shall serve a copy of his/her protest on the owner at the same time as the resident files the protest with the City. Failure of a resident to file his/her protest within 15 days of service of the notice shall constitute a waiver of the resident’s right to protest, and the proposed initial or annual permissive rent increase shall be final.

(I) The Housing Manager, upon receipt of the protest, shall review the protest and determine if it is timely and complete. If the protest is not timely, the Housing Manager shall notify the resident that the protest is untimely, and that the proposed permissive rent increase may be charged by the owner upon expiration of the notice period required by State law. If the protest is not complete, the Housing Manager shall notify the resident that the protest is not complete and shall request any additional information or documentation that must be submitted in order for the Housing Manager to deem the protest complete. The Housing Manager shall not declare the protest complete until all requested information is submitted to the City by the resident. If the resident does not submit the requested information or other documentation to the City by the fifteenth day following service of the Housing Manager’s request for additional information, the protest shall be deemed denied, and the Housing Manager shall provide written notice to the owner and appellant confirming the denial of the protest, and advising the owner and appellant that the proposed permissive rent increase shall be final.

(J) Within 20 days after the Housing Manager deems the protest complete, the City Manager shall issue a written decision on the protest, which shall be served on the appellant and the owner.

(K) If the Housing Manager denies the protest, the proposed permissive rent increase shall become effective in accordance with the terms listed in the owner’s notice of rent increase. If the Housing Manager sustains the protest, the Housing Manager shall have the authority to approve a modified permissive rent increase or deny the proposed permissive rent increase in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any modified permissive rent increase approved by the Housing Manager pursuant to this subsection shall not be effective until expiration of the 90-day notice of rent increase required under Civil Code Section 798.30.

(L) The Housing Manager shall sustain the protest if he/she makes any of the following findings:

(1) The notice of permissive rent increase was sent more frequently than once in any 12-month period.

(2) The owner imposed an initial permissive rent increase or an annual permissive rent increase on a space within the 12-month period immediately preceding the proposed effective date of the new permissive rent increase.

(3) The space was previously exempt from rent regulation under this chapter pursuant to a long-term lease or rental agreement, and the proposed initial permissive rent increase or the proposed annual permissive rent increase would be imposed on the space within 12 months of the expiration of the lease or rental agreement.

(4) The proposed initial permissive rent increase or annual permissive rent increase would be imposed on any space within 12 months after a vacancy increase was imposed on that space.

(5) The proposed permissive rent increase exceeds the lesser of the CPI increase or five percent of the base rent, as determined under subsection (D) or (E) of this section. In such event, the Housing Manager shall approve a permissive rent increase that does not exceed the lesser of the CPI increase or five percent of the base rent.

(6) The proposed permissive rent increase violates the prohibition on banking set forth in subsection (B) of this section.

(7) If the Housing Manager finds that the park is not currently registered as required by PMC 5.44.050, the Housing Manager shall sustain the protest unless the owner immediately registers the park in compliance with PMC 5.44.050.

(M) A protest may be filed by one or more residents in the park. Failure of a resident to file a protest under this section shall not preclude the Housing Manager from issuing a decision applicable to all of the spaces in the park as provided in subsection (N) of this section.

(N) If the Housing Manager sustains the protest, the Housing Manager shall issue a written decision setting forth the basis for his/her findings, and specifying the space(s) to which the protest has been sustained. Failure of a resident to appeal on behalf of all spaces shall not preclude the Housing Manager from sustaining the protest as to all spaces if the Housing Manager finds that the limitations of this section would otherwise be violated. The Housing Manager, in his/her decision on the protest, shall specify if the decision applies to only the space(s) subject to the protest, or to all spaces in the park.

(O) The decision of the Housing Manager on any protest under this section shall be final and not subject to any right of appeal.

(P) Upon final approval of a permissive rent increase, the owner shall not charge the resident rent in excess of that rent permitted under the permissive rent increase, except based on a subsequent rent increase approved in accordance with this chapter. Following receipt of the Housing Manager’s decision, the owner shall submit a modified rent schedule to the City containing the rents actually charged to the residents based on the Housing Manager’s decision under subsection (J) of this section, and shall include the new rents in the subsequent annual registration required under PMC 5.44.050. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.080 Special rent increases by application to the Board.
(A) Introduction. An owner may seek a special rent increase in addition to those permitted by PMC 5.44.060 and 5.44.070 pursuant to the procedures and requirements of this section. The owner shall bear the burden of proof and shall provide the evidence to justify a special rent increase under subsections (H), (I) and (J) of this section. No special rent increase shall be granted unless supported by the preponderance of the evidence submitted at the hearing. It is the intent of this section to establish rents at a level which will provide owners with a fair and reasonable return while protecting the residents from excessive rent increases. Applications for a special rent increase shall be filed by the owner with the Housing Manager based on the provisions of this chapter and any regulations adopted by the City Manager to implement this chapter.

(B) Limitations.

(1) A special rent increase application under this section shall not be filed for a park more frequently than once in any 12-month period.

(2) A special rent increase shall not be filed any earlier than 12 months after approval of a permissive rent increase under PMC 5.44.070.

(3) For any space previously exempt from rent regulation pursuant to a long-term lease or rental agreement, a special rent increase shall not be imposed on that space until 12 months after that space comes under this chapter. No retroactive imposition of any previously approved special rent increase shall be allowed.

(4) For any space which received a vacancy increase under PMC 5.44.060, a special rent increase shall not be imposed on that space until 12 months after the effective date of the vacancy increase. No retroactive imposition of any previously approved special rent increase shall be allowed.

(C) Presumptions. Subsection (H) of this section provides for special rent increases under a maintenance of net operating income (“MNOI”) formula. It is presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that the MNOI formula provides a fair and reasonable return. Subsection (I) of this section authorizes an application for a special rent increase under an MNOI formula, based on modifications or readjustments to the base year net operating income (“NOI”). Subsection (J) of this section authorizes an application for a special rent increase where the owner contends that he/she cannot receive a fair return notwithstanding the MNOI rent increases allowed under subsection (H) or (I) of this section.

(D) Filing Fee. Any application submitted under this section for a special rent increase shall be accompanied by the filing fee as may be determined by resolution of the City Council from time to time.

(E) An MNOI special rent increase application may be filed with the Housing Manager under subsection (H) of this section without filing an application under subsection (I) or (J) of this section. An application for an MNOI special rent increase may be filed under subsection (I) of this section without filing an application under subsection (H) or (J) of this section. However, an application for a special rent increase under subsection (J) of this section shall not be filed unless an MNOI application under Subsection (H) or (I) of this section is also concurrently filed, and the two applications shall be heard together. If the owner fails to meet his/her burden of proof to justify a special rent increase under subsection (J) of this section, the Board shall have the authority to grant an MNOI special rent increase under subsection (H) or (I) of this section if there is a preponderance of evidence in the record to support a special rent increase under subsection (H) or (I) of this section. If the owner fails to meet his/her burden of proof, based on a preponderance of evidence, to justify any special rent increase under subsection (H), (I) or (J) of this section, the Board shall deny any special rent increase.

(F) Required Information and Documentation. An application submitted to the Housing Manager by an owner for a special rent increase under this section shall contain all information and documentation necessary for the Housing Manager to deem the application complete. For purposes of this section, the term “complete” means payment of the required filing fee as may be established by resolution of the City Council from time to time pursuant to subsection (D) of this section, and all of the following:

(1) For a park’s MNOI rent increase application under subsection (H) of this section, information and documentation establishing the following: the park’s income and expenses in calendar year 2005 (or for the base year as defined in subsection (G)(2)(a) of this section if the owner previously received an MNOI rent increase or other special rent increase under subsection (H) of this section); the park’s income and expenses for the current year; the park’s income and expenses in each of the last five years; if the owner previously received a special rent increase under this section, the park’s income and expenses since its last special rent increase; and such other information and documentation necessary and relevant for the City and its experts to complete their analysis and for the Board to properly determine whether the owner is entitled to an MNOI calculation under subsection (H) of this section.

(2) For a park’s application for a readjusted base year MNOI rent increase under subsection (I) of this section, all information and documentation required by subsection (F)(1) of this section, and additional information and documentation establishing: the park’s purchase price; capital improvements made by the owner in calendar year 2005; capital improvements made by the owner in the current year; the factual basis and supporting evidence for the owner’s contention that the park’s 2005 operating expenses were unusually high or low despite prudent business practices; the factual basis and supporting evidence for the owner’s contention that capital improvements that were made in calendar year 2005 but not reflected in rent increases collected during 2005; the factual basis and supporting evidence for the owner’s contention that unusual repairs made in calendar year 2005, including but not limited to the reasons for those repairs; the factual basis and supporting evidence for the owner’s contention that the park had unusually high or low expenses in calendar year 2005, including but not limited to the reasons for those expenses; the factual basis and supporting evidence for the owner’s contention that rents during calendar year 2005 were disproportionately low because the rents were not established in an arm’s-length transaction; the factual basis and supporting evidence for the owner’s contention that rents in calendar year 2005 were low when compared to rents being charged in comparable mobile home parks in the City and comparable mobile home parks in comparable surrounding areas, including evidence to establish the comparability of the other mobile home parks and the comparability of surrounding areas; the return earned by the owner in calendar year 2005; and such other information and documentation as is necessary and relevant for the City and its experts to complete their analysis and for the Board to properly determine whether the owner is entitled to a readjusted MNOI rent increase under any of the factors listed in subsection (H) of this section.

(3) For an application for a fair return special rent increase under subsection (J) of this section, information and documentation establishing: the park’s purchase price, the park’s income and expenses in the calendar year 2005 (or other base year as defined in subsection (G)(2)(a) of this section, if the owner previously received a special rent increase under this section); the park’s income and expenses for the current year; the park’s income and expenses in each of the last five years; the park’s income and expenses since its last special rent increase; capital improvements made by the owner in calendar year 2005 (or other base year as defined in subsection (G)(2)(a) of this section, if the owner previously received a special rent increase under this section), capital improvements made by the owner in the current year and each of the last five years; other information and documentation supporting the owner’s contention that the return earned by the mobile home park is not just and reasonable; and such other information and documentation as is necessary and relevant for the City and its experts to complete their analysis and for the Board to properly determine whether the owner is entitled to a fair return special rent increase under subsection (J) of this section.

(4) For any application submitted under this section, all information and documentation concerning any rent increases imposed by the owner based on approval of any permissive rent increases under PMC 5.44.070 for the base year, and in each of the years up to and including the current year; and all annual permissive rent increases noticed, imposed, or proposed to be imposed, between submittal of the special rent increase application and the Board’s determination under PMC 5.44.090.

(5) An application shall not be deemed complete until information and documentation, as set forth in this section, has been provided. An application shall not be set for hearing before it is deemed complete. If an owner fails to submit a complete application within 60 days of the City’s request for additional information, the application shall be deemed withdrawn. The owner shall be credited with any unused filing fee as of the date of withdrawal. Upon withdrawal of the application, the owner shall be required to submit a new application if he/she wishes for the City to consider a special rent increase application under this section.

(6) The determination by the Department that an application is complete under this subsection (F) shall not preclude the Board from requesting additional information or documentation deemed necessary and relevant by the Board to evaluate the application and determine whether the owner is entitled to a special rent increase under this section.

(G) Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following words, terms and phrases are defined to mean:

(1) “Base rent” means the lawfully charged space rent for a space pursuant to this chapter.

(2) “Base year” means calendar year 2005, except as provided in subsections (G)(2)(a) and (b) of this section:

(a) Following approval by the City of a special rent increase under this section, “base year” means the income and expense year which was used by the Board as the current year in determining the most recently approved special rent increase.

(b) In the event a park received a rent increase under predecessor PMC 5.44.060 (Ord. 1304 § 4, 2007; Ord. 867 § 4, 1990; Ord. 556 § 2, 1985), the “base year” shall be calendar year 2005.

(3) “Base year Consumer Price Index” or “base year CPI” means the average CPI reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for calendar year 2005, or such other base year determined under subsection (G)(2) of this section.

(4) “Base year net operating income” or “base year NOI” means base year gross income minus base year operating expenses.

(5) “Comparable park” means a park which has similar quality, number and type of amenities, construction and services, is located in a similar neighborhood and provides similar access and proximity to schools, medical and educational facilities, recreation, entertainment, parks, shopping and other services and amenities and is similarly maintained as the applicant’s park.

(6) “Current year” means the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of submittal of a complete application for a special rent increase.

(7) “Current year CPI” means the average CPI reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of submittal of a complete application for a special rent increase.

(8) “Current year net operating income” or “current year NOI” means current year gross income minus current year operating expenses.

(9) “Gross income” includes:

(a) Space rents. For any park which received a prior annual permissive rent increase or prior special rent increase, “space rents” shall include the amount of space rents authorized pursuant to the most recent annual permissive rent increase as provided in PMC 5.44.070, or the amount of space rents that were determined to be necessary by the Board (or hearing officer) in the most recent prior decision to enable the owner to earn a fair return as provided in subsection (L)(5) of this section, whether or not such approved space rents were actually collected by the owner.

(b) Security deposits and late fees.

(c) Fees collected for services and amenities not included in space rent such as fees for recreational vehicle storage, cable TV, security, use of recreational facilities, income from coin-operated facilities.

(d) Collections for sub-metered utility service in excess of that paid by the park to the utility company, except that “gross income” shall not include collections for sub-metered utility services provided by utilities regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) (including but not limited to gas and electric services).

(e) Any other income received in connection with use, occupancy or operation of the park.

(10) “Operating expenses” include:

(a) License fees.

(b) Real property taxes and assessments.

(c) Utility costs, except as provided in subsection (G)(9)(d) of this section.

(d) Insurance.

(e) Management expenses (owner performed or contracted), including reasonable advertising, accounting and managerial expense. Management expenses are presumed to be the same percentage of gross income as incurred in the base year unless the applicant produces evidence sufficient to justify that expenses increased at a higher rate despite prudent management. In the event the base year expenses are not available, they shall be estimated by taking the current expenses and decreasing them downward according to the CPI between the base year and the application year, as modified for any adjustments based on a difference between owner-managed and contracted-management in the park between the base year and current year, unless the applicant produces substantial evidence to establish that management expenses increased at a higher rate despite prudent management.

(f) Normal repairs and maintenance, including but not limited to painting, cleaning, landscaping, repair of all standard services including plumbing, carpeting, electrical, furnished appliances and recreational facilities.

(g) Operating supplies such as janitorial supplies, gardening supplies, stationery, and similar items.

(h) Amortizable capital expenses. The amount of any amortizable capital expense shall be divided by the number of years in its useful life and only the dividend thereof shall be utilized as an operating expense for any given year in performing the MNOI or fair return calculations.

(i) Allowable legal expenses. Allowable legal expenses include reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in connection with successful actions to evict residents or recover back rent and matters pertaining to the operation of the park, and reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred in connection with preparation of the rent increase application. Allowable legal expenses shall be divided by the number of years of their useful life or other reasonable basis, and only the dividend thereof shall be used as an operating expense for any given year in performing the NOI calculations or fair return calculations.

(11) “Operating expenses” shall not include:

(a) Debt service, including but not limited to mortgage principal and interest payments, and any other form of debt service.

(b) Land lease payments.

(c) Fees or penalties imposed for violation of the Mobilehome Residency Law (California Civil Code Section 798, et seq., or any other City, county, state or federal law.

(d) Fees based on the form of ownership of the park, and any governmental fees, charges or assessments imposed based on the form of ownership of the park.

(e) Expenses of any kind reimbursed by insurance or a fee charged to the residents.

(f) Any expenses which resulted due to the owner’s failure to undertake prudent and ongoing maintenance activities or activities required by law; or costs which were caused by unnecessary and unreasonably deferred negligent, or otherwise improper repair and/or maintenance or other act or unreasonable omissions of the owner.

(g) Any sub-metered utility expenses related to, resulting from or arising out of any utility services regulated by the PUC (including gas and electricity services).

(h) Allowable legal expenses shall not include (i) attorneys’ fees, costs and other legal expenses incurred in actions filed against the City, the Board or the hearing officer; (ii) attorneys’ fees, costs and other legal expenses incurred in connection with the form of ownership of the park; and (iii) attorney’s fees, costs and other legal expenses incurred in connection with complying with applicable provisions of federal, state or local law with regard to the operation of the park (including legal expenses incurred resulting from any civil or criminal code enforcement violations by the owner, or legal expenses incurred in any pending and unresolved cases defending the owner against any alleged civil or criminal code violations).

(12) Modifications to Operating Expenses.

(a) In calculating operating expenses for any year, when: (i) an expense item for a particular year is not representative; or (ii) in the case of base year expenses, when the expense is not a reasonable projection of average past expenditure for that item; or (iii) in the case of current year expense, when the expense is not a reasonable projection of future expenditures of that item, said expense shall be averaged with other expense levels for other years or amortized or adjusted by the CPI or may otherwise be adjusted in order to establish an expense amount for that item which most reasonably serves the objectives of obtaining a reasonable comparison of base year and current year expenses.

(b) In the event the applicant did not own the park in the base year, the operating expenses for the base year shall be determined based upon the actual operating expenses of the owner during the base year. Where actual figures are not available (such as if the records no longer exist or are not obtainable notwithstanding reasonable and good faith efforts by the applicant to obtain the records from the actual owner), the Board may consider the actual operating expenses for the first calendar year that the applicant owned the park, discounted to the base year by the percentage change in the CPI between the base year and the current year.

(13) Reasonableness of Operating Expenses. The owner shall have the burden of proving that all operating expenses are reasonable. Whenever a particular expense exceeds the normal industry or other comparable standard, the owner shall bear the burden of establishing the reasonableness of the expense. To the extent that the Board finds any such expense to be unreasonable, the Board shall adjust the expense to reflect the normal industry or other comparable standard.

(H) Maintenance of Net Operating Income Special Rent Increase (MNOI Rent Increase). It shall be presumed in the absence of evidence to the contrary presented pursuant to this subsection, or subsections (I) and (J) of this section, that the NOI earned by the mobile home park in the base year provided a just and reasonable return to the park. Except as otherwise provided in subsection (H)(1) of this section, owners shall be entitled to increase the park’s base year NOI by 75 percent of the percentage increase in the CPI since the base year to the date of submittal of a complete application. Procedures for determining the MNOI rent increase shall be determined in accordance with this subsection and any regulations adopted by the City.

(1) For purposes of determining a park’s initial MNOI rent increase under this subsection (H) or under subsection (I) of this section, the base year CPI shall be the average CPI reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for calendar year 2005; and the current CPI used in determining an MNOI special rent increase application under this subsection (H) or subsection (I) of this section shall be the average CPI reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the 12-month period immediately preceding the date that the MNOI rent increase application is deemed complete.

(2) In the event a park submits a special rent increase application under this section, and the park previously received a special rent increase(s) under this section, the following provisions shall apply in determining if the owner is entitled to a subsequent special rent increase:

(a) The income and expense year which was designated by the Board (or hearing officer) as the current year for the most recent special rent increase approved by the Board (or hearing officer) shall be deemed the base year for purposes of evaluating and determining the subsequent special rent increase.

(b) The base year CPI shall be the average CPI reported by the U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, for the 12-month period used by the Board (or hearing officer) in determining the current year for the most recently approved special rent increase.

(c) In determining the park’s gross income for the base year for the subsequent special rent increase application, the gross income previously determined by the Board (or hearing officer) for the prior current year as necessary to provide a fair return in the prior current year (as reflected in the Board’s prior decision) shall be used as the base year gross income for the subsequent special rent increase application.

(3) In the event that there has been an increase of more than three percent in vacancies in the park since the base year, calculation of the park’s gross income and operating expenses shall be governed as follows:

(a) In the event that there has been an increase in vacancies of more than three percent in the park since the base year, the City finds that it would be contrary to the purposes of rent stabilization to authorize additional rent increases for occupied spaces in order to offset reductions in income due to increased vacancies which occur because there is not sufficient demand to fill the vacant spaces at the legal rent ceiling. In effect, allowing additional rent increases for occupied spaces because there are more vacant spaces in a park would allow owners to obtain higher rents from existing residents than it is possible to obtain from the prospective residents, whose homes are still mobile and whose options have not been restricted by the process of moving into the park. Therefore, in the event that there has been an increase in vacancies of more than three percent since the base year, gross income and operating expenses shall be determined pursuant to subsections (G)(3)(b) and (c) of this section.

(b) Gross space rents for the park shall be computed as 97 percent of the gross scheduled rental income for the park, based on 100 percent occupancy.

(c) Calculations of base year and current year operating expenses may be adjusted by the Board so that a reasonable comparison of the expenses and charges associated with rented spaces is obtained for the purpose of comparing base year and current year operating expenses and to adjust for variations in operating expenses due to the increased vacancy rate.

(4) Schedule of Increases in Operating Expense. Where scheduling of rental increases, or other calculations, require projections of income and expenses because actual data is not available, it shall be presumed that operating expenses and management expenses, exclusive of property taxes, increase at the rate of the increase in the CPI for the applicable year; and that property taxes increase at two percent per year.

(I) Special Rent Increase Based on Modifications to or Readjustment of 2005 NOI (“Readjusted 2005 MNOI Rent Increase”). An owner may rebut the presumption that the park’s 2005 NOI provided a just and reasonable return at that time and obtain an adjustment of the base year rents, by presenting evidence that:

(1) The park’s operating expenses in calendar year 2005 were unusually high or low despite prudent business practices. In such instance, the Board may adjust the calculation of 2005 NOI by adjusting the 2005 expenses to reflect the average of the park’s expenses over a reasonable period of time or the average of expenses in comparable mobile home parks in 2005; or

(2) Capital improvements were made in calendar year 2005 that were not reflected in rent increases collected during that year. In seeking an increase under this provision, the owner shall have the burden of demonstrating that the improvement is completed and operational, and submitting evidence of the cost incurred; or

(3) Unusual repairs were made in calendar year 2005 due to damage caused by uninsured natural events or vandalism; or

(4) Other expenses in calendar year 2005 were unusually high or low notwithstanding prudent business practices; or

(5) The rent during calendar year 2005 was disproportionately low due to the fact that it was not established in an arm’s-length transaction; or

(6) The rent during calendar year 2005 was low when compared to rents being charged in comparable mobile home parks in the City and comparable mobile home parks in comparable surrounding areas; or

(7) The rent during calendar year 2005 was not sufficient to provide a just and reasonable return in calendar year 2005 year.

The park owner shall have the burden of proving the existence of one or more of the circumstances listed in subsections (I)(1) through (7) of this section, by a preponderance of evidence, and shall have the burden of providing reliable and credible evidence of the rents, operating expenses, gross income, NOI, capital improvement costs, existence and justification for finding of comparable rents and comparable parks, and the return resulting in the determination that a readjustment or modification to the 2005 NOI is warranted.

(J) Special Rent Increase Based on Fair Return. An owner may rebut the presumption that the increased calculations provided in subsection (H) of this section and modified calculations provided by subsection (I) of this section are sufficient to provide a just and reasonable return by presenting evidence that the return being earned by the mobile home park is not just and reasonable as set forth in this section and the regulations adopted from time to time by resolution of the City Council. The owner shall have the burden of proving the park is not earning a just and reasonable return by a preponderance of evidence.

In reviewing the evidence and making its determination, the Board shall consider all relevant information, including but not limited to:

(1) The purchase price of the park;

(2) Any capital improvements made in the park by the owner;

(3) The return earned by the park;

(4) The return earned by comparable mobile home parks; and

(5) The mobile home park’s pattern of income and expenses over each of the past five years, including any unavoidable increases or decreases in maintenance, repairs and other operating expenses, including but expressly not limited to deferred maintenance or substantial deterioration in the mobile home park other than as the result of normal wear and tear.

(K) It is the intent of this chapter that a rent increase be approved under this section only when the owner demonstrates by a preponderance of evidence that such a rent increase is necessary to provide the owner with a fair return.

(L) An owner may charge less than the special rent increase approved by the Board, subject to the following:

(1) An owner may phase in a special rent increase approved by the Board (or hearing officer), but at time of the initial phasing, the owner shall serve notice of the phasing plan to each affected resident along with the notice of rent increase required by State law, and shall concurrently serve a copy of the phasing plan to the Department.

(2) An owner may decide not to charge the full amount of a special rent increase approved by the Board (or hearing officer), as determined in the owner’s discretion. The owner shall serve each affected resident with notice of rent increase as required by state law.

(3) At no time shall any special rent increase be imposed on any space such that the total rent paid by the resident in any one month exceeds the new rent reflected in the decision of the Board (or hearing officer).

(4) If an owner decides to phase in an approved special rent increase, or to charge less than the approved special rent increase, the owner shall not thereafter demand, charge or collect any portion of any uncollected special rent increase for any retroactive period of time. No retroactive recovery of any portion of a special rent increase not previously collected from a resident shall be recoverable by the owner. No phasing plan shall include any retroactive recovery of any uncollected special rent increases, and a phasing plan shall operate prospectively only.

(5) In evaluating a subsequent special rent increase application under this section, the new space rents determined by the Board (or hearing officer) as necessary to provide the owner with a fair return in the most recent prior special rent increase shall be included in determining the base year gross income for purposes of calculating the subsequent special rent increase (subject to the provisions of subsection (H)(3) of this section).

(6) If the new space rent actually charged to a resident by the owner following the City’s approval of the special rent increase is less than the authorized special rent increase determined under this section, the owner shall also list the actual rent charged in the park’s annual registration provided to the City under PMC 5.44.050.

(M) Upon final approval of a special rent increase, the owner shall not charge the resident rent in excess of that rent permitted under the special rent increase except based on a subsequent rent increase approved in accordance with and as otherwise authorized by this chapter. Following receipt of the Board’s final decision (if the Board’s decision is not timely appealed), or following receipt of the hearing officer’s final decision in the event of an appeal under PMC 5.44.100, the owner shall submit a modified rent schedule to the City containing the rents actually charged to the residents based on the Board’s final decision or the hearing officer’s final decision.

(N) Following approval of a special rent increase by the Board under subsection (H), (I) or (J) of this section, an owner shall not apply for or impose a permissive rent increase pursuant to PMC 5.44.070 until the expiration of at least 12 months following the approval of the special rent increase under subsection (H), (I) or (J) of this section. No permissive rent increase shall be imposed on any space until at least 12 months after imposition of any special rent increase approved under this section.

(O) Following approval of a special rent increase by the Board under subsection (H), (I) or (J) of this section, the owner shall not apply for a special rent increase under this section until the expiration of at least 12 months following the approval of the special rent increase. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.090 Hearing procedures.
(A) All applications pursuant to PMC 5.44.080 shall be filed on an application form provided by the Department. A total of eight copies of the completed application and any additional back-up documentation submitted prior to the hearing, along with two sets of mailing labels for all affected spaces in the park, must be provided to the City in order for the application to be deemed complete by the Housing Manager. At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall also post in three conspicuous places in the park, a notice advising the park residents that an application has been filed with the City.

(B) Written notice of the application shall be mailed to the affected residents by the Housing Manager on the date on which the application is determined to be complete. The notice shall inform the affected residents of their right to submit written, documentary and photographic responses to the application to the Housing Manager within 20 days of the date notice of the complete application is mailed by the City. The affected residents shall provide the owner with copies of their response or opposition concurrently with their filing of their response or opposition to the City. One copy of the application shall be maintained by the owner in the park office during regular business hours, and one copy shall also be maintained by the owner in the club house or other mutually accessible area, at all times.

If an owner submits additional information or documentation to the City after the initial submittal of the application, or if the owner submits additional information or documentation to the City after the City determines the application is not complete, the owner shall concurrently serve notice of filing of such additional information, and make such additional information available to the residents, in accordance with the procedures set out in this subsection.

(C) Hearings on Special Rent Increase Applications.

(1) Upon receipt of a special rent increase application under PMC 5.44.080(H), (I) or (J), the Housing Manager shall have 30 days in which to declare the application complete. The term “complete” shall have the meaning set forth in PMC 5.44.080(F). If the Housing Manager determines that the application is not complete, the Housing Manager shall send written notice to the owner that the application is incomplete, and will specify the information and documentation that must be submitted in order for the application to be deemed complete. In order for the City to further process the application, and deem it complete, the owner shall be required to submit all required information and documentation to the City. The City has 30 days from submittal of any additional information or documentation to again determine if the application is complete, or shall notify the owner that the application cannot be determined to be complete. If the owner fails or refuses to submit the information and documentation required to deem the application complete within 60 days of the original submittal, the application shall be deemed withdrawn, and the owner will be credited with any unused fee. Any further consideration of a special rent increase for the park shall require submittal of a new application pursuant to PMC 5.44.080 and this section.

(2) A hearing of the Board shall commence not later than 60 days from the date the application is determined complete.

(3) The Board shall render its decision in writing within 60 days after the conclusion of the public hearing on the application. The Board’s written decision shall include findings of fact, including but not limited to a calculation of the park’s NOI in the base year and in the current year, with a breakdown of expense categories. A copy of the decision shall be served on the residents, owner and the City in accordance with subsection (D) of this section.

(D) Notice of the Board’s determination shall be mailed to the owner, all affected residents at the mobile home spaces designated in the application, and the City. The Board’s decision may be appealed in accordance with PMC 5.44.100. If any party fails to file a timely appeal under PMC 5.44.100, the decision of the Board shall be final. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.100 Appeal to hearing officer.
A park owner or resident may appeal any decision of the Board under PMC 5.44.090 in accordance with the following procedures.

(A) Deadline to File Appeal – Requirements. Either party may, and prior to commencing any action in a court of competent jurisdiction shall, appeal any final decision or order of the Board to a hearing officer by filing written notice of the appeal, a written summary of the basis of the appeal and any documents supporting the appeal with the Housing Manager not later than 10 days after the decision of the Board has been deposited in the mail, addressed to the owner and the affected residents. The appellant shall serve written notice of the filing of the appeal, the written summary of the basis of the appeal and any documents supporting the appeal, on the opposing party. Such service may either be in person or by mail to the last known address of the opposing party. No appeal shall be considered filed until a complete appeal, along with proof of service of such notice and all supporting documentation (under penalty of perjury) is received by the Housing Manager, and the cost of the appeal is deposited with the City Manager. The Housing Manager shall estimate the cost of the appeal based on the fee resolution adopted by the City Council. Proof of service shall be on a form provided by the Housing Manager.

(B) Selection of Hearing Officer. Upon receipt of a complete appeal, the Housing Manager shall obtain a list of retired judges or justices from the California State and federal courts, and from that list of retired judges/justices shall develop and maintain a list of hearing officers. Within five days after the appeal is deemed effective, each party (the owner and the residents’ representative) will be given the opportunity to review the hearing officer list and agree on the selection of the hearing officer. In the event the parties are unable to agree on a hearing officer within five days, the Housing Manager will designate a panel of five hearing officers from its list. Within five days of notification by the Housing Manager of the names on the panel, the parties (the owner and the residents’ representative) shall meet and select the hearing officer from that panel. The process for selection will require a coin toss, the winner (either owner or residents’ representative) shall strike one name from the panel. The other party shall strike one name, and the parties shall then alternate in striking names until only one name remains, who shall serve as the hearing officer. Within five days of this selection, the Housing Manager shall issue a notice of appointment of the hearing officer to the owner and the affected residents.

(C) Disqualification of Hearing Officer. Any potential hearing officer shall be disqualified from consideration as a hearing officer if he/she owns, leases or resides in any mobile home park, or has ever been an owner, lessee or resident of a mobile home park; or if he/she has owned or leased any property subject to rent control; or if he/she has ever been party to any litigation challenging or defending any rent control ordinance or decision on any rent increase application in any rent control jurisdiction. Each potential hearing officer shall be required to submit a form, under penalty of perjury, that he/she does not have any such disqualifying interest, as a condition of his/her selection as a hearing officer.

(D) Costs and Expenses of the Hearing Officer.

(1) Within five days of the Housing Manager’s notice of appointment of the hearing officer, the Housing Manager shall inform the appealing party of the hearing officer’s estimated costs to conduct the appeal.

(2) Within five days of such notification, the appealing party shall deposit those estimated costs with the City Clerk. As soon as the deposit is made, the hearing officer shall commence his/her duties as set forth in subsection (E) of this section. Failure to timely deposit such estimated costs shall result in a dismissal of the administrative appeal.

(3) If, at the close of the hearing, an appealing owner is deemed to be the successful party by the hearing officer, the costs and expenses of the hearing officer may be included in the hearing officer’s rent decision and the affected residents’ rents adjusted in the form of higher rents. Any such hearing officer costs and expenses shall be amortized over several years so that the residents shall be required to pay only a reasonable amount each year and each month, and the amortized portion of the hearing officer’s costs and expenses shall be separately itemized on the monthly rent invoice and shall not be included in the space rent for purposes of determining any future rent increase under this chapter. If, at the close of the hearing, the appealing residents are deemed to be the successful party by the hearing officer, the cost and expenses of the hearing officer may be included in the hearing officer’s rent decision and the affected residents’ rents adjusted in the form of lower rents, subject to a reasonable amortization period.

(E) Powers and Duties of Hearing Officer.

(1) Within five days of the Housing Manager’s receipt of the hearing officer deposit from the appealing party, the hearing officer shall receive the complete Board file, including copies of taped recordings of the Board hearing(s), and a transcript. The cost of the transcript shall be deposited by the appealing party as a condition of deeming the appeal complete.

(2) Within 30 days of the Housing Manager’s receipt of the hearing officer deposit from the appealing party, the hearing officer shall commence the administrative appeal hearing. By stipulation, the parties may extend this 30-day hearing period for any length of time. In the absence of such stipulation, the hearing officer may, on his/her own motion, extend the 30-day hearing period for up to an additional 15 days.

(3) Not less than 20 days prior to the appeal hearing date, the hearing officer shall provide the parties (park owner and residents’ representative) and the City with written notification of the date, place and time of the hearing. The same notice shall set forth a time schedule for the filing of written argument and/or any request to file additional evidence which the parties wish the hearing officer to consider at the appeal hearing, subject to subsection (E)(4) of this section.

(4) The hearing officer shall exercise his/her independent judgment as to whether the owner is entitled to a special rent increase, and if so, the amount of such increase. The hearing officer is not bound by the prior determinations, findings, or decision of the Board; provided, that the hearing shall be conducted on the record previously presented to the Board, as provided in subsection (E)(3) of this section. The hearing officer shall review the Board’s decision based on the record before the Board, including the Board resolution deciding the application, the verbatim transcripts of the proceedings, staff reports, and exhibits and reports, which were considered and/or approved by the Board during its hearings. In conducting a hearing on any appeal, no new or additional witness testimony or other evidence shall be permitted at the appeal hearing by the hearing officer, unless the party offering the evidence establishes that the evidence is relevant and, in the exercise of reasonable diligence, could not have been produced or that was improperly excluded at the hearing before the Board. The hearing officer may provide guidelines for the submission of briefs and may (but is not required to) permit oral argument on certain issues. On appeal, the hearing officer reviews the Board’s decision based on whether there was substantial evidence existing in the record to support the Board’s decision.

(5) The hearing officer shall have no authority to issue a decision based on factors not authorized or included in this chapter, or otherwise inconsistent with the purposes of this chapter.

(6) The hearing officer shall issue his/her decision including written findings and conclusions within 10 days after the close of the hearing. If the hearing officer determines that substantial evidence is found to exist in the record, the decision of the Board shall be upheld. If it is found lacking, the hearing officer may either decide the matter differently or refer it back to the Board, with directions, for further consideration. The hearing officer may affirm, modify or rescind the decision of the Board. The decision shall be in writing, and a copy shall be served on the Housing Manager, the appealing party, and the opposing party.

(F) Procedures Following Hearing Officer Decision.

(1) If the hearing officer remands the application to the Board, the Board’s remand proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with PMC 5.44.090.

(2) If the hearing officer issues a decision modifying, upholding or rejecting the appeal, the decision of the hearing officer shall be the final administrative decision within the City.

(G) Judicial Challenge. Any party dissatisfied with a final decision of the hearing officer’s decision may seek judicial review in the Superior Court in accordance with PMC 5.44.160.

(H) Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, the City Council may enter into a court settlement agreement that allows an owner or affected residents the ability to apply, utilize, modify, or amend the provisions of this section for any special adjustment decision of the Board which is not final as of the effective date of such agreement. For the purposes of this rule, a Board decision is not final when it remains subject to review by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.110 Fees.
A resident whose residency is not regulated by the provisions of the Mobilehome Residency Law (Civil Code Sections 798 through 799.6) shall not be charged a fee for anything other than rent or utilities with the exception of incidental reasonable charges for services actually rendered. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.120 Permissible reasons for termination of or refusal to renew residency.
(A) A residency which is not subject to the provisions of the Mobilehome Residency Law (Civil Code Sections 798 through 799.6) shall not be terminated, nor shall its renewal be refused, except for one or more of the following reasons:

(1) Failure of the resident to comply with a local ordinance or State law or regulation relating to mobile home spaces within a reasonable time after the resident receives a notice of noncompliance from the appropriate governmental agency;

(2) Conduct by the resident, upon the mobile home park premises, which constitutes a substantial annoyance to other residents;

(3) Failure of the resident to comply with reasonable rules or regulations of the mobile home park. No act or omission of the resident constitutes such a failure to comply unless and until the owner has given the resident written notice of the alleged rule or regulation violation and the resident has failed to adhere to the rule or regulation within seven days;

(4) Nonpayment of rent, utility charges or reasonable incidental service charges;

(5) Condemnation of the mobile home park;

(6) Change of use of the mobile home park; provided, that the provisions of subsection (f) of Section 798.56 of the California Civil Code are followed:

(a) The owner gives the resident written notice of the proposed change 12 months or more before the date of the proposed change;

(b) The owner gives each prospective resident whose residency will commence within 12 months of the proposed changes written notice thereof prior to the inception of his/her residency.

(B) Notice of termination or refusal to renew must be given in writing in the manner prescribed by Section 1162 of the Code of Civil Procedure at least 60 days prior to the termination date of the residency. The notice shall state the date the residency terminates, the reason for the termination or refusal to renew, and the specific facts upon which the owner is relying. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.130 Refusal of resident to pay illegal rent.
A resident may refuse to pay any rent in excess of the maximum rent permitted by this chapter. The fact that such unpaid rent is in excess of the maximum rent shall be a defense in any action brought to recover possession of a mobile home space for nonpayment of rent or to collect the illegal rent. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.140 No retaliation.
No resident shall be subjected to retaliation for the exercise of his/her rights under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.150 Posting of chapter.
A copy of this chapter shall be posted in every park in the City, in (A) the park office; and (B) the recreation building or clubhouse (if any). (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.160 Remedies.
(A) Any person who demands, accepts or retains any payment of rent in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable in a civil action to the person from whom such payment is demanded, accepted or retained for damages in the sum of three times the amount by which the payment or payments demanded, accepted, or retained exceed the maximum rent which could be lawfully demanded, accepted, or retained together with reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs as determined by the court.

(B) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in PMC Title 1. Where the conduct constituting the violation is of a continuing nature, each day that the conduct continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation.

(C) The City may institute a civil action to compel compliance with this chapter.

(D) Any legal challenge to a determination of the hearing officer’s decision granting or denying an appeal must be filed within 90 days of the date of the hearing officer’s final decision as set forth in his/her resolution making findings. The hearing officer’s decision shall state that judicial review must be sought within 90 days and is governed by Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. The hearing officer’s decision is final upon the date that it is mailed by first-class mail, postage prepaid, including a copy of the affidavit or certificate of mailing, to each party to the appeal. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.170 City Council review of this chapter.
The City Council shall review the provisions of this chapter six months after the date of adoption of the ordinance from which it derives, and at any other time deemed appropriate, in order to consider the following:

(A) Whether mobile home space rent control continues to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare;

(B) Whether the implementation of the provisions of this chapter has been adequate; and

(C) Whether the provisions of this chapter should be amended to provide more effective regulation or to avoid unnecessary hardship. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.180 Exemptions.
(A) Any mobile home space that is within an exemption created by the State Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798 et seq., is exempt from the provisions of this chapter (except PMC 5.44.041 and 5.44.080).

(B) Any mobile home space that was not subject to the provisions of this chapter as of June 11, 1997, and is within a mobile home park that is owned or operated by either the Palmdale Housing Authority or an organization that is exempt from federal income taxes under Section 501 (c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, is exempt from the provisions of this chapter (except PMC 5.44.041 and 5.44.120). The exemption created by this subsection is effective only if a covenant has been recorded against the park documenting that the owner or operator of the mobile home park has an existing agreement with the City regulating the rental rates for mobile home spaces within the mobile home park, and said agreement includes a commitment to provide affordable housing so that at least 20 percent of the spaces/coaches in the park are set aside for rental to persons of low or moderate income, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50093. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.190 Park inspections and audits.
City staff shall have the right to inspect mobile home parks within the City, including, without limitation, inspection of the notices required by PMC 5.44.060, documentation regarding any rent increases imposed on any regulated spaces in the park, and courtesy inspections by the Code Enforcement Division of the City. City staff also shall have the right to conduct an annual audit of the records being maintained by any mobile home park within the City during the park’s regular business hours, following a written request therefor, made at least five business days prior to the time of the audit. City staff shall determine the location where the audit is to be conducted and may conduct the audit at the mobile home park or at the location where the park’s business records are maintained, if the records are not maintained at the mobile home park. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

5.44.200 Regulations and forms.
The City Council may adopt regulations and forms from time to time as the Council deems necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or any regulations of the City Council, the City Manager may adopt such regulations and/or forms as he/she deems necessary for the City to implement and administer the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1368 § 1 (Att. A), 2009)

Chapter 5.48
INTERIM SCHOOL FACILITIES FINANCING
Sections:

5.48.010    Title and purpose of chapter provisions.

5.48.020    Definitions.

5.48.030    Administration and implementation procedures.

5.48.040    Conditions of overcrowding – School district to notify City Council.

5.48.050    Determination by City Council.

5.48.060    Attendance area development conditions.

5.48.070    Exceptions to chapter applicability.

5.48.080    Use of land or fees – School district schedule requirements.

5.48.090    Payment of fees or land made available.

5.48.100    Small developments – Payments of fee.

5.48.110    Collection of fees and land grant agreements – Certificate of completion.

5.48.120    Fee schedule.

5.48.130    Land donation schedule.

5.48.140    Land – Consistency with general plan.

5.48.150    Overlapping attendance areas – Fees distribution agreement.

5.48.160    Reports by school districts receiving land or fees.

5.48.170    End of overcrowding conditions – Notice required.

5.48.010 Title and purpose of chapter provisions.
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “interim school facilities’ financing ordinance of the City of Palmdale.” The purpose of this chapter is to establish a method of providing interim classrooms and related facilities for school districts having conditions of overcrowding within one or more attendance areas. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context:

(A) “Attendance area” means that portion of a school district, with identifiable boundaries determined by the school board, from which children residing within these boundaries would normally be assigned to attend a specified school in the district.

(B) “Certificate of completion” means a written notice to the Division of Building and Safety that a developer has paid fees as required by this chapter and/or has made land available as required by this chapter.

(C) “Conditions of overcrowding” means that the total enrollment of a school, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school as determined by the governing body of the district.

(D) “Developer” means any person, association, firm, corporation and other business entity, or public agency, installing or constructing a residential development.

(E) “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a building or portion thereof, or one or more rooms in a mobile home, designed, intended to be used, or used for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping quarters and containing only one kitchen.

(F) “Family” means a person or persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.

(G) “Mobile home space” means any space, including each space within a mobile home park, designed for parking a mobile home on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis.

(H) “Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding” includes, but is not limited to, the following:

(1) Agreements between a developer and the affected school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to the school district for an interim period, or whereby temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used;

(2) The availability of funds, the use of which would not impair the normal functioning of educational programs;

(3) The use of funds which could be made available from the sale of surplus school district property; for purposes of this subsection, “property” means both real and personal;

(4) The use of school district property for temporary-use buildings;

(5) The use of other schools in the district not having overcrowded conditions.

(I) “Residential development” means a project containing one or more dwelling units. (Ord. 1408 § 10, 2010; Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.030 Administration and implementation procedures.
The City Council may, from time to time, issue procedures and guidelines to provide for the administration and implementation of this chapter. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.040 Conditions of overcrowding – School district to notify City Council.
When the governing body of a school district which operates in whole or in part within the City notifies the City Council that conditions of overcrowding exist within one or more attendance areas within the district, such notice shall be in writing and contain the following:

(A) Clear and convincing evidence upon which the finding of overcrowding is based;

(B) Clear and convincing evidence that such overcrowding will impair the normal functioning of educational programs;

(C) The reasons why such overcrowding conditions exist;

(D) The reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding that were evaluated, and the reasons why such mitigating methods are unfeasible;

(E) A statement that no other feasible method for mitigation of the conditions exist;

(F) A description of the geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas; and

(G) Such other information as may be required by the City Council. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.050 Determination by City Council.
(A) After the receipt of a notice complying with the provisions of PMC 5.48.040 subsequent to 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the City Council shall determine within 60 days whether it concurs with such a school district’s findings. At the conclusion of 60 days, the matter shall be deemed approved by the City Council if no action has been taken, unless it has been mutually agreed to extend the time period an additional 60 days. The matter shall be deemed approved by the City Council if no action has been taken by the end of the additional 60-day period.

(B) In the event the City Council determines to conduct a public hearing, such hearing shall be set within 30 days after the filing of the notice of overcrowding conditions, and within 60 days following the conclusion of the hearing the City Council shall take action, unless an additional 60 days is agreed upon, and if no action is taken within the time allowed the matter shall be deemed approved.

(C) In making such determination, the City Council may receive and rely on any other evidence submitted by the school district or any other interested person. Evidence of continued overcrowding shall be submitted to the City Council in the same manner set forth in PMC 5.48.040 in the annual audit report as defined in PMC 5.48.160. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.060 Attendance area development conditions.
When the City Council concurs with a school district’s findings that conditions of overcrowding exist within an attendance area, it shall notify the Building Services Department and the Planning Department of the concurrence and of the geographical boundaries of such attendance area. Upon receipt of such notification by the City Council, the Building Services Department shall not issue a building permit, or in the case of an installation of a mobile home or the construction of a mobile home park, a utility permit (for example, electrical, sewer, plumbing, construction, etc.) within the attendance area until it has received a written “certificate of completion” from the affected school district. In the case of a conversion of an apartment building restricted to adults only to a condominium, no tentative map shall be approved without a condition requiring the developer to enter into an agreement with the school district providing compliance with this chapter in the event the restriction is removed. The agreement shall require the developer to comply with this chapter’s requirements at the time a building permit is applied for or, if no building permit is required, prior to the sale of any unit. (Ord. 1102 § 3, 1997; Ord. 738 § 2, 1988; Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.070 Exceptions to chapter applicability.
This chapter shall not apply to projects involving the following:

(A) Senior citizen housing approved, financed and/or subsidized by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development, and residential development restricted to adults only, provided the developer enters into a written agreement with the affected school district requiring that the developer will make land available pursuant to PMC 5.48.130, or pay fees in lieu thereof pursuant to PMC 5.48.120 when and if such restrictions cease during a period the school district has overcrowded conditions within the attendance area in which the development is located;

(B) The conversion of existing apartment buildings to condominiums, except where such apartment buildings were restricted to “adults only” and the restrictions are removed when the conversion takes place;

(C) Alterations;

(D) Remodeling or renovations which do not result in additional dwelling units; and

(E) Dwelling units sold prior to October 1, 1978, where the sales contract contains a fixed price which cannot be modified. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.080 Use of land or fees – School district schedule requirements.
Following the concurrence and decision by the City Council that an overcrowded condition exists in an attendance area, the governing body of the involved school district shall submit within 60 days a schedule specifying how it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding, and a detailed analysis of how the school district will alleviate the conditions. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the times when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule and projections of when such conditions will be alleviated, it shall submit modifications to the City Council and the reasons for the modification. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.090 Payment of fees or land made available.
In an attendance area where the City Council has concurred in a finding of overcrowding conditions, the developer of a proposed residential development, as a condition of obtaining a building permit or, in the case of an installation of a mobile home or the construction of a mobile home park, a utility permit (for example, electrical, sewer, plumbing, construction, etc.), shall pay fees in accordance with the provisions of PMC 5.48.120 or make land available in accordance with the provisions of PMC 5.48.130. The land to be made available or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, shall bear a reasonable relationship, and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary and/or high school classrooms and related facilities, and shall be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development. Such land or fees shall be used only for the purpose of providing interim elementary or high school classrooms and related facilities. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.100 Small developments – Payments of fee.
Only the payment of fees may be required in residential developments containing 50 dwelling units or less. In instances where the total development exceeds 50 dwelling units, the decision to pay fees or to make land available and for what period of time, or a combination thereof, shall be made by the school district in consultation with the developer. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.110 Collection of fees and land grant agreements – Certificate of completion.
(A) Where the payment of fees is required, they shall be collected by the school district prior to the issuance of a building permit or, in the case of an installation of a mobile home or the construction of a mobile home park, a utility permit (for example, electrical, sewer, plumbing, construction, etc.). Upon receipt of payment, the school district shall issue its certificate of completion of requirements under the ordinance for interim school facilities’ financing.

(B) Where land is to be made available, the developer shall provide a recordable written agreement to the school district which grants to the school district exclusive use of the land acceptable to the school district for an interim period. This written agreement shall be provided to the school district prior to the issuance of a building permit or, in the case of an installation of a mobile home or the construction of a mobile home park, a utility permit (for example, electrical, sewer, plumbing, construction, etc.). Upon receiving the recordable agreement, the school district shall issue its certificate of completion.

(C) If the school district determines that the requirement for land or fees in lieu thereof would result in an inequitable duplication of land or fees previously provided by the developer or his predecessors in interest, the school district shall adjust the requirement to the extent necessary to eliminate such duplication. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.120 Fee schedule.
Commencing February 10, 1985, the following fees shall be required:

(A) For each new mobile home space with unrestricted occupancy the fee shall be $667.00.

(B) For each new dwelling unit, exclusive of the mobile homes located on spaces for which a fee has been paid, the fee shall be assessed as follows:

(1) Dwelling units with one bedroom, $333.00;

(2) Dwelling units with two bedrooms, $667.00;

(3) Dwelling units with three bedrooms, $1,000;

(4) Dwelling units with four bedrooms, $1,330;

(5) Dwelling units with five or more bedrooms, $1,665.

(C) Every year on July 1st the amount of each fee in this section shall be increased or decreased by a percentage equal to the percentage change in the cost of living as shown by the California Consumer Price Index for all items determined by the California Department of Industrial Relations, between:

(1) The first day of the quarter of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter; and

(2) The April 1st preceding the date of increase or decrease. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.130 Land donation schedule.
The following land donation schedule shall apply:

(A) The length of time the land is needed shall be determined by the school district.

(B) A computation shall be made to determine the total fees which would be assessed if the total exaction were to be fees.

(C) The fair market value of the interim use of the site(s) designated shall be determined as the higher of two appraisals presented by professional appraisers. The appraisers shall be selected by the school district and if the developer does not concur with the district’s selection of appraiser, the district shall select one and the developer shall select one from a list of five names provided by the district. Appraisers shall be members of the American Institute of Real Estate Appraisers. The fair market value of the interim use shall be determined by the condition of the land at the time of donation.

(D) In the event the fair market value of the interim use of the land to be made available exceeds the amount computed in PMC 5.48.120, the district shall pay the developer the difference.

(E) In the event the fair market value of the interim use of the land to be made available is less than the amount computed in PMC 5.48.120, the developer shall pay the difference to the district in fees. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.140 Land – Consistency with general plan.
When land is to be made available to the school district, the district shall submit the proposal to the Development Services Department for a determination of whether the general plan provides for the location of public schools and whether the proposal is consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.150 Overlapping attendance areas – Fees distribution agreement.
Where two separate school districts operate schools in overlapping attendance areas where the City Council concurs that overcrowding conditions exist for both school districts, the governing bodies of the affected school districts shall determine the distribution of revenue from the fees levied pursuant to this chapter within 30 days from the date of concurrence by the City Council. In the event the school districts fail to agree on distribution of fees within 30 days, the County Superintendent of Schools shall determine the apportionment of fees within a second 30-day period. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.160 Reports by school districts receiving land or fees.
(A) Any school district receiving funds or land pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and disposition of land received, and shall file a report with the City Council specifying the following:

(1) The balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year;

(2) The facilities listed, purchased or constructed during the previous fiscal year;

(3) The attendance areas that will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins;

(4) When and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist;

(5) A detailed analysis of what the school district is doing to alleviate the overcrowded conditions.

(B) Such report shall be filed by August 1st of each year, and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the City Council. (Ord. 549, 1985)

5.48.170 End of overcrowding conditions – Notice required.
As soon as overcrowding conditions cease to exist the school district shall immediately notify the City Council of such fact. Upon receiving such notice, the City Council shall cease the requirement of fees or land required by this chapter. In the event the school district has money from fees previously paid in its interim school facility account after overcrowding conditions cease to exist, it shall apply such fees to mitigate future over crowded conditions in the same attendance area for which the fees were collected; provided, however, that in the event overcrowded conditions do not occur in the attendance area within five years from the date overcrowded conditions cease to exist, such fees may be applied to relieve overcrowded conditions in other attendance areas within the district. (Ord. 549, 1985)

Chapter 5.52
SOLID WASTE HANDLING AND RECYCLING SERVICES
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

5.52.010    Title.

5.52.020    Findings and intent.

5.52.030    Definitions.

Article II. Franchises, Fees and Rates

5.52.040    Franchise requirement.

5.52.050    Collector franchise fee.

5.52.060    Transfer of franchise.

5.52.070    Revocation of permit or franchise.

5.52.080    Interim suspension.

5.52.090    Notice of hearing – Revocation.

5.52.100    Appeals.

5.52.110    Council action.

5.52.120    Rates.

5.52.130    Billing and collection of rates, fees and charges.

5.52.140    Permits and licenses.

Article III. Contents of Franchise Agreements

5.52.150    Authorization by City Council – Resolution of conflicts.

Article IV. Exclusions

5.52.160    Residential householder exclusion.

5.52.170    Gardener’s exclusion.

5.52.180    Commercial/industrial exclusions.

5.52.190    Contractor’s exclusions.

5.52.200    Document destruction service.

Article V. General Requirements

5.52.210    Litter.

5.52.220    Transfer of loads on public streets.

5.52.230    Unauthorized removal from containers.

Article VI. Residential Collection and Recycling

5.52.240    Residential collection – Mandatory service – Exception.

5.52.250    Residential collection – Disposal and status of solid waste or recyclable materials.

5.52.260    Residential collection – Frequency.

5.52.270    Residential collection – Solid waste containers.

5.52.280    Residential collection – Recycling containers.

5.52.290    Residential collection – Placement and removal of containers.

5.52.300    Residential collection – Care of containers.

5.52.310    Residential collection – Special collection services.

Article VII. Commercial/Industrial Collection

5.52.320    Commercial/industrial exclusive franchise.

5.52.330    Commercial/industrial – Disposal and status of solid waste.

5.52.340    Commercial/industrial – Frequency and hours of collection.

5.52.350    Commercial/industrial – Containers.

5.52.360    Commercial/industrial – Maintenance and placement of containers.

5.52.370    Commercial/industrial – Care of containers.

5.52.380    Commercial/industrial – Special circumstances.

Article VIII. Nonexclusive Franchises for Commercial/Industrial Solid Waste Handling Services

5.52.390    Conversion of permits to nonexclusive franchises.

5.52.400    Contents of nonexclusive franchise agreements.

Article I. General Provisions

5.52.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “solid waste handling and recycling services ordinance” of the City. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.020 Findings and intent.
(A) The City Council finds and determines as follows:

(1) In order to meet the requirements of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, including source reduction of the solid waste stream, diversion of solid waste from landfills, and conservation of natural resources, it is necessary to regulate the collection of solid waste from commercial/industrial premises, as well as residential premises, and to encourage recycling of solid waste materials.

(2) The mandates of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Southern California Air Quality Management District, and other regulatory agencies, with respect to air pollution and traffic congestion management require the regulation, and, where possible, reduction in the number, of waste collection vehicles and vehicle trips which cause the discharge of air contaminants and create air pollution.

(3) A reduction in the number of heavy waste collection vehicles using the City streets daily will reduce traffic hazards and congestion and promote safety.

(4) The storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of solid waste in, without limitation, garbage, trash, debris and other discarded materials is a matter of substantial public concern in that improper control of such matters may create a public nuisance, air pollution, fire hazard, rat and insect infestation and other problems affecting the public health, safety and welfare.

(5) Regulation of the collection of garbage, refuse and other discarded materials from all residential, commercial and industrial properties within the City will provide the most orderly and efficient solution to such problems and will promote the public health, safety and welfare.

(6) The regulation of solid waste handling services in the City will also promote the public health, safety and welfare by requiring the use of newer and safer vehicles, the regular maintenance of such vehicles, and the reduction of spillage and litter in the public streets, by establishing accountability for the cleaning of refuse bins and containers, and by providing for accountability to the public.

(7) The public health, safety and welfare will best be served by providing for an exclusive franchise for residential refuse collection services, and for commercial and industrial refuse collection services, subject to the limited continuation rights of certain existing commercial/industrial collectors which are providing solid waste handling services pursuant to permits previously authorized by the City and which are qualified, under Public Resources Code Sections 49520 and 49521, to continue such services for five years following notice given pursuant to said Section 49520. Such five-year period expires on March 31, 1997.

(B) This chapter is enacted by the City Council pursuant to the following statutory authorization and in order to accomplish the objectives set forth in this section:

(1) Public Resources Code Section 40059 authorizes the City to determine (i) all aspects of solid waste handling which are of local concern, including, but not limited to, frequency of collection, means of collection and transportation, level of services, charges and fees, and nature, location and extent of providing solid waste handling services; and (ii) whether the services are to be provided by means of nonexclusive franchise, contract, license, permit, or otherwise, either with or without competitive bidding, or if, in the opinion of its governing body, the public health, safety and well-being so require, by partially exclusive or wholly exclusive franchise, contract, license, permit, or otherwise, either with or without competitive bidding.

(2) Public Resources Code Section 49300 provides that the City may, pursuant to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by its legislative body, contract for the collection or disposal, or both, of garbage, waste, refuse, offal, trimmings, or other refuse matter.

(3) Public Resources Code Section 49501 provides that the City may take action, whether by franchise, contract, license, permit, or otherwise, whereby the City itself, or one or more other local agencies or solid waste enterprises is authorized or permitted to have the exclusive right to provide solid waste handling services of any class or type within all or any part of the territory of the City.

(4) It is the intent of this chapter to set forth terms and conditions pursuant to which authorization may be granted by the City Council to provide solid waste handling services, and to promote the public health, welfare and safety of the community by establishing reasonable regulations relating to the storage, accumulation, collection and disposal of garbage, trash, rubbish, debris and other discarded matter, goods and material.

(5) This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws. If any federal or state agency shall hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over any specific provisions of this chapter, such paramount jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the City. Modification of a federal or state law or regulation shall, to the extent applicable to the City, be deemed a part of this chapter as of the effective date of such modification. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.030 Definitions.
(A) For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms and phrases as defined in this section shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Palmdale (“City”) or the City Manager’s designee.

“Collection” means the operation of gathering together within the City, and transporting by means of a motor vehicle to the point of disposal or processing, any solid waste or recyclable materials.

“Collector” means any person who has been awarded an exclusive franchise to provide residential or commercial/industrial solid waste or recyclable materials collection services in the City, or who, prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, has been issued a permit or nonexclusive franchise to operate as a commercial/industrial solid waste collector until the rights thereunder are terminated or revoked, or until such rights expire pursuant to the provisions of Section 49520 of the Public Resources Code.

“Commercial/industrial business owner” means any person, firm, corporation or other enterprise or organization holding or occupying, alone or with others, commercial/industrial premises, whether or not it is the holder of the title or the owner of record of the commercial/industrial premises.

“Commercial/industrial collector” means a collector providing solid waste collection services to commercial/industrial premises, including construction or demolition sites.

“Commercial/industrial premises” means all occupied real property in the City, except property occupied by federal, state or local governmental agencies which do not consent to their inclusion, and except residential premises as defined in this section, and shall include, without limitation, wholesale and retail establishments, restaurants and other food establishments, bars, stores, shops, offices, industrial establishments, manufacturing establishments, service stations, repair, research and development establishments, professional services, sports or recreational facilities, construction and demolition sites, and any other commercial or industrial business facilities, structures, sites, or establishments in the City.

“Construction site or demolition site” means any real property in the City in, on or from which a building or structure is being fabricated, assembled, erected or demolished, and which produces construction or demolition solid waste which must be removed from the property, and requires the use of commercial refuse containers (two-, three-, four-, six- or eight-yard containers) or 10-, 15-, 25-, 30- or 40-yard roll-off boxes.

“Construction or demolition waste” means any solid waste or debris generated as the result of construction or demolition, including without limitation, discarded packaging or containers and waste construction materials, whether brought on site for fabrication or used in construction or resulting from demolition, excluding liquid waste and hazardous waste.

“Disposal” means the complete operation of treating and disposing of solid waste after the collection thereof.

“Exclusive solid waste handling services” means any action by the City Council, whether by franchise, contract, license, permit, or otherwise, whereby the City itself, or one or more other local agencies or solid waste enterprises, has the exclusive right to provide solid waste handling services of any class or type within all or any part of the territory of the City.

“Hazardous waste” means and includes waste defined as hazardous by Public Resources Code Section 40141, namely, a waste or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may do either of the following: (i) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; (ii) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. “Hazardous waste” includes extremely hazardous waste and acutely hazardous waste, and such other waste as may hereafter from time to time be designated as such by the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) or other agency of the United States Government, or by the California Legislature or any agency of the state of California empowered by law to classify or designate waste as hazardous, extremely hazardous or acutely hazardous.

“Holiday” means: New Year’s Day; Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Thanksgiving Day; Christmas Day. “Holiday” also means any other day designated as such in a contract between a collector and the labor union serving as the exclusive representative of said collector’s employees, provided such holiday is established or recognized by resolution of the City Council.

“In the City” or “within the City” means within the limits of the City as such limits exist on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or may thereafter exist by virtue of the annexation of territory to or detachment of territory from the limits of the City as they exist on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

“Manure” means the waste droppings from any animal not disposed of through sewers.

“Person” means any individual, association, firm, partnership, corporation, or any other group or combination thereof acting as a unit.

“Processing” means the reduction, separation, recovery and conversion of solid waste.

“Public agency” means any governmental agency or department thereof, whether federal, state, or local.

“Recyclable materials” means the following materials generated on or emanating from residential or commercial/industrial premises and no longer useful or wanted thereon; glass bottles and jars; any food or beverage container (excluding ceramics and chemical containers); aluminum cans, foil, pie tins and similar items (excluding dirt or organic material); steel or bimetal cans not to exceed one gallon size; PET – plastic soda bottles or other bottles with the designated “PET” symbol; HDPE – plastic milk and water bottles with the designated “HDPE” symbol (excluding detergent or bleach bottles and other plastic products); newspaper; cardboard – separated and not having waxed surfaces; computer printout (excluding carbon); and white ledger – white bond paper, office paper, white envelopes (excluding coated paper); and such additional materials as the City Council may designate from time to time.

“Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40201.

“Recycling container” means a container which is provided to residential premises for use in collecting and moving recyclable materials to curbside for collection by the collector, of a container which is provided to commercial/industrial premises for use by the collector in collecting and moving recyclable materials.

“Residential collector” means the collector which collects solid waste and recyclable materials from residential premises under an exclusive contract or franchise.

“Residential householder” means any person or persons holding or occupying residential premises in the City, whether or not the owner of such residential premises.

“Residential owner” means the owner of any residential premises within the City.

“Residential premises” means any residential dwelling unit within the City, including, without limitation, multiple unit residential complexes, such as rental housing projects, condominiums, apartment houses, mixed condominiums and rental housing, and mobile home parks.

“Resource recovery” means any use of refuse or solid waste collected pursuant to this chapter; except for landfill disposal or transfer for landfill disposal. “Resource recovery” includes, but is not limited to, transformation, composting, and multimaterial recycling.

“Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes, generated in or upon, related to the occupancy of, remaining in or emanating from residential premises or commercial/industrial premises, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid wastes, and other solid and semisolid wastes, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 49503, excluding liquid wastes and abandoned vehicles; provided, however, that “solid waste” shall not include hazardous waste.

“Solid waste container” means any vessel, tank, receptacle, box or bin permitted to be used for the purpose of holding solid waste for collection.

“Solid waste enterprise” means any individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste handling services.

“Solid waste handling services” means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, or processing of solid wastes for residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial users or customers.

“Special collection services” means the removal by a collector of oversized or overweight household articles placed curbside by a residential householder or owner, which oversized or overweight household articles have weights, volumes or dimensions which cannot be accommodated by solid waste containers for residential premises, such as stoves, refrigerators, water heaters, washing machines, furniture, sofas, mattresses, box springs and large rugs.

“Standard commercial/industrial solid waste container” means a state-of-the-art bin or solid waste container used in connection with commercial/industrial premises with a two-, three-, four-, six- or eight-cubic-yard capacity, designed for mechanical pick-up by collection vehicles and equipped with a lid, or where appropriate for the commercial/industrial premises being served, a 15-, 25-, 30-, 40- or 50-cubic-yard roll-off box or compactor, and shall include other types of containers suitable for the storage and collection of commercial/industrial solid waste if approved in writing by the City Manager.

“Standard residential solid waste container” means a standardized roll-away container with a locking lid, made of metal, hard rubber or plastic and having an approximate capacity of 90 gallons, and of a design, color and durability as approved by the City Manager.

(B) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude the City and any solid waste enterprise from incorporating into any agreement for exclusive solid waste handling services definitions relating to their respective contractual rights and obligations which may differ from or augment those set forth herein. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

Article II. Franchises, Fees and Rates

5.52.040 Franchise requirement.
No person shall collect or dispose of solid waste in the City unless such person has been awarded a solid waste collector franchise and has entered into a franchise agreement with the City, except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. No person shall collect recyclable materials generated on or emanating from residential premises in the City unless such person has been awarded a residential recycling franchise and has entered into a franchise agreement with the City. Any such solid waste or residential recycling franchise shall be in addition to any business license or permit otherwise required by this code. No permit issued by any other governmental agency authorizing collection of solid waste or residential recycling materials shall be valid in the City. Commercial/industrial collectors operating in the City on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter under a permit or a nonexclusive franchise agreement may continue to operate only until the rights thereunder are terminated or revoked, or until such rights expire pursuant to the provisions of Section 49520 of the Public Resources Code. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.050 Collector franchise fee.
Each collector shall pay a franchise fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council or established in the franchise agreement authorizing the collection of solid waste or recyclable materials. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.060 Transfer of franchise.
No solid waste collector permit or franchise which is authorized by, subject to, or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred, delegated, sublet, subcontracted to or assigned to another person without the prior approval of the City Council. This restriction includes the transfer of ownership or the majority of the ownership or control of the permittee or the franchisee, and the transfer of a majority of the permittee’s or franchisee’s stock to another person. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.070 Revocation of permit or franchise.
After a hearing as provided in this chapter, the City Manager may revoke or suspend any solid waste collector permit or franchise for violation of a provision of this chapter or any other applicable law, ordinance, or regulation of any public agency. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.080 Interim suspension.
The City Manager, without a hearing, may suspend a franchise or a permit for not more than 60 days, if the City Manager finds that continued operation by the franchisee or permittee will constitute a threat to the public health, safety, or general welfare. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.090 Notice of hearing – Revocation.
The City Manager shall mail notice of a hearing to revoke a solid waste permit or franchise to the collector not less than 15 days prior to such hearing. In the event of the revocation of a franchise or a permit, the City Manager shall notify the collector in writing of the reasons for the revocation. Such notification may be made in person or by mail. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.100 Appeals.
Within 15 calendar days after notice by the City Manager of revocation of a solid waste permit or franchise has been sent to the collector, the collector may file with the City Clerk an appeal of such decision to the City Council. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.110 Council action.
The City Council may either affirm the action of the City Manager, send the matter back to the City Manager for further consideration, or set the matter for hearing by the City Council. If the City Council sets the matter for hearing, it shall base its action upon the standards delineated in PMC 5.52.070. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to the collector not less than 15 days prior to the hearing. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.120 Rates.
The City Council may, by resolution, establish rates to be charged to residential householders and to commercial/industrial business owners for the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials. The City Council may, by resolution, establish or adjust the rates charged by those commercial/industrial collectors which, upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are operating in the City pursuant to permits or nonexclusive franchise agreements. No collector shall charge any rate or fee which is greater or less than the permissible maximum or minimum rate established by the City Council, unless otherwise authorized in this chapter. Every commercial/industrial business owner and residential householder or owner shall pay the rates established from time to time by the City Council for collection services rendered pursuant to this chapter in the manner set forth in PMC 5.52.130. The City Council shall establish such rate categories as may be appropriate for collection services provided by any commercial/industrial collector. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.130 Billing and collection of rates, fees and charges.
(A) The billing and collection of the rates, fees and charges authorized by the City Council for residential solid waste handling services shall be the responsibility of the franchised residential collector, and the City shall have no liability or responsibility therefor.

(B) Every commercial/industrial collector shall be solely responsible for collecting the charges for such collector’s services for providing such commercial/industrial collections as may be authorized by this chapter, and the City shall have no liability or responsibility for collection. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.140 Permits and licenses.
Every collector shall obtain and maintain at all times during the collector’s operations a business license issued by the City, and all applicable permits and licenses required by any public agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

Article III. Contents of Franchise Agreements

5.52.150 Authorization by City Council – Resolution of conflicts.
(A) The City Council may authorize, by franchise, contract, license or permit, a solid waste enterprise to provide solid waste handling services for residential, commercial, institutional, or industrial users or customers.

(B) In the sole discretion of the City Council, the solid waste handling services may be authorized on an exclusive or nonexclusive basis, and with or without competitive bidding, and may relate to any class or type of solid waste within all or any part of the territory of the City.

(C) The terms and provisions of any franchise agreement for solid waste handling services may relate to or include, without limitation, the following subject matters:

(1) The nature, scope and duration of the franchise;

(2) The collection schedule, including the frequency, days and hours of collection;

(3) The applicable franchise fee, including the amount, method of computation, and time for payment;

(4) The applicable rates, fees and charges for regular, special and emergency collection services, including the method of setting and adjusting same, and responsibility for billing and collecting same;

(5) Collection vehicles, including the permissible size and color, and any required identification, safety equipment, maintenance, inspection, and operational requirements;

(6) The receipt, processing and reporting of customer inquiries and complaints;

(7) The collection of solid waste from publicly owned property and facilities;

(8) Performance standards for the collector’s personnel and equipment;

(9) Solid waste and recycling containers, including size, repair or replacement, handling, placement, obligations of the collector to provide, and permissible charges therefor;

(10) Standards and procedures for periodic performance reviews by the City;

(11) Noise attenuation policies and procedures;

(12) The maintenance by the collector of an office for the conduct of business;

(13) Policies and procedures relating to the noncollection of solid waste, the composting of green waste, the collection of recyclable materials, and resource recovery;

(14) Requirements relating to comprehensive liability insurance and workers’ compensation insurance;

(15) Requirements relating to the dissemination of information to the public concerning regular and special solid waste collection and recycling services;

(16) Actions or omissions constituting breaches or defaults, and the imposition of applicable penalties, liquidated damages, and other remedies, including suspension, revocation or termination;

(17) Requirements relating to performance bonds and to indemnification;

(18) Requirements relating to affirmative-action programs;

(19) Requirements relating to record keeping, accounting procedures, reporting, periodic audits, and inspection of records;

(20) Requirements relating to the assignment, transfer and renewal of the franchise;

(21) Requirements relating to compliance with and implementation of state and federal laws, rules or regulations pertaining to solid waste handling services, and to the implementation by the City of state-mandated programs, including, without limitation, the City’s “source reduction and recycling element” and the City’s “household hazardous waste element”;

(22) Such additional requirements, conditions, policies and procedures as may be mutually agreed upon by the parties to the franchise agreement and which will, in the judgment and discretion of the City Council, best serve the public interest and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

(D) In the event of any conflict between the provisions of a franchise agreement which is authorized and approved by the City Council and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the franchise agreement shall control. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

Article IV. Exclusions

5.52.160 Residential householder exclusion.
No provision of this chapter shall prevent residential householders from collecting and disposing of occasional loads of solid waste generated in or on their residential premises, or from composting green waste, or from selling or disposing of recyclable materials generated in or on their residential premises; provided, however, that no residential householder shall employ or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than the franchised residential collector, to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or landfill. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.170 Gardener’s exclusion.
No provisions of this chapter shall prevent a gardener, tree trimmer or person engaged in a similar trade from collecting and disposing of grass cuttings, prunings, and similar material not containing other solid waste as an incidental portion of providing such gardening, tree trimming or similar services. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.180 Commercial/industrial exclusions.
(A) Source-Separated Recyclables.

(1) No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from selling to a buyer, for a monetary or other valuable consideration, any source-separated recyclables, including, without limitation, any saleable scrap, discard, reject, by-product, ferrous or nonferrous metal, worn out or defective part, junk, pallet, packaging material, paper or other similar item generated in, on or by a commercial/industrial premises or business, and no longer useful to such commercial/industrial business but having market value, whether such buyer is a recycler, junk dealer, or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce; provided, however, that such buyer is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste for a fee or other charge or consideration, and that no such materials are transported for disposition to a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200). “Source-separated recyclables” within the meaning of this section shall mean recyclable materials separated on the commercial/industrial premises from solid waste for the purpose of sale, not mixed with or containing more than incidental or minimal solid waste, and having a market value.

(2) No provision of this chapter shall prevent a recycler, junk dealer or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce and which is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste or providing solid waste collection services for a fee or other charge, or consideration, from buying any materials referenced in this section for a monetary or other valuable consideration, and which buys such materials for marketing and not for disposition in a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200); nor shall any provision of this chapter prevent such recycler, junk dealer or enterprise which buys such materials from removing and transporting such materials to a destination for marketing in the stream of commerce. No such buyer shall buy or transport such materials without prior authorization from the City, as required by this code, whether in the form of a business license, a business permit, or a nonexclusive franchise agreement.

(B) Renovation, Rebuilding, Repairs. No provision of this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business owner from arranging for any worn, spent, or defective equipment, or part thereof, used in such commercial/industrial business and requiring renovation, rebuilding, recharging, regeneration or repair, to be picked up, renovated, rebuilt, recharged, regenerated or otherwise restored and repaired and returned to such commercial/industrial business owner; nor shall any provision of this chapter prevent any person engaged in the business of renovating, rebuilding, recharging, regenerating, or otherwise restoring or repairing such equipment or part thereof, from transporting the same from or returning it to the commercial/industrial business, or from removing, transporting or disposing of any such equipment, or part thereof, replaced in connection with an equipment repair or service contract. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.190 Contractor’s exclusions.
No provision of this chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor having a contract for the demolition or reconstruction of a building, structure, pavement, or concrete installation from marketing any saleable items salvaged from such demolition or reconstruction, or from causing such salvageable items or demolition waste to be removed and transported from the premises on which such waste is generated, pursuant to the provisions of the demolition or construction contract; provided, however, that if a subcontractor is to be engaged to remove such demolition waste, the exclusive franchised collector shall have the right of first refusal to provide such services. If the exclusive franchised collector cannot guarantee that such services will be provided within a period of 24 hours, then the City Manager may authorize the licensed contractor or the owner of the premises to utilize the services of another duly authorized solid waste enterprise. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.200 Document destruction service.
No provision of this chapter shall prevent any person engaged in the business of destroying or disposing of secret, confidential or sensitive documents from transporting or disposing of such documents by shredding, lumping, incinerating, or other means, as a part of such document destruction or disposal service. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

Article V. General Requirements

5.52.210 Litter.
Any person who deposits or causes to be deposited any solid waste or recyclable materials on the public right-of-way or on private property within public view, except in a container provided therefor as herein specified, shall, not later than 24 hours after receipt of notice from any duly authorized officer or employee of the City, sweep up and remove the same. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.220 Transfer of loads on public streets.
No person shall transfer solid waste or recyclable materials from one collection vehicle to another on any public street or road unless such transfer is essential to the method of operation and is approved by the City Manager, or is necessary owing to mechanical failure or accidental damage to a vehicle. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.230 Unauthorized removal from containers.
No person other than the collector which provides collection services at residential premises, or the residential owner or householder occupying the residential premises in or upon which a solid waste container or recyclable materials container is placed at curbside for collection, shall remove any material from such container. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

Article VI. Residential Collection and Recycling

5.52.240 Residential collection – Mandatory service – Exception.
(A) Subject to the exception set forth in subsection (B) of this section, every residential householder or residential owner must use the services of the collector having the exclusive franchise for collecting solid waste or recyclable materials.

(B) The mandatory service specified in subsection (A) of this section is not applicable to any residential householder or residential owner who is concurrently operating a business in the City under a current business license or business permit, and who has an existing contract with the exclusive franchised collector for commercial or industrial solid waste handling and recycling services.

(C) No residential householder or residential owner may enter into an agreement for residential refuse or recyclable materials collection services with a vendor other than the City’s exclusive franchisee. (Ord. 1123 § 1, 1998; Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.250 Residential collection – Disposal and status of solid waste or recyclable materials.
(A) Solid Waste. All solid waste collected by a collector shall be disposed of by the collector in accordance with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations.

(B) Recyclable Materials. Upon placement at the residential curbside for collection, all recyclable materials shall become the property of the collector holding the exclusive franchise for residential collection services. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.260 Residential collection – Frequency.
The residential collector shall collect all solid waste and recyclable materials placed for collection in compliance with this chapter from each occupied residential premises in accordance with a schedule which has been approved by the City Manager. Said schedule shall identify the routes and days of pick up for each collection district established within the City. Unless otherwise approved by the City Council, collection of solid waste shall take place no less than once each calendar week. Collection of recyclable materials shall take place no less than once each calendar week. Not more than seven days shall elapse between collections of solid waste collections, nor between collections of recyclable materials. No collections from residential premises shall be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the next day. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.270 Residential collection – Solid waste containers.
Subject to the prior approval of the City Manager, the collector shall provide standard residential solid waste containers to each residential householder and may include the costs thereof in the monthly collection rate. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a residential householder may provide additional solid waste containers sufficient to accommodate the amount of solid waste generated by the residential premises; provided, however, that such containers shall be compatible with the collector’s collection equipment. Such additional containers shall be the property of the residential householder. No cardboard box or paper bag may be used as a container for solid waste. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.280 Residential collection – Recycling containers.
The collector shall provide each residential premises with at least one recycling container. If one recycling container is inadequate, the collector shall provide one or more additional recycling containers upon request, and at no charge to the residential householder. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.290 Residential collection – Placement and removal of containers.
Every residential householder shall place each solid waste container and recycling container for collection at the curb in front of the premises, or at the curb at the side of the premises where the premises are adjacent to more than one street. When the premises are adjacent to a paved alley with a minimum width of 15 feet, the residential householder shall place the container within two feet of the rear property line for collection. No person shall place any such container for collection more than 24 hours before collection is scheduled to commence in the district, or leave any such container at the place of collection after 10:00 p.m. on the day of collection, or more than two hours after actual collection, whichever is later. Such containers shall not be located within the front yard setback and shall be regulated by Chapter 8.36 PMC. (Ord. 1120 § 10, 1998; Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.300 Residential collection – Care of containers.
Upon collection, all solid waste containers shall be replaced, by the collector, upright, where found, with the lids replaced, and all recycling containers shall be replaced in an upright or upside down position, at the location where found by the collector. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.310 Residential collection – Special collection services.
The franchised residential collector shall provide, upon request from a residential householder, special collection of solid waste, at such rates as may be approved by the City and at such times as may be agreed upon by the collector and the person requesting the service. If no agreement is reached, such special collections shall be provided as determined by the City Manager. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

Article VII. Commercial/Industrial Collection

5.52.320 Commercial/industrial exclusive franchise.
(A) All solid waste collected from commercial/industrial premises for a fee, service charge, or other consideration, shall be collected by a solid waste enterprise under the provisions of an exclusive franchise awarded by the City Council (“franchised collector”), subject only to the limited continuation rights of certain qualified collectors which, upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, are operating under a permit or a nonexclusive franchise agreement, and which collectors have been given written notification as required by Public Resources Code Section 49520.

(B) No person, firm, corporation or solid waste enterprise, other than those referenced in subsection (A) of this section, shall negotiate or contract for, undertake to receive, collect or transport solid waste from within the City for a fee, service charge or other consideration, except as specifically provided herein.

(C) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each commercial/industrial business owner shall utilize the services of the franchised collector for the collection of solid waste from the commercial/industrial premises held or occupied by such commercial/industrial business owner and shall pay for such services the fees approved by the City Council. No commercial/industrial business owner shall enter into an agreement for solid waste handling services with any person, firm, or corporation other than the franchised collector, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

(D) Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial/industrial business which has its own recycling or resource recovery program for recyclable materials generated by such business and not utilizing a commercial or industrial solid waste enterprise (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40193) which provides collection services for a fee, service charge, or other consideration, from continuing such recycling or resource recovery program, and the recyclable materials included in such program are excepted from the exclusive franchise between the City and the franchised collector.

(E) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, certain solid waste enterprises that have been authorized by permit or by a nonexclusive franchise agreement to provide solid waste handling services for commercial/industrial premises in the City may continue to provide these services until March 31, 1997, or until the rights thereunder are earlier terminated or revoked, or expire pursuant to the provisions of Section 49520 of the Public Resources Code. Such solid waste enterprises are hereinafter referred to as “excepted collectors.”

(F) The exclusive franchise of the franchised collector shall not preclude a commercial/industrial business served by an excepted collector from continuing to use the solid waste handling services of such excepted collector until the rights of such excepted collector to operate in the City are terminated or revoked or have expired; provided, however, if the rights of an excepted collector to provide such services to a commercial/industrial business owner are terminated or revoked for any reason, said business owner shall not use the services of any collector other than the exclusive franchised collector. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.330 Commercial/industrial – Disposal and status of solid waste.
The commercial/industrial collector shall collect and dispose of all solid waste generated and presented for collection at each commercial/industrial premises in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Any such collection and disposal shall be in accordance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and regulations and any controlling permit or franchise agreement between the collector and the City. All solid waste collected by a commercial/industrial collector shall be the exclusive property of said collector. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.340 Commercial/industrial – Frequency and hours of collection.
(A) Frequency. The commercial/industrial collector shall collect solid waste from commercial/industrial premises on a schedule which is agreed upon between the commercial/industrial business owner and the collector. In no event shall such collection schedule permit the accumulation of solid waste in quantities detrimental to public health or safety.

(B) Hours. No collection of solid waste from commercial/industrial premises within 600 feet of occupied residential premises shall be made between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. on the next day. No collection shall be made on Sunday unless specifically authorized in writing by the City Manager. Hours and days of collection shall be subject to the prior approval of the City Manager. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.350 Commercial/industrial – Containers.
(A) Every commercial/industrial business served by the franchised collector shall have the option to:

(1) Provide the necessary container or containers to accommodate solid waste generated from said commercial/industrial business; or

(2) Use the standard commercial/industrial solid waste container or containers provided by the franchised collector, which containers are compatible with the franchised collector’s collection equipment. Where a commercial/industrial business owner is served by an excepted collector, such excepted collector and business owner shall determine by private agreement who is to provide the container.

(B) Every collector which provides any container or other equipment used for the storage of commercial/industrial solid waste shall:

(1) Place and maintain on the outside of such container, bin or other equipment, in legible letters and numerals not less than one inch in height, said collector’s business name and telephone number, in a color contrasting with the background color of the container; and

(2) Provide containers on casters or hasps or locks upon request by the commercial/industrial business owner. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.360 Commercial/industrial – Maintenance and placement of containers.
Solid waste containers provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the collector. Solid waste containers which are not provided by the collector shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the commercial/industrial business owner. Every commercial/industrial business owner shall provide a solid waste container location on the commercial/industrial premises and shall keep said area in good repair, clean and free of refuse outside of the container. Every collector shall remove any solid waste or litter that is spilled or deposited on the ground as a result of the collector’s emptying of the container or other activities of the collector. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.370 Commercial/industrial – Care of containers.
Upon collection of solid waste by the collector, all containers shall be replaced, upright, where found, with the lids closed. No person, other than the owner thereof, shall in any manner, break, damage, roughly handle or destroy containers placed on the premises of a commercial/industrial business owner. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

5.52.380 Commercial/industrial – Special circumstances.
If particular commercial/industrial business premises require collections at times, frequencies or in a manner such that the franchised collector is unable to perform said collection in the normal course of business, or where unusual quantities of solid waste or special types of material are to be collected and disposed of, or where special methods of handling are required, or where the quantity of solid waste requires the use of multiple (more than three) containers, the collector and the commercial/industrial business owner may make arrangements for such collection on mutually agreeable terms. If the business owner and the franchised collector do not agree as to the methods for the service provided for in this section, the City Manager shall determine the method of service. If the franchised collector is unable or unwilling to provide such service, the City Manager may authorize the business owner to use another solid waste enterprise for such special service until the franchised collector can provide such service in its normal course of business. (Ord. 977 § 1, 1992)

Article VIII. Nonexclusive Franchises for Commercial/Industrial Solid Waste Handling Services

5.52.390 Conversion of permits to nonexclusive franchises.
(A) Not later than July 1, 1993, every “excepted collector,” as said term is defined in PMC 5.52.320(E), shall apply to the City for a nonexclusive franchise for the collection of solid waste from commercial/industrial premises (including the collection of construction or demolition waste from construction sites or demolition sites). No other applications for nonexclusive franchises for the collection of commercial/industrial solid waste shall be accepted by the City from any excepted collector after said date.

(B) Upon a determination by the Director of Public Works that the excepted collector is then in compliance with all terms and conditions which are applicable to the permit previously issued to the excepted collector, and that the excepted collector has executed a standard form of nonexclusive franchise agreement, the Director of Public Works shall authorize and issue the nonexclusive franchise to the excepted collector, and shall notify the Director of Finance of such issuance. (Ord. U-1011 § 1, 1993)

5.52.400 Contents of nonexclusive franchise agreements.
(A) The terms and provisions of a nonexclusive franchise agreement with an excepted collector may relate to or include, without limitation, the applicable subject matters which are specified in PMC 5.52.150.

(B) Every excepted collector to which a nonexclusive franchise is issued hereunder shall pay to the City a franchise fee which shall be determined as follows:

Commencing upon the effective date of the nonexclusive franchise agreement and continuing through June 30, 1994, the franchise fee shall be seven and one-half percent of the contractor’s gross receipts collected from all commercial/industrial customers and seven and one-half percent of the contractor’s net profits derived from any sales of recyclable materials collected within the City. Commencing upon July 1, 1994, and upon each July 1st thereafter, the seven and one-half percent franchise fee applicable to said gross receipts and to said net profits, shall be increased as follows:

 

From

To

July 1, 1994

7.5%

7.75%

July 1, 1995

7.75%

8.0%

July 1, 1996 to
March 31, 1997

8.0%

8.25%

The franchise fee shall be paid to the City not later than 15 days following the end of the preceding calendar month, and shall be accompanied by a report in such form as may be specified by the Director of Public Works. Said monthly report may require detailed information related to the nature and quantity of solid waste collected in the City, solid waste landfills which are utilized, and the nature and quantity of solid waste which is diverted from solid waste landfills. The franchise fee payable hereunder shall be in lieu of all business license taxes or business permit application for renewal fees otherwise required by this code.

(C) City shall have the right to direct all excepted collectors operating under a nonexclusive franchise to dispose of commercial/industrial solid waste at one or more landfills designated by the City. The designation by the City of any such landfill shall be for the sole purpose of ensuring that the City is in compliance with all reporting and waste characterization requirements imposed by AB 939.

(D) Every nonexclusive franchise agreement issued hereunder shall in all events terminate, and shall be of no further force or effect, as of the close of business on March 31, 1997.

(E) Every nonexclusive franchise agreement issued hereunder shall require the excepted collector to adhere to and abide by the schedule of permissible rates, fees and charges for commercial/industrial solid waste handling services as authorized from time to time by resolution of the City Council.

(F) Every nonexclusive franchise agreement issued hereunder shall require the excepted collector to obtain, and to maintain during the term of the nonexclusive franchise agreement, comprehensive general liability insurance with such coverage, and in such amounts, as may be deemed by the City to be adequate to protect the interests of the City and of the general public, taking into consideration the nature, frequency and magnitude of the excepted collector’s solid waste handling services. The excepted collector’s insurance policies, or certificate of insurance, shall name the City as an additional insured and shall be subject to the approval of the City Attorney. (Ord. U-1011 § 1, 1993)

Title 6
ANIMALS
Chapters:

6.04    Animal Control

6.08    Racing Homing Pigeons

Chapter 6.04
ANIMAL CONTROL
Sections:

6.04.010    Adoption of Los Angeles County animal control ordinance.

6.04.020    Definitions.

6.04.030    Repeals to the animal control ordinance.

6.04.040    Penalties.

6.04.050    Penalty for dog bites.

6.04.060    Section 10.90.010 amended – Fee schedule.

6.04.080    Section 10.20.038 amended – Residential dogs and cats – Limitations.

6.04.010 Adoption of Los Angeles County animal control ordinance.
(A) Subject to the amendments contained in this chapter, Divisions 1, 2, and 3 of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code (“Animals”), in effect on October 3, 2017, and as they may be amended from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference, and may be cited as the “Animal Control Ordinance” of the City of Palmdale.

(B) In the event there are any inconsistencies between Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code and this chapter pertaining to animal control, the latter shall prevail.

(C) In the event there are any inconsistencies between the Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code and the City’s zoning ordinance relating to the keeping of animals, the latter shall prevail.

(D) At least one copy of the current version of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code shall be maintained on file in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 1503 § 1, 2017)

6.04.020 Definitions.
Notwithstanding the definitions provided in Chapter 10.08 of the animal control ordinance, whenever any of the following names or terms is used in the animal control ordinance and this chapter, each such name or term shall be deemed or construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

(A) “Board of Supervisors” shall mean the City Council of the City of Palmdale.

(B) “City” shall mean the City of Palmdale.

(C) “County” or “County of Los Angeles” or “unincorporated territory of Los Angeles County” shall mean the City of Palmdale.

(D) “Owner” shall mean any person who holds the license to the animal, or, if the animal is not licensed, the person legally entitled to possession of the animal, or any person with primary responsibility for the care of the animal. An owner shall also include any adult person who has possession of, or who exercises control over, an animal. (Ord. 1503 § 1, 2017)

6.04.030 Repeals to the animal control ordinance.
Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 6.04.010, the following provisions of the animal control ordinance are hereby repealed: Section 10.04.060 (“Penalty: General”) and Section 10.84.030 (“Penalty: Predator Animals”). (Ord. 1503 § 1, 2017)

6.04.040 Penalties.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision, regulation, or requirement of the animal control ordinance or of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 1503 § 1, 2017)

6.04.050 Penalty for dog bites.
Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 6.04.010(A), Section 10.37.180 of the animal control ordinance is hereby amended to read as follows:

10.37.180 Penalty for dog bites. In addition to the conditions and restrictions imposed on the ownership of potentially dangerous and vicious dogs set forth in this chapter, an owner or custodian of a dog who permits, allows or causes a dog to run, stray or be uncontrolled or at large upon a public street, sidewalk, park or other public property, or in or upon the private property of another person, is guilty of a public offense punishable pursuant to Chapter 1.12 of this Code if such dog bites, attacks or causes injury to any person or to a domestic animal.

(Ord. 1503 § 1, 2017)

6.04.060 Section 10.90.010 amended – Fee schedule.
Section 10.90.010 of the County animal control ordinance is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

10.90.010 Fee schedule.

A. The fees required to be paid for all services and activities set forth in Title 10 shall be established by resolution of the City Council.

B. The Director may waive any fees in cases of undue hardship.

(Ord. 1503 § 1, 2017)

6.04.080 Section 10.20.038 amended – Residential dogs and cats – Limitations.
Section 10.20.038 of the County animal control ordinance is deleted in its entirety and replaced with the following:

10.20.038 - Residential Dogs and Cats—Limitations.

A. Dogs. It is unlawful to keep more than the allowable number of dogs, pursuant to Section 17.89.030, at any residence without an animal facility license. Each dog must be licensed. For purposes of this section, a service dog licensed under Section 10.20.090 and serving a person who is disabled within the meaning of Government Code section 12926 subsection (i) or (j) is not counted toward the number of dogs kept or maintained.

B. Cats. It is unlawful to keep more than the allowable number of cats, pursuant to Section 17.89.030, at any residence without an animal facility license. Each cat must be licensed, and kept primarily indoors.

(Ord. 1502 § 4 (Exh. 1), 2018)

Chapter 6.08
RACING HOMING PIGEONS
Sections:

6.08.010    Purpose.

6.08.020    Homing pigeons defined.

6.08.030    Permit – Required.

6.08.040    Permit – Term and fee.

6.08.050    Feed storage.

6.08.060    Food scrap and dropping removal.

6.08.070    Loft construction.

6.08.080    Maintenance.

6.08.090    Inspection.

6.08.100    Height.

6.08.110    Number of birds allowed.

6.08.120    Fee exemption.

6.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to permit, subject to proper regulation, the keeping and flying of racing homing pigeons as a recreational sport and hobby, and for no other purpose. (Ord. 50 § 1, 1963)

6.08.020 Homing pigeons defined.
The term “homing pigeons” means a pigeon trained to return home from a distance. Homing pigeons can be identified by a seamless leg band issued by the American Racing Pigeon Union and marked with the letters AU and the figures designating the year issued. (Ord. 50 § 2, 1963)

6.08.030 Permit – Required.
Homing pigeons, which are not raised or kept for the market or other commercial purpose, may be kept and liberated for exercise or racing within not less than 25 feet from any door, window or other opening of any dwelling, if a permit in writing, authorizing the keeping and liberating for exercise and racing of such homing pigeons, is first applied for and obtained from the City. Each application for a permit to keep and liberate for exercise and racing of the homing pigeons shall be made upon forms to be furnished for that purpose by the City, signed by the applicant and filed with the City. No such application shall be received for filing by the City unless accompanied by a filing fee of $10.00. The permit shall be issued by the City upon compliance by the applicant with the conditions set out in this chapter. (Ord. 50 § 3, 1963)

6.08.040 Permit – Term and fee.
Each permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year from and after the date of issuance and shall be renewable on the payment to the City of a renewal fee in the sum of $7.50 annually. (Ord. 50 § 3(6), 1963)

6.08.050 Feed storage.
All feed for the homing pigeons shall be stored in containers which offer protection against rodents. (Ord. 50 § 3(1), 1963)

6.08.060 Food scrap and dropping removal.
All homing pigeon droppings and food scrap shall be removed from the premises at least once a week and disposed of in a sanitary manner. (Ord. 50 § 3(2), 1963)

6.08.070 Loft construction.
Lofts or pigeon houses where the homing pigeons are kept shall be soundly constructed, properly maintained and adequately landscaped to blend with and conform to the surrounding area. (Ord. 50 § 3(3), 1963)

6.08.080 Maintenance.
The lofts or pigeon houses shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and in compliance with all health regulations of the City. (Ord. 50 § 3(4), 1963)

6.08.090 Inspection.
The City, or its duly authorized representative, shall have the right to inspect each such loft and pigeon house at such times as it deems advisable. (Ord. 50 § 3(5), 1963)

6.08.100 Height.
Pigeon coops or buildings shall not exceed eight feet above normal ground line. (Ord. 50 § 3(7), 1963)

6.08.110 Number of birds allowed.
No more than 50 adult birds of any kind, sex or variety may be kept at any one time at any one location or piece of property by one or more owners. An adult bird is any bird banded in a previous calendar year. (Ord. 50 § 3(8), 1963)

6.08.120 Fee exemption.
Any junior member of the American Racing Pigeon Union shall be subject to all of the requirements of this chapter except that a junior member shall be issued a no-fee permit upon compliance with this chapter and displaying his membership card in the American Racing Pigeon Union. (Ord. 50 § 3(9), 1963)

Title 7
(Reserved)
Title 8
HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapters:

8.04    Adoption of Health, Safety and Technical Construction Codes

8.05    Solar Energy Systems

8.08    General Hazards

8.10    Public Nuisances and Abatement Procedures

8.16    Restaurant Employee Outer Garments

8.20    Abandoned, Wrecked, Dismantled or Inoperative Vehicles

8.24    Park and Recreation Areas

8.25    Ambulance Service

8.28    Building Construction Hours of Operation and Noise Control

8.32    Skateboards, Roller Skates and Bicycles

8.34    Regulation of Smoking at Public Places and Places of Employment

8.36    Regulation of Property Maintenance

8.38    Vacant and Abandoned Property Registration

8.40    Comprehensive Residential Rental Unit Inspection Program

8.44    Maintenance of Street Trees

Chapter 8.04
ADOPTION OF HEALTH, SAFETY AND TECHNICAL CONSTRUCTION CODES
Sections:

8.04.050    Appeals board.

8.04.100    Health code.

8.04.105    Health Code Section 11.18.090 added – Abatement of nuisance conveyances, carts, and equipment used in the unlawful peddling of food and beverages by impoundment.

8.04.110    Copy of health code maintained by City Clerk.

8.04.120    Penalty for violation.

8.04.200    Adoption of administrative provisions for the Palmdale Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, Residential Code and Green Building Code.

8.04.201    Adoption of building code.

8.04.202    Copy of Palmdale Building Code maintained by City Clerk.

8.04.203    Addition to the definitions in Chapter 7 of the Palmdale Building Code to include the local agency very high fire hazard severity zone maps.

8.04.204    Amendments to Chapter 16 of the Palmdale Building Code.

8.04.205    Amendments to Chapter 17 of the Palmdale Building Code.

8.04.206    Amendments to Chapter 18 of the Palmdale Building Code.

8.04.207    Amendments to Chapter 19 of the Palmdale Building Code.

8.04.208    Reserved.

8.04.209    Amendments to Chapter 23 of the Palmdale Building Code.

8.04.210    Amendments to Chapter 31 of the Palmdale Building Code.

8.04.235    Reserved.

8.04.240    Adoption of the Palmdale Existing Building Code.

8.04.245    Adoption of Chapter 65, Signs.

8.04.250    Adoption of Chapter 66, Special Safety Provisions.

8.04.255    Adoption of Chapter 67, Security Provisions.

8.04.260    Adoption of Chapter 68, Relocation Permits Provisions.

8.04.265    Chapter 70, Excavation and Grading.

8.04.270    Adoption of Chapter 98, Unoccupied Buildings and Structures.

8.04.300    Adoption of Palmdale Electrical Code.

8.04.330    Copy of electrical code maintained by City Clerk.

8.04.340    Adoption of Palmdale Electrical Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.

8.04.400    Adoption of the Palmdale Fire Code.

8.04.410    Definitions.

8.04.430    Fireworks – Safe and sane fireworks permitted.

8.04.440    Fireworks – Dangerous prohibited.

8.04.450    Fireworks – Permit – Required.

8.04.460    Fireworks – Permit – Application – Procedure.

8.04.470    Fireworks – Permit – Application – Contents.

8.04.480    Fireworks – Permit – Deposits.

8.04.490    Fireworks – Permit – Eligible organizations.

8.04.500    Fireworks – Stand – Operation.

8.04.510    Fireworks – Stand – Construction.

8.04.520    Responsibility.

8.04.530    Violations and penalties.

8.04.540    Infractions.

8.04.550    Amendments to Chapter 49, Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface, of the Palmdale Fire Code.

8.04.555    Amendment to Appendix B, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings.

8.04.600    Adoption of the Palmdale Plumbing Code.

8.04.610    Copy of plumbing code maintained by City Clerk.

8.04.630    Adoption of Palmdale Plumbing Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.

8.04.700    Adoption of Palmdale Mechanical Code.

8.04.710    Copy of mechanical code maintained by City Clerk.

8.04.730    Adoption of the Palmdale Mechanical Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.

8.04.750    Adoption of Palmdale Residential Code.

8.04.751    Copy of residential code maintained by City Clerk.

8.04.752    Adoption of the Palmdale Residential Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.

8.04.753    Amendments to Chapter 3 of the Palmdale Residential Code.

8.04.754    Amendments to Chapter 4 of the Palmdale Residential Code.

8.04.755    Amendments to Chapter 5 of the Palmdale Residential Code.

8.04.756    Amendments to Chapter 6 of the Palmdale Residential Code.

8.04.757    Amendments to Chapter 8 of the Palmdale Residential Code.

8.04.775    Adoption of Palmdale Green Building Standards Code.

8.04.776    Copy of green code maintained by City Clerk.

8.04.777    Adoption of the Palmdale Green Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.

8.04.800    Adoption of housing code by reference.

8.04.810    Copy of housing code maintained by Building Official.

8.04.820    Violations and penalties.

8.04.830    Definitions amended.

8.04.900    Adoption of code.

8.04.910    Code available for review.

8.04.920    Violations and penalties.

8.04.930    Fees.

8.04.940    Definitions amended.

8.04.050 Appeals board.
Whenever any code adopted herein by reference refers to an appeals board or board of appeals, or requires that a board be appointed to hear appeals of the provisions of that adopted code or the determinations of the Building Official, such board shall mean the board of appeals appointed for the Palmdale Building Code, pursuant to Subsection 105 of PMC 8.04.202 and hearings shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth therein. (Ord. 1322 § 1, 2007)

8.04.100 Health code.
Except as hereinafter provided, Chapter 1, entitled “Health Code,” of Title 11, entitled “Health and Safety,” of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended and in effect on April 1, 1998, is adopted by reference and shall constitute the health code of the City. It may be cited as the “Palmdale health code.”

With this section, the City will amend the Municipal Code by adding and adopting County of Los Angeles Ordinance 2018-0037. This action serves to keep the City of Palmdale in compliance with the State Water Resources Control Board regulations and standards for on-site wastewater treatment systems. (Ord. 1515 § 1, 2019; Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.105 Health Code Section 11.18.090 added – Abatement of nuisance conveyances, carts, and equipment used in the unlawful peddling of food and beverages by impoundment.
Section 11.18.090 is added to read as follows:

Section 11.18.090 – Abatement of Nuisance Conveyances, Carts, and Equipment Used in the Unlawful Peddling of Food and Beverages by Impoundment.

A. Definitions.

1. “Conveyance” means any pack, box, cooler, basket, bucket, cart, or other means of transport for foods or beverages to be vended.

2. “Cart” means any motorized or non-motorized handcart, pushcart, wagon, barrow, or other small, wheeled vehicle.

3. “Equipment” means any utensil, tool, pot, vessel, container, or other implements used in a hawking or vending operation or activity.

B. Purpose and Intent. The intent of this section is to abate public nuisances that threaten the public health, safety, and welfare by abating nuisance conveyances, carts, and equipment used in the unlawful peddling of food or beverages and by establishing a process for their impoundment and destruction.

C. Nuisance Declared. Any conveyance, cart, or equipment used in violation of sections 11.18.010, 11.18.030, or 11.18.060 of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated as provided in this section. Any person who uses a conveyance, cart, or equipment in violation thereof, or who causes another person, including but not limited to his servant, agent, or employee to use such a conveyance, cart, or equipment in violation thereof is responsible for creating and maintaining a public nuisance. Any person or his servant, agent, or employee who owns, leases, conducts or maintains any conveyance, cart or equipment in violation of this Chapter is responsible for creating a public nuisance.

D. Impoundment of Conveyance, Cart, and Equipment.

1. A peace officer or code enforcement officer may impound any conveyance, cart, or equipment used in violation of sections 11.18.010, 11.18.030, or 11.18.060 of this Chapter.

2. A peace officer or code enforcement officer impounding a conveyance, cart, or equipment under this section shall complete a Receipt of Impoundment and deliver it to the person from whose possession the conveyance, cart, or equipment was impounded. The Receipt of Impoundment shall be completed in accordance with Penal Code Section 1412 and include:

a. A description and/or photograph of the conveyance, cart, or equipment as well as the date and place the conveyance, cart, or equipment was impounded.

b. The authority and reason for the impoundment.

c. The name, address and telephone number of the public agency impounding the conveyance, cart, or equipment.

d. The name, address and telephone number, if provided, of the person having possession of the conveyance, cart, or equipment at the time it was impounded.

e. The date, time and location of the administrative hearing provided for in subsection E.

3. Within three (3) court days of impounding the conveyance, cart, or equipment, the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department or the city of Palmdale shall file a post-impoundment Statement of Probable Cause for review by a neutral magistrate. The reviewing magistrate shall limit review to the question of whether probable cause exists for the conveyance, cart, or equipment to be held under this section. If the reviewing magistrate finds that no probable cause exists for the conveyance, cart, or equipment to be held, the conveyance, cart, or equipment shall, within two (2) business days of that finding, be made available to be released to the legal owner or the person having possession of the conveyance, cart, or equipment at the time it was impounded, in accordance with subsection F below.

4. Any conveyance, cart, or equipment impounded pursuant to this section may be held as evidence in any proceeding brought by the District Attorney or City Attorney.

E. Administrative Hearing.

1. An administrative hearing shall be conducted by the city of Palmdale at the date, time, and location within the city of Palmdale identified in the Receipt of Impoundment. A person contesting the impoundment or abatement of the nuisance shall be given the option of appearing in person, or submitting his opposition and evidence in writing, to present and rebut evidence and to argue his case. The administrative hearing shall take place within 31 calendar days of the impoundment of the conveyance, cart, or equipment. The administrative hearing shall provide an independent, objective, fair, and impartial review of the facts of the case and render a final administrative decision.

2. The city of Palmdale shall appoint or contract with qualified examiners to conduct the administrative hearing. Examiners shall demonstrate those qualifications, training, and objectivity necessary to conduct a fair and impartial review. An examiner’s continued employment, compensation, and benefits shall not, directly or indirectly, be linked to the decisions of the examiner.

3. The officer or person who impounded the conveyance, cart, or equipment shall not be required to participate in the administrative hearing. The impounding agency shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the Receipt of Impoundment and the Statement of Probable Cause reviewed by a neutral magistrate, which, in proper form, shall be prima facie evidence that the conveyance, cart, or equipment is a public nuisance and should be abated.

4. The examiner’s decision shall be in writing and include a statement of the factual and legal basis of the decision.

5. The examiner’s decision following the administrative hearing may be personally delivered by the examiner to the legal owner or the person having possession of the conveyance, cart, or equipment at the time it was impounded or delivered by first class mail.

6. Following a determination by the examiner that the conveyance, cart, or equipment constitutes a public nuisance, the impounding agency shall destroy the nuisance conveyance, cart, or equipment.

7. Following a determination by the examiner that the conveyance, cart, or equipment does not constitute a public nuisance, the impounding agency shall, within two (2) business days of that determination, make available to be released the conveyance, cart, or equipment to the legal owner or the person having possession of the conveyance, cart, or equipment at the time it was impounded, in accordance with subsection F.

F. Release of Impounded Conveyance, Cart and Equipment. Any conveyance, cart, or equipment ordered to be released shall be made available to the legal owner or the person from whose possession the conveyance, cart, or equipment was impounded provided he or she presents to the impounding agency the Receipt of Impoundment or proof of ownership, and photographic identification, as defined in Section 1.04.100. The impounded conveyance, cart, or equipment will be made available for release for a period of 30 days from the date the conveyance, cart, or equipment was ordered released. Any conveyance, cart, or equipment not claimed within 30 days shall be deemed abandoned and destroyed.

G. Other Remedies Available. Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit any other criminal, civil, or equitable remedies available to the city of Palmdale to punish a violation or abate a public nuisance.

(Ord. 1317 § 8, 2007; Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.110 Copy of health code maintained by City Clerk.
A copy of Los Angeles County Code, Title 11, Chapter 1, shall be kept and maintained by the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.120 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision, or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the Palmdale health code. Any person who violates or fails to comply with the Palmdale health code is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be prosecuted and punished pursuant to Chapter 1.08 PMC. In addition to the penalties therein provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of the Palmdale health code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the City, including, but not limited to, by summary abatement. Each day such violation or condition continues shall constitute a new and separate offense. (Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.200 Adoption of administrative provisions for the Palmdale Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, Residential Code and Green Building Code.
The following provisions are adopted as the administrative provisions and constitute Chapter 1 of the Palmdale Building Code, Palmdale Plumbing Code, Palmdale Mechanical Code, Palmdale Residential Code, Palmdale Green Code and Article 89 of the Palmdale Electrical Code to read and to be cited as set forth herein below. The subsections are numbered to be consistent with the numbering of the codes adopted by reference.

CHAPTER 1 ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS

SECTION 101 Titles, Purpose and Scope

101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Palmdale Administrative provisions of the Palmdale building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code, may be cited as such and will be referred to herein as the PAP.

101.2 Purpose and Intent.

The purpose of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code is to provide minimum standards to preserve the public peace, health and safety by regulating the design, construction, quality of materials, use, occupancy, location and maintenance of all buildings, structures, grading and certain equipment as specifically set forth herein. Consistent with this purpose, the provisions of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code are intended and always have been intended to confer a benefit on the community as a whole and are not intended to establish a duty of care toward any particular person.

The PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code, shall not be construed to hold the City of Palmdale or any officer, employee or agent thereof responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of any inspection authorized herein or by reason of the issuance or nonissuance of any permit authorized herein, and/or for any action or omission in connection with the application and/or enforcement of the Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code provision and/or any provisions of the PAP. The adoption of the Palmdale Administrative provisions, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code the City does not intend to impose on itself, its employees or agents any mandatory duties of care toward persons and property within its jurisdiction so as to provide a basis of civil liability for damages. This section is declaratory of existing law and is not to be construed as suggesting that such was not the purpose and intent of previous code adoptions.

101.3 Scope.

The provisions of this PAP shall apply to the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, and use of any building or structure and grading for the Palmdale Building, plumbing, mechanical, Electrical, Residential and Green codes within the City and to such work or use by the City.

The provisions of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code shall not apply to work located primarily in a public way other than pedestrian protection structures required by Chapter 33; public utility towers and poles; equipment not specifically regulated; hydraulic flood control structures; work exempted by; or minor work of negligible hazard to life specifically exempted by the Building Official.

101.3.1 Repairs, and Alterations

Additions, alterations, repairs and changes of use or occupancy in all buildings and structures shall comply with the provisions for new buildings and structures except as otherwise provided in Chapter 34 of the Building Code. Where, in any specific case, different sections of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable.

In the event any differences in requirements exist between the accessibility requirements of the Palmdale Building Code and Part 2, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, then Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations shall govern.

In existing buildings or premises in which any installations are to be altered, repaired or renovated, deviations from the provisions of the PPC are permitted, provided such deviations are found to be necessary and are first approved by the Building Official. Any building may have its existing use, maintenance or repair continued when the Building Official determines that its use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and no hazard to the public health, safety or welfare has been created by such building or installation.

Existing plumbing and any drains may be used in connection with new buildings or new plumbing and drainage work only when they are found on examination and test to conform in all respects to the requirements governing new work, and the Building Official shall notify the owner to make any changes necessary to conform to the Palmdale Plumbing Code. No building or part thereof, shall be erected or placed over any part of a drainage system, which is constructed of materials other than those approved elsewhere in the PPC for use under or within a building. Existing building sewers and building drains may be used in connection with plumbing alterations or repairs if such sewers or drains have been properly maintained and were installed in accordance with the applicable laws in effect at the time of installation. Any plumbing system existing on January 1, 1975, shall be deemed to have conformed to applicable law in effect at the time of installation and to have been maintained in good condition if currently in good and safe condition and working properly.

All openings into a drainage, sewer or vent system, excepting those openings to which plumbing fixtures are properly connected or which constitute vent terminals, shall be permanently plugged or capped in an approved manner, using the appropriate materials required by this PPC.

101.3.2 Maintenance.

The owner or the owner’s agent shall maintain all buildings, plumbing, mechanical, electrical and drainage system of any premises under the jurisdiction of the Building Official in a safe and sanitary operating condition. Whenever it is brought to the attention of the Building Official that any construction or work regulated by this PPC is dangerous, unsafe, and unsanitary or a menace to life, health or property, or is in violation of any code, the Building Official shall have the authority to make an investigation.

The Building Official shall have the authority to order any person, firm or corporation using or maintaining any such condition or responsible for the use or maintenance thereof to discontinue the use of or maintenance thereof, or to repair, alter, change, remove or demolish same, as he, in his discretion, may consider necessary for the proper protection of life, health or property.

The Building Official shall have the authority to order any equipment found to be unsafe and a hazard to life and safety disconnected from the energy source that supplies the equipment. The Building Official shall attach a notice to the equipment stating the equipment shall not be reconnected until approved to do so by the Building Official.

101.3.3 Existing Construction.

No provision of the codes shall be deemed to require a change in any building system or any other work regulated by the PAP in or on an existing building or lot when such work was installed and is maintained in accordance with law in effect prior to the effective date of the PAP, except when any such building, system or other work regulated by the PAP is determined by the Building Official to be in fact dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary, or a nuisance and a menace to life, health, or property.

SECTION 102 UNSAFE BUILDINGS.

See City of Palmdale Housing code and/or Palmdale Dangerous Building code.

SECTION 103 – VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES

103.1 Compliance with Code.

It shall be unlawful for a person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, connect, convert, demolish, equip, or perform any other work on any building or structure or portion thereof, or perform any grading in the City of Palmdale, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of the PAP, Palmdale building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code.

103.2 Violation.

It shall be unlawful for any person to own, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or portion thereof, in the City of Palmdale, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code.

103.3 Penalty.

Violations of any provision of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code is punishable as set forth in Palmdale Municipal Code Title 1. It shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions is committed, continued or permitted. The provisions for punishment in this subsection are in addition to and independent of any other sanctions, penalties or costs which are or may be imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code.

103.4 Recordation of Violation.

103.4.1 General.

The Building Official may record a notice with the county recorder’s office that a property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any code provision provided that the provisions of this section are complied with. The remedy provided by this section is cumulative to any other enforcement actions permitted.

103.4.2 Recordation.

If (1) the Building official determines that any property, building or structure, or any part thereof, is in violation of any provision of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code Provisions; and if (2) the Building Official gives written notice as specified below of said violation; and if (3) within 15 days of said notice, the property, buildings, or structures thereon are not brought into compliance then the Building Official may have sole discretion to, at any time thereafter, record with the county recorder’s office a notice that the property and/or any building or structure located thereon is in violation.

103.4.3 Notice.

The written notice given pursuant to this section shall indicate: 1. The nature of the violation(s); and 2. That if the violation is not remedied to the satisfaction of the Building Official within 15 days the Building Official may, at any time thereafter, record with the county recorder’s office a notice that the property and/or any building or structure located thereon is in violation of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and/or Green building code. The notice shall be posted on the property and shall be mailed to the owner of the property as indicated on the last equalized county assessment roll. The mailed notice may be by registered, certified or first class mail. The 15-day period for achieving compliance with shall run from the date the property is posted or from the date of the mailing of the notice, whichever is later.

103.4.4 Rescission.

Any person who desires to have recorded a notice rescinding the notice of violation may present evidence of compliance to the Building Official. If the Building Official determines that the violation has been satisfactorily resolved, the Building official shall record a notice rescinding the prior notice of violation.

Following the recordation of the notice of violation, the Building Official is not required to make any inspection or review of the premises to determine the continued existence of the cited violation. It is the responsibility of the property owner, occupant or other similarly interested private party to present evidence of compliance to the Building Official.

103.4.5 Costs.

Any person that violates any code provision shall be responsible for the costs of any and all code enforcement actions taken by the Building Official in response to such violations. These costs shall be based on an accounting of all expenses, including overhead, incurred in enforcing the provisions.

SECTION 104 – ORGANIZATION AND ENFORCEMENT

104.1 Building and Safety Division.

There is hereby established the Building and Safety division of the Department of Public Works.

104.2 Powers and Duties of the Building Official.

The Building Official of the Building and Safety division for the City of Palmdale shall have all authority granted by the PAP, Palmdale Building, Plumbing, Residential, Green, Mechanical, Electrical, Housing and Abatement of Dangerous Building Codes and all mandated State of California regulations and codes. The Building Official shall have the power to render interpretations of these codes and to adopt and enforce rules and supplemental regulations in order to clarify the application of its provisions. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformance with the intent and purpose of these codes and available to the public for review.

104.2.1 Deputies.

In accordance with the procedures of the City of Palmdale and with the approval of the city manager, the Building Official may appoint such number of officers, inspectors and assistants, and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. The Building Official may deputize such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the building and safety division.

104.2.2 Safety Assessments of Structures In the Event of a Catastrophic Event, Disaster, or Declaration of Emergency.

104.2.2.1 Intent. It is the Intent of the City Council to authorize the Building Official to issue orders regarding the occupancy of buildings, structures, or other premises in the City of Palmdale by the posting of safety assessment placards in the event of a catastrophic event, disaster, or other local, state, or federal declaration of emergency.

104.2.2.2. Applicability. The provisions of this section 104.2.2 and its subsections are applicable to all buildings, structures, and other premises (whether improved or unimproved land), of all occupancies in the City of Palmdale.

104.2.2.3. Safety Assessment – Definition. “Safety assessment” shall mean a visual, non-destructive examination of a building, structure, or other premises (whether improved or unimproved land), or a portion thereof, for the purpose of determining its condition for entry or continued occupancy.

104.2.2.4. Safety Assessment Placards.

(A) Upon completing a safety assessment of any building, structure, or premises (whether improved or unimproved land) in the event of a catastrophic event, disaster, or declaration of a federal, state, or local disaster or emergency, the Building Official or his authorized designee, shall post a Safety Assessment Placard at each apparent entrance into such building, structure, or premises or at an otherwise conspicuous place thereon. Each placard shall cite Palmdale Building Code Section 104.2.2 et seq. as its authority, and shall contain the address and telephone number of the Building and Safety Department. The Building Official or his authorized designee performing the safety assessment shall legibly note on the placard his or her name or registration number, the facility name, if any, and address to which the placard pertains, and the date and time the safety assessment was completed. Each placard shall also contain a statement prohibiting its removal, alteration, or covering until authorized by the Building Official.

(B) Upon completing a safety assessment, the Building Official or his authorized designee shall post one of the three Safety Assessment Placards set forth in this subsection. The Building Official may, but is not required to, assign a color for each type of placard. The following are verbal descriptions of the Safety Assessment Placards to be used to designate the condition of buildings, structures, or other premises.

1) “INSPECTED – Lawful Occupancy Permitted” is to be posted on any building, structure, or other premises (whether improved or unimproved land) wherein no apparent structural or other hazard has been found in the course of a safety assessment. This placard shall not be construed to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

2) “RESTRICTED USE” is to be posted on each building, structure, or other premises (whether improved or unimproved land) that has been damaged wherein the damage requires some form of restriction to its use or occupancy. The placard shall note in general terms the type of damage encountered and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. The placard shall constitute a lawful order of the Building Official, the violation of which is punishable as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of the Palmdale Municipal Code.

3) “UNSAFE – Do Not Enter or Occupy” is to be posted on each building or structure, or premises (whether improved or unimproved land) that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings, structures, or premises posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the Building Official, or his or her authorized designee. Safety assessment teams, law enforcement, and disaster response personnel shall be authorized to enter at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order and shall so state. The placard shall note in general terms the type of damage observed during the safety assessment. The placard shall constitute a lawful order of the Building Official, the violation of which may be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 of this Code.

(C) Once it has been posted on a building, structure, or other premises, it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity other than the Building Official or his authorized designee to remove, alter, cover, or deface a placard.

104.2.3.1 Right of Entry.

Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of or perform any duty imposed by this PAP or other applicable law, or whenever the Building Official or an authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which makes such building or premises hazardous, unsafe or dangerous for any reason specified in this PAP or other similar law, the Building Official or an authorized representative is hereby authorized to enter such property at any reasonable time and to inspect the same and perform any duty imposed upon the Building Official by this PAP or other applicable law, provided that (1) if such property is occupied, the Building Official shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining the reasons therefor and (2) if such property is unoccupied, the Building Official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the property and request entry, explaining the reasons therefor. If such entry cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence or if entry is refused, the Building Official or an authorized representative shall have some recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspect the property.

104.2.3.2. Hazardous Condition

Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the Building Official or an authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that the building or premises is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the public health or safety, the Building Official shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, the Building Official shall first present credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining the reasons therefor and the purpose of the inspection.

104.2.3.3 Representatives.

“Authorized representative” shall include the officers named in Section 104.2.1 and their authorized inspection personnel.

104.2.3.4 Denial of Access.

No person shall fail or refuse, after proper demand has been made upon such person as provided in this section, to promptly permit the Building Official or an authorized representative to make any inspection provided for by this PAP. Any person violating this section shall be punishable as set forth in Title 1 of the Palmdale Municipal Code.

104.2.4 Stop Orders.

Whenever any building or grading work is being done contrary to the provisions of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code, or other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented through the enforcement of this PAP, the Building Official or in the case of grading the City Engineer may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the Building Official or City Engineer to proceed with the work.

104.2.5 Occupancy Violations.

Whenever any structure or portion thereof is being used contrary to the provisions of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code or whenever any structure or portion thereof which was built contrary to these codes is being used or occupied, the Building Official may order such use discontinued and the structure, or portion thereof, vacated by notice served on any person causing such use to be continued. Such person shall discontinue the use within 10 days after receipt of such notice to make the structure, or portion thereof, comply with the requirements of these codes, provided, however, that the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code shall apply in the event of an unsafe building.

104.2.6 Liability.

The provision of Division 3.6 of Title I of the Government Code governs the liability and indemnification of the Building Official and any subordinates.

104.2.7 Modifications.

Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in carrying out the provisions of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code, the Building Official may grant modifications for individual cases, provided the Building Official shall first find that a special individual reason makes the strict letter of the provision impractical and that the modification is in conformity with the spirit and purpose of the code provision and that such modification does not lessen any fire protection requirements or any degree of structural integrity. The details of any action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the files of the enforcement agency. A written application for the granting of such modifications shall be submitted together with a filing fee as adopted in the current city fee resolution.

104.2.8 Alternate Materials and Methods of Construction.

The provisions of the respective codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed, provided any such alternate has been approved. The Building Official may approve any such alternate, provided that he or she finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability, safety and sanitation. Copies of the results of all such tests shall be retained for a period of not less than two years after the acceptance of the structure.

104.2.9 Tests.

Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the provisions of any code requirement or evidence that any material or any construction does not conform to the requirements of any provision, or in order to substantiate claims for alternate materials or methods of construction, the Building Official may require tests as proof of compliance to be made by an approved agency at the expense of the owner or the owner’s agent. Test methods shall be as specified by nationally recognized standards for the material in question. If there are no appropriate test methods specified the Building Official shall determine the test procedure. The Building Official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding its use. A written application for use of an alternate material or method of construction shall be submitted together with a filing fee and staff review fees as adopted in the current fee resolution. For the requirements for an approved fabricator, see Palmdale Building code.

104.2.10 Cooperation of Other Officials.

The Building Official may request, and shall receive, so far as may be necessary in the discharge of his or her duties, the assistance and cooperation of other officials of the City.

104.2.11 Service.

Whenever this PAP or any Palmdale code requires a notice to be served by personal service or by registered or certified mail, it shall be deemed a reasonable effort has been made to serve such notice when registered or certified letters have been mailed to the address of the interested party as shown on the official record and/or the record of the county assessor. When an address is not so listed or contact cannot be made at the listed address, the service shall be by posting a copy of the notice on the structure.

104.2.12 Reports and Records.

The Building Official shall keep a permanent, accurate account of all fees and other moneys collected and received under the provisions of the PAP or any city ordinance, the names of the persons upon whose account the same were paid, and the date and amount thereof, together with the location of the building or premises to which they relate.

104.2.13 Amendments to Ordinances.

Whenever any reference is made to any other ordinance, such reference shall be deemed to include all future amendments thereto.

104.3 Definitions.

Whenever any of the names or terms defined in this section is used in the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section.

AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION shall mean the Building Official.

BUILDING DEPARTMENT shall mean the Building and Safety Division of the City of Palmdale.

BUILDING OFFICIAL shall mean the Building Official of the Division of Building and Safety charged with the administration, interpretation and enforcement of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code, or the Building Official’s duly authorized representative.

BUILDING REHABILITATION APPEALS BOARD shall mean the Appeals Board.

CITY ENGINEER shall mean City Engineer of the City of Palmdale.

DANGEROUS BUILDING CODE shall mean the Palmdale Abatement of Dangerous Building Code.

DEMOLITION. Whenever the term “demolition” or “demolish” is used in this PBC or other Palmdale codes it shall include the removal of the foundation or basement and resulting debris from such demolition and the filling of excavations exposed by such demolition as required by any other laws or ordinances and the removal and/or capping of any sewage disposal system.

ELECTRICAL CODE shall mean the Palmdale Electrical Code.

FIRE CODE or LOS ANGELES COUNTY FIRE CODE shall mean the Palmdale Fire code.

FIRE DEPARTMENT shall mean the Los Angeles County Fire District.

GREEN CODE shall mean the Palmdale Green Code

HEALTH CODE or LOS ANGELES COUNTY HEALTH CODE shall mean the Health Code as adopted by the City of Palmdale.

HOUSING CODE shall mean the Palmdale Housing Code.

LOS ANGELES COUNTY FLOOD CONTROL DISTRICT shall mean the Department of Public Works.

MECHANICAL CODE shall mean the Palmdale Mechanical Code.

MECHANICAL OFFICIAL shall mean Building Official.

PLUMBING CODE shall mean the Palmdale Plumbing Code.

PLUMBING OFFICIAL shall mean Building Official.

RESIDENTIAL BUILDING CODE shall mean the Palmdale Residential Code.

ROAD COMMISSIONER shall mean the Director of Public Works.

SECTION 105. APPEALS

105.1 Board of Appeals.

In order to conduct the hearings provided for in this PAP there shall be a board of appeals consisting of five members who are qualified by experience and training to pass upon matters pertaining to building construction. One member shall be a practicing architect, one a competent builder, one a lawyer, one an engineer, each of whom shall have had at least five years experience in the construction industry as an architect, builder, lawyer, or engineer and one physically challenged individual.

Members of the Board of Appeals shall hold office for a term of two years but shall continue to serve until their successor is appointed and takes office. All vacancies shall be appointed by the City Council.

The building official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary to the board. The members of the board of appeals shall be appointed by the City Council and shall hold office at its pleasure. If the appeals board has not been appointed, the City Council, for expediency, hereby authorizes the City Manager as follows.

105.1.1. The City Manager may appoint one or more administrative hearing officers to conduct the appeals hearings.

105.1.2 Limitations of authority.

The board of appeals or hearing officer shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative portions of the PAP nor shall the board be empowered to waive requirements of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code.

105.1.3 Accessibility Appeals Board.

In order to conduct the hearings on written appeals regarding notice and orders of the building official and to ratify certain exempting actions of the building official in enforcing the accessibility requirements of the Palmdale Administrative provisions or any Palmdale Code for privately funded construction, to serve as an advisor to the building official on disabled access matters, there shall be an accessibility appeals board which shall be the Appeals Board as Defined in Section 105.1.

The Accessibility appeals board may approve or disapprove interpretations and enforcement actions taken by the building official. All such approvals or disapprovals for privately funded construction shall be final and conclusive as to the building official in the absence of fraud or prejudicial abuse of discretion.

105.2. Appeal.

Any person adversely affected by any regulation, interpretation, rule or decision may appeal from any notice and order of the building official as determined by this PAP or Building, Green, Uniform Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, Housing, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing Codes, by filing at the office of the Building Official a written appeal containing the names and addresses of all persons filing the appeal; the interest of each appellant being adversely affected, a description of the specific order, action, interpretation or decision being appealed, a statement of the reasons for the appeal and the relief being sought. The written appeal must be signed by all persons filing the appeal.

105.3. Time for appeal. Any appeal must be filed within 30 days from the date of the service of the order or notice of the decision which is the subject of the appeal, provided, however, that if the appeal concerns a building or structure in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or adjacent property and is ordered vacated and is posted in accordance with Section 404 of the Abatement of Dangerous Building Codes and Section 1104 of the Housing Code, such appeal must be filed within 10 days from the date of the service of the notice, and order of the building official. If the office of the Building Official does not receive the appeal within the times specified above, the right to an appeal shall be waived and the Order, notice or decision shall be confirmed and final.

105.4. Hearing on Appeal.

Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the Building Official shall schedule a hearing before the appeals board or before the Administrative Hearing Officer appointed by the City Manager. The hearing shall be held within sixty days of the City’s receipt of the written appeal. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the Building Official by mailing such notice to the address or addresses provided in the appeal.

105.6 Staying Of Order under Appeal.

Except for vacation orders made pursuant to the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code and the Housing Code, enforcement of any notice and order of the building official issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal there from which is properly and timely filed.

105.7 Procedures For Conduct Of Hearing Appeals.

Administrative hearings are informal and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The appellant may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the Office of the Building Official at least three (3) City business days prior to the hearing. If the appellant fails to attend the scheduled hearing, or does not submit a written declaration in a timely manner, he or she shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. In such an instance, the Board of Appeals or hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and not render a decision. In such instances, the original Order or decision shall be deemed confirmed.

105.7.1 Continuances. Hearings may be continued once at the request of an appellant or the Building Official. The Board of Appeals or hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause.

105.7.2. Hearing Decision. After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the Appeals Board or Hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or overturn the appealed Order or decision and shall state the reasons therefor. If the Order or decision is upheld, Decision of the hearing officer or Appeals Board shall specify deadline(s) for compliance with the Building Official’s Order.

105.7.3 The hearing officer shall serve appellant(s) by first class mail with a copy of the written decision. The date the decision is deposited with the U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of an appellant to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, City action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this Chapter.

105.7.4. Decisions of the Appeals Board or hearing officer are final.

105.7.5. Record.

A record of the entire proceedings shall be made by tape recording or by any other means determined to be appropriate by the board.

105.7.6. Subpoenas

The board or hearing officer may obtain the issuance and service of a subpoena for the attendance of witnesses or the production of other evidence at a hearing upon the request of a member of the board or upon the written request of any party. It is a violation of the Code punishable as set forth in Title 1 of this Code for any person to refuse without lawful excuse to attend any hearing or to produce material evidence which the person possesses or controls as required by any subpoena.

105.7.7 Inspection of the premises.

The board or the hearing officer may inspect any building or premises involved in the appeal during the course of the hearing, provided that (i) notice of such inspection shall be given to the parties before the inspection is made, (ii) the parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection, and (iii) the board or the hearing officer shall state for the record upon completion of the inspection the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn there from. Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the board or Hearing Officer.

105.7.8. Fees.

A fee as adopted by the current fee resolution shall be paid to the building official whenever a person requests a hearing or a rehearing before the appeals boards provided for in this section. All requests to appeal determinations, orders or actions of the building official or to seek modifications of previous orders of the appeals boards shall be presented in writing as outlined above.

SECTION 106 PERMITS

106.1 Permits Required.

No person, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, connect, convert, demolish, or equip any building, structure, automatic fire-extinguishing system or portion thereof, perform any grading, or perform landscaping as regulated by City of Palmdale Landscape Ordinance, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit for each such building, structure, plumbing system or device, mechanical system or device, electrical system or device, automatic fire-extinguishing system, grading or landscaping from the Building Official or City Engineer.

EXCEPTION: A single permit may be issued for a dwelling and one accessory building of one-story construction that are not over 600 square feet (55.74 m2) in area and are on the same property.

106.2 Unpermitted Structures.

No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any “Unpermitted structure.” “Unpermitted structure” shall be defined as any structure, or portion thereof, that was erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, connected, converted, demolished or equipped, at any point in time, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the Building Official.

106.3 Work Exempted.

A permit shall not be required for the following:

Building and Residential Code:

1. One-story detached accessory buildings used as tool and storage sheds, playhouses and similar uses, provided the floor area does not exceed 120 square feet (11.15 m2).

2. Wire fences not over 12 feet (3658 mm) in height and other fences not over 6 feet (1829 mm) in height.

3. Steel tanks supported on a foundation not more than two feet (610 mm) above grade when the height does not exceed 1 1/2 times the diameter.

4. Movable cases, counters and partitions not over six feet high except all work shall comply with handicapped access provisions.

5. One-story detached, private lath houses, glass houses (greenhouses) and pergolas, provided the horizontally projected roof area does not exceed 400 square feet (37.16 in2).

6. Bridges not involving buildings.

7. Retaining walls that retain not more than three feet (914 mm) of earth, unless supporting a surcharge such as a slope or building, or impounding flammable liquids.

8. Motion picture, television and theater stage sets and scenery, except when used as a building.

9. Radio and television antennae towers which do not exceed 45 feet (13716 mm) in height and ground support dish antennas not exceeding 15 feet (4572 mm) in height above finished grade in any position.

10. Light standards that do not exceed 30 feet (9144 mm) in height.

11. Flagpoles not erected upon a building and not more than 30 feet (4572 mm) high.

12. A tree house provided it does not exceed 64 square feet (5.94 m2) in area or 8 feet (2438 mm) in height from floor to roof and the ceiling height as established by door height or plate line does not exceed 6 feet (1829 mm).

13. Canopies or awnings attached to a Group R or U Occupancy and extending not more than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the exterior wall of the building.

14. Sheds, office or storage buildings, and other structures incidental to and work authorized by a valid grading or building permit. Such structures must be removed upon expiration of the permit or completion of the work covered by the permit.

15. Oil derricks.

17. Platforms, walks and driveways not more than 30 inches (762 mm) above grade and not over any basement or story below.

18. Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R, Division 3 Occupancy in which the pool walls are entirely above the adjacent grade and the capacity does not exceed 10,000 gallons (18,927 L).

19. Playground equipment.

Plumbing Code:

Work Not Requiring Permit

No permit shall be required in the case of any repair work as follows:

1. The stopping of leaks in drains, soil, waste or vent pipe; provided, however, that should any trap, drainpipe, soil, waste or vent pipe be or become defective and it becomes necessary to remove and replace the same with new material in any part or parts, the same shall be considered as new work and a permit shall be procured and inspection made as hereinbefore provided.

2. No permit shall be required for the clearing of stoppages or the repairing of leaks in pipes, valves, or fixtures when such repairs do not involve or require the replacement or rearrangement of valves, pipes or fixtures.

3. No permit, test or inspection shall be required where a plumbing system or part thereof is set up for exhibition purposes and has no connection with a water or drainage system.

Mechanical Code

No permit shall be required for the following:

1. Any portable heating appliance.

2. Any portable ventilating equipment.

3. Any portable comfort-cooling unit.

4. Any steam, hot, or chilled water piping within any comfort heating or cooling equipment regulated by this PMC.

5. Replacement of any component part or assembly of an appliance, which does not alter its original approval and complies with other applicable requirements of this PMC.

6. Any portable evaporative cooler.

7. Any refrigerating equipment that is a part of the equipment for which a permit has been issued pursuant to the requirements of this PMC.

8. Any unit refrigerating system.

Electrical Code.

1. Minor repair works such as the replacement of lamps, switches, receptacle devices, sockets, taping bare joints and the like, or the connection of portable motor and appliances to suitable receptacles which have been permanently installed.

2. The wiring for temporary theater, motion picture or television stage sets.

3. The repair or replacement of fixed motors, transformers, apparatus, or appliances of the same type and rating in the same location.

4. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances, apparatus, or equipment operating at less than 25 volts and not capable of supplying more than 50 watts of energy.

5. Low-energy power, control, and signal circuits that are not an integral part of an appliance and in which the power is limited from a source having a rated output of not more than 30 volts and 1,000 volt-amperes.

6. Temporary Holiday decorative lighting.

7. The installation of temporary wiring for testing or experimental purposes within suitable facilities.

8. Repair or replacement of over current devices.

9. Portable generators, motors, appliances, tools, power outlets, and other portable equipment connected by means of a cord or cable having an attachment plug.

10. The installation by Southern California Edison Company of radio controlled relays on privately owned air conditioning and agricultural irrigation pumping equipment in the company’s pilot program of energy conservation through electrical load management, entitled “Air Conditioner Cycling and Agricultural and Pumping Interruptible Programs”; provided that:

a. The relays shall be tested and labeled by Underwriters’ Laboratories, Inc.;

b. The Electrical Official shall approve of specifications for the installation of the relays;

c. The relays shall be installed and maintained by Southern California Edison Company or its contractors; and

d. The Southern California Edison Company shall make available for random inspection, upon request of and by the City, designated relay installations to ensure code compliance.

11. Private telephone, intercom, sound and communication systems; provided, however, that a permit shall be obtained for the power supplies required by the above systems.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, all electrical wiring and equipment shall comply with all electrical code requirements.

Unless otherwise exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and mechanical permits may be required for the above-exempted items as applicable.

Exemption from the permit requirements shall not be deemed to grant authorization for any work to be done in any manner in violation of the provisions of other laws or ordinances.

106.4 Application for Permit.

106.4.1 Application.

To obtain a permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall: 1) Identify and describe the work to be covered by the permit for which application is made. 2) Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be done by lot, block, tract and house and street address, or similar description that will readily identify and definitely locate the proposed building or work. 3) Show the use or occupancy of all parts of the building. 4) Be accompanied by plans and specifications as required. 5) State the valuation of the proposed work or, for grading, the volume of earthwork to be handled. 6) State the area in square feet (m2), to be landscaped and the source of water for irrigation. 7) List of all equipment, devices and systems when a combination permit is not being applied for. 8) Be signed by the permittee, or an authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence to indicate such authority. 9) Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the Building Official.

106.4.2 Plans and Specifications.

General:

Within each application for a permit and when required by the Building Official for enforcement of any provisions of the Palmdale codes, plans and specifications shall be submitted in an electronic format approved by the Building Official. If approved prior to submittal by the Building Official two sets of paper plans may be submitted. Additional storage and processing fees may apply as adopted by the current city fee resolution. The Building Official may require plans and specifications to be prepared and designed by an engineer, architect or landscape architect licensed or registered by the state to practice as such. Submittals shall include construction inspection documents completed by the design professional.

EXCEPTION: When authorized by the Building official, complete plans and specifications need not be submitted for the following when drawings and data sufficient to determine the nature and scope of the work are submitted for review:

1. One story Type V building room additions with less than a 10 ft. span.

2. Group U, Division I Occupancies of Type V conventional wood-stud construction; or

3. Small and unimportant work as determined by the Building Official.

Plans, specifications, reports or documents for work regulated by the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 7, Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code shall bear the signature and number or seal of a civil engineer, structural engineer or architect registered or certified to practice in the State of California. A signature or seal shall not be required for work authorized by the said article to be performed by a person not registered or certified as a civil engineer, structural engineer or architect. For buildings exceeding 160 feet (48.77 m) in height, the structural calculations and each sheet of structural plans shall be prepared under the supervision of and shall bear the signature or approved stamp of a person authorized by the State of California to use the title structural engineer. In addition, all architectural sheets shall bear the signature or approved stamp of an architect licensed by the State of California.

106.4.3 Information on Plans and Specifications.

Building, Residential, and Green code:

Plans and specifications shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of the work proposed and show in detail that it will conform to the provisions of the Codes and all relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet of each set of plans shall have the address and street name of the location of the work and the name and address of the owner. The name and contact persons of who prepared the plans if other then the owner shall also be given. Plans shall include a plot plan showing the location of any proposed buildings and of every existing building on the property. In lieu of detailed specifications, the Building Official may approve references on the plans to a specific section or part of the codes or other ordinances or laws.

Computations, stress diagrams and other data sufficient to show the correctness of the plans shall be submitted. Plans for buildings more than two stories in height of other than Group U Occupancies shall indicate how required structural and fire-resistive integrity will be maintained where a penetration will be made for electrical, mechanical, plumbing and communication conduits, pipes and similar systems. Where proposed construction will affect site drainage, existing and proposed drainage patterns shall be shown on the plot plan and shall be approved by the City Engineer. The plans shall show all mitigation measures required under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the City of Palmdale. For the application of NPDES permit requirements as they apply to grading plans and permits, see Chapter 70 of this code.

Plumbing Code:

Plans, specifications, drawings, listings, manufacturer’s installation instruction, descriptions and diagrams necessary to show clearly the character, kind and extent of plumbing work covered by applications for a permit,

Mechanical Code:

1. Installations where the aggregate Btu input capacity for either comfort heating or comfort cooling is more than 500,000 Btu. Plans shall detail all the mechanical systems, including comfort heating systems, comfort cooling systems, refrigeration systems and ventilation systems and hoods.

2. Installations of the following individual systems:

a. Food processing establishment containing a commercial-type I or II hood;

b. Garage ventilation systems installed in compliance with the provisions of the Palmdale Building Code;

c. Stair pressurization systems installed in compliance with the provisions of the Palmdale Building Code;

d. Product conveying duct systems installed in compliance with Chapter 5 of this PMC;

e. Tenant improvement installations requiring review to verify compliance with the State’s Energy Regulations, when a building permit is not required for that work.

Electrical Code:

(1) Every plan shall be a type approved by the Building Official. The information contained on the plans shall be drawn in a professional manner, be clearly legible, and contain the information required in subsection (2) below. The plans for the electrical wiring in a building shall be of a scale no smaller than one-eighth inch per foot. Reasonable symbols satisfactory to the department shall be used on all plans.

EXCEPTION.

A scale of less than one-eighth inch per foot may be used where the plan can be read and understood.

(2) The following is required to be shown on the plans required for the electrical system and wiring installation.

A complete plan showing the layout of the proposed electric wiring for each floor, including dimensions of all working spaces, and a legend of all symbols used;

A complete single line diagram;

The type, location and capacity of all service equipment, and a dimensioned elevation diagram of the service;

The size and the length of all service raceways to the manhole vault or pole of the serving agency or to the service head;

The size of all raceways and the length of all feeder raceways;

The dimensions of all pull or junction boxes larger than four inches trade size;

The number, size and type of all conductors to be installed in wiring enclosures;

The location of every proposed outlet and switch in all parts of the building or structures including all fixed showcases, wall cases, office furnishings, and similar wiring;

The wattage or ampere rating of each outlet for noninductive loads and the volt-ampere rating of each unit or transformer for electric discharge lighting;

The location, voltage and HP rating of every motor and the KW rating of every generator;

The type and code letter of every AC motor, unless an alternate specification is otherwise satisfactory to the Electrical Official;

The location and KVA, or equivalent rating of each transformer, capacitor, ballast, converter, frequency changer and similar equipment; and the locations and ampere or wattage rating of other appliances of the noninductive type;

Details of panelboards, switchboard and distribution centers, showing type and arrangement of switches, overcurrent devices, and general control equipment;

Panelboards, switchboard and motor control center schedules, showing wattage and amperage, the number of active branch circuits to be installed, and the number of spare branch circuits for future use. This shall include identifying the circuits to which the outlets are connected and listing the number and type of outlets;

A lighting fixture schedule;

The existing load, as calculated in accordance with the Palmdale Electrical Code or by other methods satisfactory to the Building Official shall be indicated for existing installations having alterations or additions made thereto;

Other additional information as the Building Official may consider necessary for proper enforcement of this code.

106.4.4. Architect or Engineer of Record.

106.4.4.1 General.

When state law or the building Official requires that documents be prepared by a State of California licensed Designer, the Building Official shall require the owner to designate on the building permit application an architect or engineer who shall act as the architect or engineer of record. If the circumstances require, the owner may designate a substitute architect or engineer of record who shall perform all of the duties required of the original architect or engineer of record. The owner shall notify the Building Official in writing if the architect or engineer of record is changed or is unable to continue to perform the duties.

The architect or engineer of record shall be responsible for reviewing and coordinating all submittal documents prepared by others, including deferred submittal items, for compatibility with the design of the building.

106.4.4.2 Deferred Submittals.

For the purposes of this section, deferred submittals are defined as those portions of the design which are not submitted at the time of the application and which are to be submitted to the Building Official within a specified period.

Deferral of any submittal items shall have prior approval of the Building Official. The architect or engineer of record shall list the deferred submittals on the plans and shall submit the deferred submittal documents for review.

Submittal documents for deferred submittal items shall be submitted to the architect or engineer of record who shall review them and forward them to the Building official with a notation indicating that the deferred submittal documents have been reviewed and that they have been found to be in general conformance with the design of the building. The deferred submittal items shall not be installed until the Building Official has approved the deferred submittal documents.

106.4.5 Special inspection and Structural observation.

When special inspection is required by any code provision or product listing, the architect or engineer of record shall prepare an inspection program that shall be submitted to the Building Official for approval prior to issuance of any permit. The inspection program shall designate the portions of the work that require special inspection and the name or names of the individuals or firms who are to perform the special inspections, and indicate the duties of the special inspectors.

The special inspector may be employed by the owner, the engineer or architect of record, or an agent of the owner, but shall not be employed by the contractor, the contractor’s employees, representatives or agents, or any other person performing the work.

When structural observation is required the observation program shall name the individuals or firms who are to perform structural observation and describe the stages of construction at which structural observation is to occur. The observation program shall include samples of inspection reports and provides time limits for submission of reports.

106.5 Permits.

106.5.1 Issuance.

The application, plans and specifications, geological or engineering reports and other required data filed by an applicant for a permit shall be checked by the Building Official. Such plans may be reviewed by other departments of the City to verify compliance with the laws and ordinances under their jurisdiction.

The Building Official shall issue a permit to the applicant for the work described in the application and plans filed therewith when the Building Official is satisfied that all of the following items comply:

Exception

The Building Official shall not issue a permit for temporary or permanent electrical or gas service when there is no apparent legally permitted use for the property and/or no approval has been issued for the use by the Palmdale Planning department. In determining whether a proposed use is legally permitted, the Building Official may consider not just the provisions of the codes but all applicable statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations of the city.

The work described conforms to the requirements of the PAP, Palmdale Building code, Plumbing code, Mechanical code, Electrical code, Residential code and Green building code.

The work described conforms to the requirements of other pertinent laws and ordinances of the City of Palmdale.

The fees specified by this PAP and all City requirements have been paid.

The applicant has obtained a permit pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 30600 et seq. if such a permit is required.

When the Building Official issues a permit, the Building Official shall endorse in writing or stamp on both sets of plans and specifications “APPROVED.” Such approved plans and specifications shall not be changed, modified or altered without authorization from the Building Official, and all work shall be done in accordance with the approved plans. The issuance of a permit shall not be deemed to certify that the site of the described work is safe. The Building Official may issue a permit for the construction of part of a building or structure before the entire plans and specifications for the whole building or structure have been submitted or approved, provided adequate information and detailed statements have been filed complying with all pertinent requirements of the Palmdale codes. The holder of such permit shall proceed at his or her own risk without assurance that the permit for the entire building or structure will be granted.

The issuance of a permit based on plans and specifications shall not prevent the Building Official from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans and specifications or from preventing building operations being carried on there under when in violation of the Palmdale codes or of any other ordinances of the City. Retention of plans: The Building Official shall retain one set of approved plans, specifications and computations as required by Section 19850 of the Health and Safety Code. The Building Official shall retain such approved plans, specifications and computations for a period of not less than 90 days from date of completion of the work covered therein. One set of approved plans and specifications shall be returned to the applicant to be kept on such building or work site at all times while the authorized work is in progress.

106.5.2 Licensed contractor requirements for permit issuance.

Building and mechanical permits may be issued to a bona fide Owner(s) of a property or a licensed California contractor in accordance with provisions of California state law.

Electrical and Plumbing permits for work exceeding two hundred dollars ($200) in value shall be a licensed contractor, homeowner, or authorized government representative. A registered maintenance electrician may be issued electrical permits.

EXCEPTION.

If the Electrical Official determines that there is an urgent necessity, they may consider an application for an electrical permit prepared by persons other than those specified above.

LICENSED CONTRACTOR – A licensed contractor is a person who is engaged in the business of installing or repairing electrical wiring or equipment or who does, or who holds himself out as willing to do personally or through his employees, any work or services in connection with the installation, alteration or repair of any electrical wiring or equipment or part thereof, and who possesses an appropriate contractor’s license pursuant to the Business and Professions Code of the State of California when such license includes within its classification limitations on the activities set forth on the application for permit and entitles the licensee to perform personally or through his employees all such activities without personal local qualification or registration.

A permit may be issued to a firm, partnership or corporation, any officer or member of which is a licensed contractor, in the event that all construction or work is done under the direct personal supervision of such officer or member.

REGISTERED MAINTENANCE ELECTRICIAN – A registered maintenance electrician is a person possessing a valid certificate of registration issued by the Building Official. A certificate of registration as maintenance electrician, upon application therefor, may be issued to any person regularly employing one or more electricians for the purpose of installation, alteration or maintenance of electrical wiring or equipment on his own premises. The application for such certificate shall be made in writing by a responsible officer of the firm, and shall designate one or more persons as registrant. A registration fee shall be paid for each maintenance electrician as set forth in this code. All such work shall be installed and done in accordance with the provisions of this code, and such work shall be subject to permits, fees, and inspection to the same extent as all other similar work for which such inspection is provided. The firm shall keep a record of all work performed under the maintenance certificate, showing the nature and location of the work, and such records shall be made available to the Building Official.

HOMEOWNER – A homeowner is the owner of a single-family residence, including common accessory and minor poultry, animal or agricultural buildings. A permit may be issued to such homeowner, provided that work authorized under any such permit shall be done by the person to whom the permit is issued, or by a member of his immediate family. Should any provision of Sections (a), (b) or (c) be violated, the permit shall be subject to immediate cancellation. This permit cancellation is in addition to any other enforcement provisions or penalties provided for in this code.

GOVERNMENT REPRESENTATIVE – A government representative is a person who is employed by and who has been authorized by a governmental agency to supervise or control electrical work on the premises of such agency.

106.5.3 Validity.

The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of the Palmdale codes or any other laws or regulations. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of the Palmdale Codes or any other laws or regulations shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use, which it authorizes, is lawful.

106.5.4 Expiration.

Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this PAP shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit has not passed a foundation inspection or the first phase of inspections if no foundation exists within one year from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year or more at any time after the work is commenced. Before such work can be commenced or recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained and the fee therefor shall be 25 percent of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no codes or plan changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work and provided further that the duration of such failure to commence, or abandonment has not exceeded one and one-half years. Any permittee holding an unexpired permit may apply for an extension of the time within which he may commence work under that permit when he is unable to commence work within the time required by this section for good and satisfactory reasons. The Building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 365 days upon written request by the permittee showing that circumstances beyond the control of the permittee have prevented action from being taken. The fee for extension of the permit shall be 25% of the amount of the original fee plus the issuance fee. No permit shall be extended more than once.

Permits for rebound tumbling equipment as defined in Chapter 66 of the Building code shall be valid for a period not exceeding one year. Permits for portable amusement devices and for temporary Group A, Division 4 structures shall be valid for a period not exceeding 30 days. Permits for amusement devices erected under a building permit shall be valid for a period of 90 days. Annual platform or display permits shall be valid for one year.

106.5.5 Suspension or Revocation.

The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke a permit issued under the provisions of this PAP whenever the permit is issued in error or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this PBC.

106.5.6 Combined Building Permit.

A combination building permit may be issued for one-family or two-family dwellings and attached garages, tenant improvements, commercial and industrial buildings and swimming pools, which will include all building, electrical, plumbing, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning work but will not include grading and landscape, or sewer connections. The combined building permit shall be subject to the requirements of the Palmdale Building, Residential Code, Green Code, Electrical Code, Plumbing Code and the Mechanical Code, except that the fee for the combined building permits shall be as provided in the Current Palmdale Fee resolution.

106.5.7 Other Permits

In addition to the permits required by the PAP, and as a prerequisite to obtaining them, any person desiring to connect to a trunk sewer, to construct a public sewer, to connect to the public sewer at a point where no branch fitting has been provided in such sewer, or to discharge industrial liquid waste shall obtain permits from the authority controlling such sewer so to do. No permit shall be issued to connect to a public sewer not under the jurisdiction of the owner of such sewer or facility until the applicant for such connection has first obtained written permission from the authority controlling such sewer and has filed a copy of such permission with the Building Official.

SECTION 107 – FEES

107.1 Permit Fees.

Building, Plumbing, Mechanical, and Electrical Permit(s) and issuance fees for each permit shall be paid prior to permit issuance. The fees shall be paid as adopted in the current Palmdale fee resolution.

The Building Official shall make the final determination of value or valuation. The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan check fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and any other permanent work or permanent equipment.

EXCEPTIONS:

1. A combined swimming pool permit may be issued for a new swimming pool, spa, or hot tub, which will include all building, electrical, plumbing, heating, and excavation work. The total permit fee for the combined swimming pool permit shall be two times the building permit fee.

2. The total permit fee for a combined building permit for a one and two family dwelling shall be 1.43 times the building permit fee. The total permit for a tenant improvement permit shall be 1.33 times the building permit fee for tenant improvements with a restroom(s) and 1.23 times the fee for those without restroom improvements. (For the purposes of this section a tenant improvement is the completion of a shell type of structure with minimal amounts of equipment. Restaurants or industrial type uses would require separate permits for their equipment systems.)

3. The total building permit fee for a combination commercial or Industrial building permit shall be 1.5 times the building permit fee determined. The combination permit shall include all basic permits for the building including the trash enclosure except for the sewer connection permit which must be processed separately. Any large industrial equipment or processes shall require separate permits and also separate plan checks as required by each separate code.

107.2 Plan Checking or Review Fees for Buildings, Structures and all regulated equipment.

Building and Residential Plan review fees.

When an application for a building permit is submitted for review, whether or not plans and specifications are required, a fee shall be paid to the Building Official. Said fee shall be equal to 85 percent of the building permit fee as set forth current in the current Fee Resolution. Specific fees shall also be paid for plan check work in accordance with the current fee resolution. In addition to the aforementioned fees, the Building Official may require additional charges for review required by changes, additions or revisions of approved plans or reports, and for services beyond the first and second check due to changes, omissions or errors on the part of the applicant. The payment of said fees shall not exempt any person from compliance with other provisions of the codes.

Electrical Plan reviews required.

Plans are required to be submitted for any of the work described below. A plan checking fee shall be paid when the plans are submitted for review. With respect to the work described below wiring shall not be installed, nor any other work for which a permit is required shall be done, until the plans have been approved. Only after the plans have been approved may the applicant apply for an electrical permit for such work. Plans are required for the following:

(1) An Installation where one or more services, switchboards, motor control centers or feeders have a rating of 400 amperes or larger at 600 volts or less;

(2) Any installations rated above 600 volts;

(3) Theaters or motion picture theaters;

(4) Assembly rooms or similar places having an assemblage or seating capacity exceeding 500 persons;

(5) A hospital or other health care facility falling within the scope of Article 517 of the Electrical code;

(6) Installations in locations classed as hazardous locations by the provisions of Chapter 5 of the Electrical code;

(7) Installation of lighting fixtures weighing more than 300 pounds;

(8) Tenant improvement installations requiring review to verify compliance with the State’s Electrical Energy Conservation requirements (Title 24). This energy plan check is in addition to the plan check required above.

The fee for each plan check pursuant to subsection above shall be equal to seventy percent (70%) of the required permit fee, however, the minimum fee shall be as required in the currently adopted fee resolution.

Plumbing plan reviews required:

Plumbing Plans and specifications shall be submitted for plan review and approval prior to issuance of a permit.

The plan check fee shall be equal to 40 percent of the required plumbing permit as adopted in the current fee resolution.

1. More than 216 waste fixture units;

2. Potable water supply piping required to be 2" or larger; or

3. Fuel gas piping required to be 2" or larger or containing medium or high pressure gas.

Mechanical plan reviews required:

1. Installations where the aggregate Btu input capacity for either comfort heating or comfort cooling is more than 500,000 Btu. Plans shall detail all the mechanical systems, including comfort heating systems, comfort cooling systems, refrigeration systems and ventilation systems and hoods.

2. Installations of the following individual systems:

(i) Food processing establishment containing a commercial-type I or II hood;

(ii) Garage ventilation systems installed in compliance with the provisions of the Palmdale Building Code;

(iii) Stair pressurization systems installed in compliance with the provisions of the Palmdale Building Code;

(iv) Product conveying duct systems installed in compliance with Chapter 5 of this PMC;

(v) Tenant improvement installations requiring review to verify compliance with the State’s Energy Regulations, when a building permit is not required for that work.

Direct-fired gas makeup and industrial air heaters.

The installer shall submit plans showing the proposed installation, indicating the location of the heater and such accessories as may be required to ensure the proper and safe performance of its function.

Plan checking and addition plan check fees for Plumbing, Mechanical, Electrical and Green code plan checks shall be paid as adopted in the current Fee Resolution.

The plan check fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees.

107.3 Standard Plans.

The Building Official may approve a set of plans for a building or structure as a “standard plans,” provided that the applicant has made proper application, submitted complete sets of plans as required by this section, and paid the plan checking fee required by section 107.2 above.

Plans shall reflect laws and ordinances in effect at the time a permit is issued except as provided herein below in this section. Nothing in this section shall prohibit modifying the permit set of plans to reflect changes in laws and ordinances, which have become effective since the approval of the standard plan. The standard plans shall become null and void where the work required by such changes exceeds ten percent of the value of the building or structure. When it is desired to use an approved “standard plan” for an identical structure, two plot plans and one duplicate plan shall be submitted and a plan checking fee equal to 70 percent of the full plan checking fee required shall be paid at the time application is made for such identical structure. Such duplicate plans shall be compared, stamped and kept on the project site. In case of deviation from this standard plan, except as permitted in this section, complete plans, together with a full plan-checking fee, shall be submitted for the proposed work.

Standard plans shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of approval. The standard plan can be extended by the Building Official an additional year upon payment of an extension fee equal to 30% of the original fee providing the standard plans are being restandardized under the same year codes as the original standard plan approval.

107.4 Expiration of Plan Application.

Applications for building, grading, landscape and relocation building permits for which no permit is issued within one year following the date of application shall expire by limitation. Plans and specifications previously submitted may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official or City Engineer. The Building Official or City Engineer may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not exceeding six months beyond the one-year limit upon written request by the applicant showing that circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented action from being taken and upon payment of an extension fee equal to 25 percent of the plan check fee. No permit application shall be extended more than once. Once an application has expired, the applicant shall resubmit plans and specifications and pay a new 100% plan check fee.

107.5 Grading Fees.

Shall be as adopted in the current Palmdale Fee Resolution.

107.6 Plan Checking Fees for Grading.

Shall be as adopted in the current Palmdale Fee Resolution.

107.7 Landscape Permit Fees.

Shall be as adopted in the current Palmdale Fee Resolution.

107.8 Plan Checking Fees for Landscaping.

Shall be as adopted in the current Palmdale Fee Resolution.

107.9 Building, Residential, Plumbing, Mechanical, Electrical and Green Code permit fees.

Shall be as adopted in the current Palmdale Fee Resolution.

107.10 Exemption from Fees.

Neither the Housing Authority of the City of Palmdale nor any public officer or body acting in an official capacity on behalf of the Housing Authority shall pay or deposit any building fees for buildings owned by the City of Palmdale. This section does not apply where a public officer is acting with reference to private assets which have come under such public officer’s jurisdiction by virtue of his or her office.

107.11 Surrender of Permit.

If no portion of the work or construction covered by a permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this PAP has been commenced, the person to whom such permit has been issued may deliver such permit to the Building Official with a request that such permit be canceled. The Building official shall thereupon stamp or write on the face of such permit the words, “Canceled at the request of the permittee.” Thereupon such permit shall be null and void and of no effect.

107.12 Refunds.

In the event that any person shall have obtained a permit and no portion of the work or construction covered by such permit shall have been commenced, and such permit shall have been canceled either as provided for the permittee, upon presentation to said Building Official of a request therefor, in writing shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to 80 percent of the fee actually paid for such permit. The Building Official shall satisfy himself or herself as to the right of such applicant to such refund, and each such refund shall be paid, provided a refund request has been submitted prior to one year from expiration of the permit. If inspections have been made and the permit has been cancelled because of an issue beyond the owner’s control, the building Official may approve a pro-rated amount of the permit fees be applied toward a new permit for the same project. A letter releasing the funds from the original permittee shall be required before any funds are applied.

No portion of the plan checking fee shall be refunded, unless no checking has been performed on a set of plans, in which case 80 percent of the plan checking fee shall be refunded.

107.13 Investigation Fee for Work without Permit.

Whenever any work has been commenced without a permit as required by the provisions of the PAP, a special investigation shall be made prior to the issuance of the permit. An investigation fee shall be collected for each permit so investigated. The investigation fee shall be equal to the permit fee required for such work and in addition to any plan check or permit fees.

EXCEPTION: The investigation fee shall be reduced as adopted in the current fee resolution when the Building Official has determined that the owner-builder of a one- or two-family dwelling, accessory building or accessory structure had no knowledge that a permit was necessary and had not previously applied for a permit from the Building and Safety Department.

The payment of the investigation fee shall not exempt any person from compliance with all other provisions of any Palmdale code or regulation or from any penalty prescribed by law.

107.14 Noncompliance Fee.

If the Building Official or duly authorized board, in the course of enforcing the provisions of this PAP or any Palmdale building code or any state law, issues an order to a person and that person fails to comply with the order within 15 days following the due date for compliance stated in the order, including any extensions thereof, then the Building official shall have the authority to collect a noncompliance fee. The noncompliance fee shall not be imposed unless the order states that a failure to comply within 15 days after the compliance date specified in the order will result in the fee being imposed. No more than one such fee shall be collected for failure to comply with an order. The amount of the noncompliance fee shall be as adopted in the current fee resolution in addition to the fees specified elsewhere in this PAP.

107.15 Preliminary Review Fees.

Upon payment of a preliminary review fee an applicant may have a building, structure or other project reviewed by the Building Official prior to submittal of a permit application. Such fee entitles the applicant to two staff hours of review, which may be of any combination of building and specialty code requirements. An additional fee per hour shall be charged for each hour or portion thereof in excess of two hours. All charges must be paid at the conclusion of any such meeting and before any written findings are issued.

EXCEPTION: one staff member, not in excess of 15 minutes, shall charge no fee for a preliminary review.

107.16 Plan Maintenance Fee.

Before issuing a building permit, the Building Official shall collect a plan maintenance fee for all building plans that are not submitted in an approved electronic format and are required to be retained by Section 19850 of the Health and Safety Code. The amount of the plan maintenance fee shall be two percent of the building permit fee as set forth in the current Palmdale fee resolution. A plan maintenance fee shall be collected for each separate plan to be retained by the Building Official.

107.17 Annual Review of Fees.

The Building Official shall review all fees annually in conjunction with the review of the Palmdale Fee resolution. The amount of each fee shall be adjusted as follows: The Director of Finance shall calculate the Consumer Price Index (CPI) in accordance with city policy and advise of such increase. The Building Official shall adjust each fee by said percentage amount and round off to the nearest 10 cents. All fees shall be adopted by a fee resolution and implemented by August 1st of the same year, provided, however, that no adjustment shall exceed the reasonable cost of providing services. When it is determined that the amount reasonably necessary to recover the cost of providing services is in excess of this adjustment, the Building Official may present such fee proposals to the City Council for approval with the fee resolution.

107.18 Fees – Factory-Built Housing.

107.18.1 General.

The fees established by Section 107 for building permits and for plan checking shall be modified for factory-built housing as set forth in this section.

107.18.2 Definition.

For the purpose of this section, certain terms are defined as follows:

FACTORY-BUILT HOUSING shall mean structures, which meet all of the following criteria:

1. Fabrication on an off-site location under the inspection of the state, for which the state inspection agency has attested to compliance with the applicable state laws and regulations by the issuance, of an insignia;

2. The bearing of the state insignia and which have not been modified since fabrication in a manner that would void the state approval; and for which the City of Palmdale has been relieved by statute of the responsibility for the enforcement of laws and regulations of the State of California.

UNIT shall mean a single factory-assembled component of the factory-built housing brought to the job site for connection to the foundation and/or connection to other units of the structure.

107.18.3 Factory Built building permit fees.

A fee for each building permit shall be paid to the Building Official. The Building Official shall determine the estimated valuation in all cases, and for such purpose, the Building Official shall be guided by accepted estimating practices. The building permit fee shall be established by determining the total number of units to be assembled at the job site to construct the building defined as factory-built housing and by multiplying the building permit fee established in Table 1-A for the estimated valuation by the percentage listed below:

Job Assembled Units

Percentage Current adopted fee resolution fees

1 – 3

25%

4 or more

40%

107.18.4 Plan Checking Fees.

A plan-checking fee shall be paid to the Building Official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for the proposed work. The plan-checking fee shall be 80 percent of the building permit fee established by this section.

107.18.5 Plans and Specifications.

With each application, two sets of plans and specifications for the work to be performed at the job site shall be submitted with such other information as may be necessary to determine compliance with local and state laws and regulations.

SECTION 108 INSPECTIONS.

108.1 General.

All construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by the Building Official and all such construction or work shall remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes until approved by the Building Official. In addition, certain types of construction and installations shall have special inspection as specified in the Building code and /or other construction codes.

Approval as a result of an inspection shall not be construed to be an approval of a violation of the provisions of this PAP and Palmdale Codes or of other laws. Inspections presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions or of other laws shall not be valid.

It shall be the duty of the permit applicant to cause the work to remain accessible and exposed for inspection purposes. Neither the Building Official nor the jurisdiction shall be liable for expense entailed in the removal or replacement of any material required to allow inspection.

A survey of the lot may be required by the Building Official to verify compliance of the structure. A site inspection may be required prior to plan check of building plans for lots or parcels in areas having slopes of five horizontal to one vertical (5:1) or steeper when the Building Official finds that a visual inspection of the site is necessary to establish drainage requirements for the protection of property, existing buildings or the proposed construction. The fee for such inspection shall be as set forth in the current fee resolution. Such a pre-inspection shall not be required for a building pad graded under the provisions of the grading provisions.

108.2 Inspection Record Card.

Work requiring a building permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent shall have posted or otherwise made available an inspection record card so as to allow the Building Official to conveniently make the required entries thereon regarding inspection of the work. This card shall continue to be posted or otherwise made available by the permit holder until the Building Official has granted final approval of the building or structure.

108.3 Approvals Required.

No work shall be done on any part of the building or structure beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining the written approval of the Building Official. The Building Official, upon notification, shall make the requested inspections and shall either indicate that portion of the construction is satisfactory as completed, or shall notify the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent wherein the same fails to comply. Any portions that do not comply shall be corrected and such portion shall not be covered or concealed until authorized by the Building Official. Inspection Correction(s), verbal or written, needed to approve permitted work shall be completed in a timely manner. Refusal, failure, or neglect to comply with any such notice shall be considered a violation, and shall be subject to the penalties set forth in this PAP for violations.

There shall be a final inspection and approval of all building, plumbing, mechanical, electrical, green code requirements and structures when completed and ready for occupancy or use.

108.4 Required Inspections:

A. Building Inspections.

1. General.

Reinforcing steel or structural framework of any part of any building or structure shall not be covered or concealed without first obtaining the approval of the Building Official. Upon notification from the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent, the Building Official shall make the inspections:

2. Foundation inspection.

To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected, any required reinforcing steel is in place, and when all materials for the foundation are delivered on the job, and all required special inspection and/or structural observation reports are available for inspector review. Where concrete from a central mixing plant (commonly termed “transit mixed”) is to be used, materials need not be on the job.

3. Concrete slab or under-floor inspection.

To be made after all in-slab or under-floor building service equipment, conduit, piping accessories and other ancillary equipment items are in place, but before any concrete is poured or floor sheathing installed, including the subfloor.

4. Frame inspection.

To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all pipes, electrical wiring, mechanical ducting, chimneys and vents are complete and all required special inspection or structural observation reports are available for inspector review.

5. Lath inspection and/or wallboard.

To be made after all lathing and/or wallboard, interior and exterior, is in place, but before any plastering is applied or before wallboard joints and fasteners are taped and finished.

6. Final inspection.

To be made after finish grading and the building is completed and ready for occupancy.

B. Plumbing Inspections.

1. General.

All plumbing systems shall be tested and approved as required by the Palmdale Plumbing code.

2. Test observation required.

All plumbing systems shall be tested and approved in the presence of the Building Official or his representative.

3. Systems to remain open for inspection.

No water or gas supply system or portion thereof shall be covered or concealed until it first has been tested, inspected, and approved. No plumbing or drainage system, building sewer, private sewer disposal system or part thereof, shall be covered, concealed, or put into use until it has been tested, inspected, and accepted as prescribed in the PPC.

3. Uncovering of concealed work.

Any drainage or plumbing system, building sewer, private sewage disposal system, or part thereof, which is installed, altered, or repaired is covered or concealed before being inspected, tested, and approved as prescribed in this PPC, it shall be uncovered for inspection after notice to uncover the work has been issued to the responsible person by the Building Official.

4. Tightness.

Joints and connections in the plumbing systems shall be gas/air tight and watertight for the pressures required by any test.

5. Retesting.

If the Plumbing Official finds that the work will not pass the test, necessary corrections shall be made and the work shall then be subject to new testing and inspection.

6. Approval.

Upon the satisfactory completion and final test of the plumbing system, the Building Official shall issue a certificate of approval to the permittee if requested.

C. Mechanical inspections.

1. General

The Building Official shall inspect all equipment prior to any portion of any equipment intended to be concealed by any permanent portion of the building. The equipment shall not be concealed until inspected and approval to conceal is given.

2. Utility connection.

Equipment regulated by the Palmdale Mechanical code shall not be connected to the fuel or power supply until authorized by the Building Official.

EXCEPTION: The requirements of this section shall not be considered to prohibit the operation of any heating equipment installed to replace existing heating equipment serving an occupied portion of a building, in the event a request for inspection of such heating equipment has been filed with the Building and Safety office not more than 48 hours after such replacement work is completed, and before any portion of such equipment is concealed by any permanent portion of the building.

3. Final Inspection.

When the installation of any equipment is complete, a final inspection shall be made and final approval given prior to use of the equipment.

D. Electrical inspections.

1. General

All new electrical work, and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work, or any changes, shall be inspected and approved prior to covering or concealing by the Building Official.

2. Special inspections.

Special inspections may be required on work involving special hazards or conditions and on work requiring extensive, unusual or constant inspection. Special inspections, when necessary, shall be accomplished by the means set forth in the Palmdale Building Code except that the special inspector shall be a qualified person approved, registered by, and reporting to, the Building Official.

3. Energizing equipment.

No system, appliance, installation or wiring shall be energized until approved by the Building Official.

4. Final inspection.

All installations require a final inspection after all work and labeling is complete and ready to be energized.

E. Residential inspections.

The building, Plumbing, Mechanical and Electrical Inspections shall apply.

F. Green Code inspections.

See Palmdale Green code provisions.

108.5 Other Inspections.

In addition to the called inspections specified above, the Building Official may make or require any other inspections of any construction work to ascertain compliance with the provisions of all codes and laws which are enforced by the Building Official. For the purpose of determining compliance with Chapter 34 the Building Official may cause any structure to be reinspected.

108.6 Special Inspector Requirements.

108.6.1 Registration.

Before commencing the duties, the special inspector shall be examined by and shall obtain a certificate of registration from the Building Official. The Building Official shall require that a special inspector applicant successfully complete an examination administered by the International Code Council or be certified with an equivalent certificate as approved by the Building Official. Applications shall be made in writing. Proof of the required certificate shall accompany the application fee and the application. A separate application and a separate fee shall not be required for each type of work. Applicants failing to pass an examination shall be ineligible for reexamination for a period of 30 days. A new application and fee shall accompany each request for reexamination. Unless revoked, certificates of registration for special inspectors shall expire biennially on June 30 and must be renewed by payment of a biennial renewal. Registration and renewals shall pay fees as adopted by the current fee resolution before being issued a special inspector approval.

Upon evidence, satisfactory to the Building Official, of the failure of a special inspector to perform properly and effectively the duties of said office, the Building Official may revoke, suspend or refuse to renew any certificate of registration. Prior to such action, the holder shall be given an opportunity to appear before the Building Official and be heard.

108.6.2 For special inspections required see Palmdale Building code.

108.7 Inspection Requests.

It shall be the duty of the person doing the work authorized by a permit to notify the Building Official that such work is ready for inspection. The Building official may require that every request for inspection be filed at least one working day before such inspection is desired. Such request may be in writing or by telephone at the option of the Building Official. It shall be the duty of the person requesting any inspection required by this PAP to provide access to and means for inspection of such work.

108.8 Noninspected Work.

No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any structure on which noninspected work has been performed.

For the purposes of this PAP, “noninspected work” shall be defined as any erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, movement, improvement, removal, connection, conversion, demolition or equipping, for which a permit was not first obtained, but which has progressed beyond the point indicated in successive inspections, including but not limited to inspections set forth in Chapter 17 of the Building code, or any other Palmdale code without first obtaining inspection by and approval of the Building Official.

SECTION 109 – USE AND OCCUPANCY

109.1 General.

No building or structure or portion thereof shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall be made until the Building Official has approved the building or structure or portion thereof for such use or occupancy as evidenced by the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or a temporary certificate of occupancy. A building of Group R, Division I or Group R, Division-3 Occupancy, if erected on a site where grading has been performed pursuant to a grading permit issued under provisions of this PAP, shall not be occupied, nor shall gas or electric utilities be connected thereto, unless the grading has been completed in accordance with all applicable requirements or the Building Official has found, should the grading not be so completed, that the site conditions will pose no hazard to health, safety or welfare of occupants and/or occupants of adjacent properties, and that a temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued. Approval of a building or structure for use or occupancy (including, but not limited to, final inspection approval and/or issuance of a certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy) shall not be construed as approval of a violation of the provisions of this PAP or of other laws and regulations. Approvals presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this PAP or of other laws or regulations are not valid. The Building Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke any such approvals or certificates whenever the Building Official determines that the approval or certificate was issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or when it is determined that the building or structure or portion thereof is in violation of any ordinance or regulation or any of the provisions of this PAP or other laws or regulations. Any certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy so issued shall be surrendered upon request of the Building Official.

109.2 Change in Use.

Changes in the character or use of a building shall not be made except as specified in Chapter 34 of the Palmdale Building Code.

109.3 Certificate Issued.

When the building or structure has passed final inspection, and when the building or structure complies with the applicable laws and regulations, and the required fees have been paid, the Building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy which shall contain the following:

1. The building permit or occupancy permits number.

2. The address of the building or structure.

3. The name and address of the owner.

4. A description of that portion of the building for which the certificate is issued.

5. A statement that the described portion of the building complies with the requirements of this PBC for group and division of occupancy and the use for which the proposed occupancy is classified.

6. The name of the Building Official.

109.4 Temporary Certificate.

If the Building Official finds that no substantial hazard will result from occupancy of any building or portion thereof before the same is completed, the Building Official may issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for the use of a portion or portions of a building or structure prior to the completion of the entire building or structure. The Building Official may also require a bond or deposit to be posted to insure that any outstanding work is completed. The bond shall be for 150 percent of the value of the uncompleted work. Such temporary certificate of occupancy shall be valid for a period not to exceed six months. Upon request of the owner or permittee the Building Official may, in writing, extend the temporary certificate of occupancy when it is determined that the circumstances so warrant. After the expiration of a temporary certificate of occupancy and any extension(s) thereof, the building or structure shall not be used or occupied until the Building official has approved the building for such use or occupancy. Fees for issuance of a certificate shall be paid as adopted in the Palmdale fee resolution.

109.5 Posting.

The certificate of occupancy shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises and shall not be removed except by the Building Official.

EXCEPTION: Group R, Division 3, and Group U Occupancies.

109.6 Certificate of Completion.

The Building Official may issue a certificate of completion for work that is completed in compliance with code requirements which shall mean that all permitted work under that permit is in compliance but Occupancy is not granted by such certificate of completion.

SECTION 110 – PROHIBITED USES OF BUILDING SITES

110.1 Flood Hazard.

110.1.1 Buildings requirements.

Buildings are not permitted in an area determined by the Building Official or City Engineer to be subject to flood hazard by reason of inundation, overflow or erosion.

The placement of the building and other structures (including walls and fences) on the building site shall be such that water or mud flow will not be a hazard to the building or adjacent property. Subject to the conditions of Section 110.1.2, this prohibition shall not apply when provision is made to eliminate such hazard to the satisfaction of the Department of Public Works by providing adequate drainage facilities by protective walls, suitable fill, raising the floor level of the building, a combination of these methods, or by other means. The Department of Public Works, in the application of this section, shall enforce, as a minimum, the current Federal Flood Plain Management Regulations defined in Title 44, Code of Federal Regulations, Section 60.3 and all City adopted requirements.

110.1.2 Floodway.

Portions of the City of Palmdale subject to severe flood hazard by reason of inundation, overflow, erosion or deposition of debris are established as floodways by F.E.M.A. Whenever reference is made to any floodways in such ordinance establishing floodways, it shall be construed to mean a floodway referred to in this section. A person shall not perform work for which a building or grading permit is required within the boundaries of an established floodway if such work increases the flood hazard to adjacent properties by either increasing the capital flood water surface elevation, deflecting flows or increasing bank erosion. Such work may be performed within an established floodway and a building or grading permit therefor may be issued, where provisions are made to the satisfaction of the City Engineer to avoid such an increase in the flood hazard.

110.1.3 City Engineer.

The city engineer shall act as a consultant to the building official in permit matters relating to flood control and flood hazard identification, avoidance and mitigation in all areas defined on maps furnished to the engineer. The city engineer shall maintain a series of maps delineating areas subject to flood, mud and debris hazards. The Building Official shall consult with the city engineer with respect to work requiring a building or grading permit in the hazard areas delineated on the maps. The city engineer shall prepare written reports of its examination of each building or grading permit application for work in the hazard areas as delineated on the maps. The Building Official in acting upon the application shall consider the reports. The actions upon the applications shall be supported in writing.

The City Engineer shall also act as a consultant whenever the Building Official proposes to establish by ordinance floodways and water surface elevations regulating the locations of such proposed work.

110.2 Geologic Hazards.

110.2.1 Building Restrictions.

No building or grading permit shall be issued under the provisions of this section when the Building Official or City Engineer finds that property outside the site of the proposed work could be damaged by activation or acceleration of a geologically hazardous condition and such activation or acceleration could be attributed to the proposed work on, or change in use of, the site for which the permit is requested. For the purpose of this section, geologically hazardous condition does not include surface displacement due to earthquake faults.

110.2.2 Permits.

Work requiring a building or grading permit is not permitted in an area determined by the Building Official or City Engineer to be subject to hazard from landslide, settlement or slippage. These hazards include those from loose debris, slope wash and the potential for mudflows from natural slopes or graded slopes. For the purpose of this section, landslide, settlement or slippage does not include surface displacement due to earthquake faults.

110.2.3. Conditional requirements.

Subject to the conditions as follows building or grading permits may be issued in the following cases:

When the applicant has submitted a geological and/or geotechnical engineering report or reports complying with the provisions and showing to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the hazard will be eliminated prior to the use or occupancy of the land or structures by modification of topography, reduction of subsurface water, buttressing, a combination of these methods, or by other means.

When the applicant has submitted a geological and/or geotechnical engineering report or reports complying with the provisions of Section 111 and containing sufficient data to show to the satisfaction of the city engineer that the site appears to be safe for the intended use.

When the work involves the alteration or minor repair of existing structures and the cost of such alteration or repair does not exceed 25 percent of the value of the existing structure, such value to be based on assumed continuation of the established legal use. Before a permit is issued, the owner shall record in the office of the Department of Registrar-Recorder (1) a statement that the owner is aware that the records of the Building Official indicate that the property is subject to a physical hazard of a geological nature and (2) an agreement relieving the City and all officers and employees thereof of any liability for any damage or loss which may result from issuance of such a permit. This agreement shall provide that it is binding on all successors in interest of the owner and shall continue in effect until the Building Official records in the office of the Department of Registrar-Recorder a statement that the Building Official finds such hazard no longer exists. The repair work shall consist of restoring the original construction. Provision may be made for adjustment of the floor in anticipation of future settlement. For the purposes of this section, “alteration” does not include an addition or additions.

When the work involves an addition or additions to an existing structure but is not a change in use or occupancy and such work does not increase the area of the structure more than 25 percent of the area of the structure existing on July 6, 1968. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall submit an engineering geology and/or geotechnical engineering report or reports complying with the provisions of Section 111 and containing a finding that the proposed increased use of the site will not be geologically unsafe, and the owner shall record in the office of the Department of Registrar-Recorder (1) the finding of such report or reports and (2) an agreement relieving the City and all officers and employees thereof of any liability for any damage or loss which may result from the issuance of such a permit. This agreement shall provide that it is binding on all successors in interest of the owner and shall continue in effect until the Building Official records in the office of the Department of Registrar-Recorder a statement that the Building Official finds a hazard no longer exists.

When the work involves one story, light frame accessory structure not intended or used for human occupancy and not exceeding 400 square feet (37.2 m2) in area or 12 feet (3658 mm) in height.

When the work involves the repair of single-family residences and accessory buildings where the cost of such repair exceeds 25 percent of the value of the existing building or involves the replacement of such structures where the loss to be replaced was due to causes other than landslide, settlement or slippage.

Before a permit is issued the owner shall:

Record in the office of the Department of Registrar-Recorder (1) a statement that he or she is the owner and is aware that the records of the Building official indicate that the property is subject to a physical hazard of a geological nature and (2) an agreement relieving the City and all officers and employees thereof of any liability for any damage or loss which may result from issuance of such a permit. This agreement shall provide that it is binding on all successors in interest of the owner and shall continue in effect until the Building Official records in the office of the Department of Registrar-Recorder a statement that the Building Official finds such hazard no longer exists.

Submit calculations and plans for the proposed reconstruction prepared by a registered engineer and designed to minimize damage while accommodating the amount of vertical and horizontal displacements which the engineer determines are probable or which have occurred since the original structure was built, whichever is the greater.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, the Building Official may, at his or her discretion, deny a permit for any building, structure or grading subject to a hazard of a geological nature which cannot be mitigated and may endanger the health or safety of the occupants, adjoining property or the public.

110.3. Fills Containing Decomposable Material.

Permits shall not be issued for buildings or structures within 1,000 feet (304.8 m) of fills containing rubbish or other decomposable material unless the fill is isolated by approved natural or artificial protective systems or unless designed according to the recommendation contained in a report prepared by a licensed civil engineer. Such report shall contain a description of the investigation, study and recommendation to minimize the possible intrusion, and to prevent the accumulation of explosive concentrations of decomposition gases within or under enclosed portions of such building or structure. At the time of the final inspection, the civil engineer shall furnish a signed statement attesting that the building or structure has been constructed in accordance with the civil engineer’s recommendations as to decomposition gases required herein.

Buildings or structures regulated shall not be constructed on fills containing rubbish or other decomposable material unless provision is made to prevent damage to the structure, floors, underground piping and utilities due to uneven settlement of the fill. One-story light-frame accessory structures not exceeding 400 square feet (37.2 m2) in area or 12 feet (3658 mm) in height may be constructed without special provision for foundation stability.

110.4 Methane Gas Hazards.

Permits shall not be issued for buildings or structures regulated on or adjacent to or within 25 feet (7620 mm) of active, abandoned or idle oil or gas well(s) unless designed according to recommendations contained in a report prepared by a licensed civil engineer and approved by the Building Official. In addition, permits shall not be issued for a building or structure located between 25 feet (7620 mm) and 200 feet (60,960 mm) from active, abandoned or idle oil or gas well(s) unless designed according to the recommendations contained in a report prepared by a licensed civil engineer and approved by the Building Official or Unless all active, abandoned or idle oil or gas well(s) between 25 feet (7620 mm) and 200 feet (60,960 mm) from said building or structure are examined by a licensed petroleum engineer to evaluate whether, in accordance with the current rules and regulations of the Division of Oil and Gas of the State of California, such wells are being properly operated or maintained, or are abandoned. No permits shall be issued until certification of proper operation, maintenance, or abandonment or reabandonment, as determined by the Division of Oil and Gas, is submitted to the Building Official. This requirement is not applicable to active, abandoned or idle oil or gas well(s) located more than 200 feet (60,960 mm) from the proposed buildings or structures. As used in this section, “well” shall mean any well as defined by Section 3008, Subdivisions (a) and (b) of the California Public Resources Code.

110.5 Conditional Use.

Work required by this section as a condition for the use of the site shall be performed prior to the connection of the utilities or occupancy of the building.

SECTION 111 – GEOLOGY AND ENGINEERING REPORTS

The Building Official or City Engineer may require an engineering geology or geotechnical engineering report, or both, where in the Building Official’s opinion, such reports are essential for the evaluation of the safety of the site. The engineering geology or geotechnical engineering report or both shall contain a finding regarding the safety of the building site for the proposed structure against hazard from landslide, settlement or slippage and a finding regarding the effect that the proposed building or grading construction will have on the geologic stability of property outside of the building site. A certified engineering geologist licensed by the State of California shall prepare any engineering geology report. A civil engineer qualified to perform this work, such as a geotechnical engineer experienced in soil mechanics, shall prepare any geotechnical engineering report. When both an engineering geology and geotechnical engineering report are required for the evaluation of the safety of a building site, the two reports shall be coordinated before submission to the Building Official or City Engineer.

SECTION 112 – EARTHQUAKE FAULT MAPS

Special studies zones maps within the City of Palmdale prepared pursuant to Sections 2622 and 2623 of the California Resources Code which show traces of earthquake faults are hereby incorporated by reference and declared to be, on the date of official issue, a part of this code, and may be referred to elsewhere in this code. Special studies zones maps revised under the above sections of the California Resources Code shall, on the date of their official issue, supersede previously issued maps that they replace. Copies of each of the above maps shall be available for examination by the public at the Department of Public Works.

SECTION 113 – EARTHQUAKE FAULTS

113.1 General.

The construction of a building or structure near a known active earthquake fault and regulated by this PBC shall be permitted as set forth in this section.

113.2 Scope.

The provisions of this section shall apply only to permits for buildings or structures on individual lots or parcels and are not intended to be supplementary to geologic investigations required to qualify divisions of land as set forth in the City of Palmdale Subdivision Codes.

113.3 Definition.

For the purpose of this section, a geologist shall be a registered geologist, licensed by the California State Board of Registration for Geologists and Geophysicists to practice geology in California.

113.4 Known Active Earthquake Faults.

For the purpose of this section, known active earthquake faults are those faults, which have had displacement within Holocene time (approximately the last 11,000 years) as defined in the most current issue of Special Publication 42 of the California Division of Mines and Geology.

113.5 Construction Limitations.

No building or structure shall be constructed over or upon the trace of a known active earthquake fault which is shown on maps maintained by the City Engineer. The absence of a known active earthquake fault trace at the proposed building location shall be determined by the city engineer or a geologist in the following cases:

1. When the proposed building is within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of that line designated by the Building Official as the assumed location of a known active earthquake fault on the aforementioned maps.

2. When the proposed building is within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of the most probable ground location of the trace of a known active earthquake fault shown on the aforementioned maps.

In these cases when a geologist has not otherwise made such a determination, the city engineer may require the excavation of a trench, as a subsurface exploration for the purpose of determining the absence of a known active earthquake fault. Such a trench will be required if a lack of distinguishable fault features in the vicinity prevents the Building official from determining by a site examination, review of available aerial photographs, or by other means that the fault trace does not underlie the proposed building. The trench shall be approximately perpendicular to the most probable direction of the fault trace, at least 1 1/2 feet (457 mm) wide and at least five feet (1524 mm) in depth measured from natural grade, or to a depth satisfactory to the city engineer.

The trench must be accessible for mapping and inspection by the city engineer, when requested, and meet the requirements of Title 8 of the California Code of Regulations, Construction Safety Orders. The trench need not extend further than the full width of the proposed structure plus 5 feet (1524 mm) beyond the traversed exterior walls. A known, active earthquake fault shall be presumed nonexistent if an exposure is not found by the Building Official, City Engineer or a geologist in the walls or floor of the trench.

The Building Official may require a more extensive investigation by a geologist as evidence to the absence of a known active earthquake fault prior to the issuance of a permit for Groups A, E, I, H and R, Division I Occupancies, and Groups B, F, M and S Occupancies over one story in height.

EXCEPTION: The provisions of this section do not apply to:

1. One-story, light-frame buildings not intended or used for human occupancy and not exceeding 1000 square feet (92.9 m2) in area or 12 feet (3658 mm) in height.

Alterations or repairs to an existing building provided that the aggregate value of such work within any 12-month period does not exceed 50 percent of the value of the existing building.

2. Swimming pools, retaining walls, fences and minor work of a similar nature.

113.6 Maps of Active Faults.

The Department of Public Works shall maintain maps available to the public showing the location of known active earthquake faults within the City. In the absence of additional information, the location of known active earthquake faults shall be as shown on special studies zones maps as required by Section 112.

Special Studies Zones. Work within the special studies zones established under Sections 2622 and 2623 of the California Public Resources Code shall comply with state laws, policies, criteria, rules and regulations applicable to such work. Fees established by Chapter 7.5 of Division 2 of the California Public Resources Code shall be collected and disbursed as required by state law. In addition to the state regulations, the provisions of this section shall apply when geologic investigations, mapping, aerial photographs, other acceptable data or Special Studies Zones Maps show the location of a known active earthquake fault as defined by Section 113.4.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.201 Adoption of building code.
As amended herein, Chapters 2 through 35, of Volumes I and II and Appendix I, Patio Covers, of that certain building code known and designated as the California Building Code, 2016 Edition, published by the International Code Council and the Building Standards Commission of the State of California are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below, and shall be known as the Palmdale Building Code and may be referenced as the PBC. (Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.202 Copy of Palmdale Building Code maintained by City Clerk.
A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the California Building Code adopted herein by reference are kept in the office of the City Clerk and maintained for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.203 Addition to the definitions in Chapter 7 of the Palmdale Building Code to include the local agency very high fire hazard severity zone maps.
Section 702A, Definitions, as adopted by incorporation of the California Building Code, is hereby modified to add the following definition:

Adopted Local Agency Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone Maps for the City of Palmdale are the maps approved by the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection in cooperation with Los Angeles County Fire Department and the City of Palmdale dated July 2008.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.204 Amendments to Chapter 16 of the Palmdale Building Code.
Chapter 16, Design, of the Palmdale Building Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Building Code is hereby modified as follows:

Section 1608.2 is amended to read as follows:

Sec. 1608.2 Ground snow loads. The ground snow loads to be used in determining the design snow loads for roofs shall be 20 pounds per square foot.

Sections 1613.5.2, 1613.5.3, 1613.5.4 and 1613.5.5 are added to read as follows:

1613.5.2 Structural Separation. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.12.3 Equation 12.12-1 as follows:

dM

=

Cddmax

(12.12-1)

Ie

1613.5.3 Values for Vertical Combinations. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.2.3.1 Exception 3 as follows:

3. Detached one- and two-family dwellings up to two stories in height of light frame construction.

1613.5.4 Wood Diaphragms. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.11.2.2.3 as follows:

12.11.2.2.3 Wood Diaphragms. In wood diaphragms, the continuous ties shall be in addition to the diaphragm sheathing. Anchorage shall not be accomplished by use of toe nails or nails subject to withdrawal nor shall wood ledgers or framing be used in cross-grain bending or cross-grain tension. The diaphragm sheathing shall not be considered effective as providing ties or struts required by this section.

For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, wood diaphragms supporting concrete or masonry walls shall comply with the following:

1. The spacing of continuous ties shall not exceed 40 feet. Added chords of diaphragms may be used to form sub diaphragms to transmit the anchorage forces to the main continuous crossties.

2. The maximum diaphragm shear used to determine the depth of the sub diaphragm shall not exceed 75% of the maximum diaphragm shear.

1613.5.5 Maximum SDS Value in Determination of CS and EV. Modify ASCE 7 Section 12.8.1.3 as follows:

12.8.1.3 Maximum SDS Value in Determination of CS and EV. The value of CS and EV are permitted to be calculated using a value of SDS equal to 1.0 but not less than 70% of SDS as defined in Section 11.4.4, provided that all of the following criteria are met:

1. The structure does not have irregularities, as defined in Section 12.3.2;

2. The structure does not exceed five stories above the lower of the base or grade plane as defined in Section 11.2, and, where present, each mezzanine level shall be considered a story for the purpose of this limit;

3. The structure has a fundamental period, T, that does not exceed 0.5 seconds, as determined using Section 12.8.2;

4. The structure meets the requirements necessary for the redundancy factor, ?, to be permitted to be taken as 1.0, in accordance with Section 12.3.4.2;

5. The site soil properties are not classified as Site Classes E or F, as defined in Section 11.4.2; and

6. The structure is classified as Risk Category I or II, as defined in Section 1.5.1.

(Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.205 Amendments to Chapter 17 of the Palmdale Building Code.
Chapter 17, Special Inspections and Tests, of the Palmdale Building Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Building Code is hereby modified as follows:

Section 1704.6 is amended to read as follows:

1704.6 Structural Observations. Where required by the provisions of Section 1704.6.1 or 1704.6.2, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent shall employ a structural observer to perform structural observations. Structural observation does not include or waive the responsibility for the inspections in Section 110 or the special inspections in Section 1705 or other section of this code. The structural observer shall be one of the following individuals:

1. The registered design professional responsible for the structural design, or

2. A registered design professional designated by the registered design professional responsible for the structural design.

Prior to the commencement of observations, the structural observer shall submit to the building official a written statement identifying the frequency and extent of structural observations.

The owner or owner’s authorized agent shall coordinate and call a preconstruction meeting between the structural observer, contractors, affected subcontractors and special inspectors. The structural observer shall preside over the meeting. The purpose of the meeting shall be to identify the major structural elements and connections that affect the vertical and lateral load resisting systems of the structure and to review scheduling of the required observations. A record of the meeting shall be included in the report submitted to the Building Official.

Observed deficiencies shall be reported in writing to the owner or owner’s authorized agent, special inspector, contractor and the Building Official. Upon the form prescribed by the Building Official, the structural observer shall submit to the Building Official a written statement at each significant construction stage stating that the site visits have been made and identifying any reported deficiencies which, to the best of the structural observer’s knowledge, have not been resolved. A final report by the structural observer which states that all observed deficiencies have been resolved is required before acceptance of the work by the Building Official.

Section 1704.6.1 is amended to read as follows:

1704.6.1 Structural observations for seismic resistance. Structural observations shall be provided for those structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F, where one or more of the following conditions exist:

1. The structure is classified as Risk Category III or IV in accordance with Table 1604.5.

2. The height of the structure is greater than 75 feet (22860 mm) above the base.

3. The structure is classified as Risk Category I or II in accordance with Table 1604.5, and a lateral design is required for the structure or portion thereof.

Exception: One-story wood framed Group R-3 and Group U Occupancies less than 2,000 square feet in area, provided the adjacent grade is not steeper than 1 unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10% sloped), assigned to Seismic Design Category D.

4. When so designated by the registered design professional responsible for the structural design.

5. When such observation is specifically required by the building official.

Section 1705.3 is amended to read as follows:

1705.3 Concrete Construction. The special inspections and tests for concrete construction shall be performed in accordance with this section and Table 1705.3.

Exceptions: Special inspection and tests shall not be required for:

1. Isolated spread concrete footings of buildings three stories or less above grade plane that are fully supported on earth or rock, where the structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f’c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa) regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in the footing construction.

2. Continuous concrete footings supporting walls of buildings three stories or less in height that are fully supported on earth or rock where:

2.1. The footings support walls of light-frame construction;

2.2. The footings are designed in accordance with Table 1805.4.2; or

2.3. The structural design of the footing is based on a specified compressive strength, f’c, no greater than 2,500 pounds per square inch (psi) (17.2 Mpa), regardless of the compressive strength specified in the construction documents or used in the footing construction.

3. Nonstructural concrete slabs supported directly on the ground, including prestressed slabs on grade, where the effective prestress in the concrete is less than 150 psi (1.03 Mpa).

4. Concrete patios, driveways and sidewalks, on grade.

Section 1705.12 is amended to read as follows:

1705.12 Special inspections for seismic resistance. Special inspections for seismic resistance shall be required as specified in Sections 1705.12.1 through 1705.12.9, unless exempted by the exceptions of Section 1704.2.

Exception: The special inspections specified in Sections 1705.12.1 through 1705.12.9 are not required for structures designed and constructed in accordance with one of the following:

1. The structure consists of light-frame construction; the design spectral response acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in Section 1613.3.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does not exceed 35 feet (10 668 mm)

2. The seismic force-resisting system of the structure consists of reinforced masonry or reinforced concrete; the design spectral response acceleration at short periods, SDS, as determined in Section 1613.3.4, does not exceed 0.5; and the building height of the structure does not exceed 25 feet (7620 mm)

3. The structure is a detached one- or two-family dwelling not exceeding two stories above grade plane, is not assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F and does not have any of the following horizontal or vertical irregularities in accordance with Section 12.3 of ASCE 7:

3.1 Torsional or extreme torsional irregularity.

3.2 Nonparallel systems irregularity.

3.3 Stiffness-soft story or stiffness-extreme soft story irregularity.

3.4 Discontinuity in lateral strength-weak story irregularity.

(Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.206 Amendments to Chapter 18 of the Palmdale Building Code.
Chapter 18, Soils and Foundations, of the Palmdale Building Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Building Code is hereby modified as follows:

Section 1809.7 and Table 1809.7 of the 2010 Edition of the California Building Code are amended to read as follows:

1809.7 Prescriptive footings for light-frame construction. Where a specific design is not provided, concrete or masonry-unit footings supporting walls of light-frame construction shall be permitted to be designed in accordance with Table 1809.7. Prescriptive footings in Table 1809.7 shall not exceed one story above grade plane for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

TABLE 1809.7

PRESCRIPTIVE FOOTINGS SUPPORTING WALLS OF LIGHT-FRAME

CONSTRUCTION
a, b, c, d

NUMBER OF FLOORS SUPPORTED BY THE FOOTING e

WIDTH OF FOOTING (inches)

THICKNESS OF FOOTING (inches)

1

12

6

2

15

6

3

18

8

For SI: 1 inch = 25.4 mm, 1 foot = 304.8 mm

a. Depth of footings shall be in accordance with Section 1809.4.

b. The ground under the floor shall be permitted to be excavated to the elevation of the top of the footing.

c. See Section 1908 for additional requirements for concrete footings of structures assigned to Seismic Design Category C, D, E or F.

d. For thickness of foundation walls, see Section 1807.1.6.

e. Footings shall be permitted to support a roof addition to the stipulated number of floors. Footings supporting roof only shall be as required for supporting one floor.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.207 Amendments to Chapter 19 of the Palmdale Building Code.
Chapter 19, Concrete, of the Palmdale Building Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Building Code is hereby modified as follows:

Section 1909.4 of the 2010 Edition of the California Building Code is amended to read as follows:

1909.4 Design. Structural plain concrete walls, footings and pedestals shall be designed for adequate strength in accordance with ACI 318, Section 22.4 through 22.8.

Exception: For Group R-3 occupancies and buildings or other occupancies less than two stories above grade plane of light-frame construction, the required edge thickness of ACI 318 is permitted to be reduced to 6 inches (152 mm), provided that the footing does not extend more than 4 inches (102 mm) on either side of the supported wall. This exception shall not apply to structural elements designed to resist seismic lateral forces for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.208 Reserved.
(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.209 Amendments to Chapter 23 of the Palmdale Building Code.
Chapter 23, Wood, of the Palmdale Building Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Building Code is hereby modified as follows:

Section 2305.5 is added to read as follows:

2305.5 Hold-down Connectors. In Seismic Design Category D, E, or F, hold-down connectors shall be designed to resist shear wall overturning moments using approved cyclic load values or 75 percent of the allowable seismic load values that do not consider cyclic loading of the product. Connector bolts into wood framing shall require steel plate washers on the post on the opposite side of the anchorage device. Plate size shall be a minimum of 0.229 inch by 3 inches by 3 inches (5.82 mm by 76 mm by 76 mm) in size. Hold-down connectors shall be tightened to finger tight plus one half (1/2) wrench turn just prior to covering the wall framing.

Section 2306.3 is amended to read as follows:

2306.3 Wood-frame Shear Walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with AWC SDPWS. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F, application of Tables 4.3A and 4.3B of AWC SDPWS shall include the following:

1. Wood structural panel thickness for shear walls shall not be less than 3/8 inch thick and studs shall not be spaced at more than 16 inches on center.

2. The maximum nominal unit shear capacities for 3/8 inch wood structural panels resisting seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F is 400 pounds per linear foot (plf).

Exception: Other nominal unit shear capacities may be permitted if such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building official.

3. Nails shall be placed not less than 1/2 inch in from the panel edges and not less than 3/8 inch from the edge of the connecting members for shear greater than 350 plf using ASD or 500 plf using LRFD. Nails shall be placed not less than 3/8 inch from panel edges and not less than 1/4 inch from the edge of the connecting members for shears of 350 plf or less using ASD or 500 plf or less using LRFD.

4. Table 4.3B application is not allowed for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F.

For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, application of Table 4.3C of AWC SDPWS shall not be used below the top level in a multi-level building.

Where panels are fastened to framing members with staples, requirements and limitations of AWC SDPWS shall be met and the allowable shear values set forth in Table 2306.3(1), 2306.3(2) or 2306.3(3) shall only be permitted for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.

Exception: Allowable shear values where panels are fastened to framing members with staples may be used if such values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building official.

The allowable shear values in Tables 2306.3(1) and 2306.3(2) are permitted to be increased 40 percent for wind design. Panels complying with ANSI/APA PRP-210 shall be permitted to use design values for Plywood Siding in the AWC SDPWS.

Section 2307.2 is added to read as follows:

2307.2 Wood-frame Shear Walls. Wood-frame shear walls shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Section 2306.3 as applicable.

Table 2308.6.1 is amended to read as follows:
Section 2308.6.5, Figure 2308.6.5.1 and Figure 2308.6.5.2 are amended to read as follows:

2308.6.5 Alternative bracing. An alternate braced wall (ABW) or a portal frame with hold-downs (PFH) described in this section is permitted to substitute for a 48-inch (1219 mm) braced wall panel of Method DWB, WSP, SFB, PBS, PCP or HPS. For Method GB, each 96-inch (2438 mm) section (applied to one face) or 48-inch (1219 mm) section (applied to both faces) or portion thereof required by Table 2308.6.1 is permitted to be replaced by one panel constructed in accordance with Method ABW or PFH.

2308.6.5.1 Alternate braced wall (ABW). An ABW shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure 2308.6.5.1. In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 2 feet 8 inches (813 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 3/8-inch (3.2 mm) minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized box nails in accordance with Table 2304.10.1 and blocked at wood structural panel edges. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch-minimum-thickness (11.9 mm) wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports. Two anchor bolts installed in accordance with Section 2308.3.1 shall be provided in each panel. Anchor bolts shall be placed at each panel outside quarter points. Each panel end stud shall have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation, capable of providing an approved uplift capacity of not less than 1,800 pounds (8006 N). The hold-down device shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The ABW shall be supported directly on a foundation or on floor framing supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing or turned-down slab edge is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This continuous footing or turned-down slab edge shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped 24 inches (610 mm) with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly under the braced wall line.

Where the ABW is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, the wood structural panel sheathing shall be provided on both faces, three anchor bolts shall be placed at one-quarter points and tie-down device uplift capacity shall be not less than 3,000 pounds (13 344 N).



2308.6.5.2 Portal frame with hold-downs (PFH). A PFH shall be constructed in accordance with this section and Figure 2308.6.5.2. The adjacent door or window opening shall have a full-length header.

In one-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 16 inches (406 mm) and a height of not more than 10 feet (3048 mm). Each panel shall be sheathed on one face with a single layer of 3/8-inch (9.5 mm) minimum-thickness wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common or galvanized box nails in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. For structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D or E, each panel shall be sheathed on one face with 15/32-inch- minimum-thickness (11.9 mm) wood structural panel sheathing nailed with 8d common nails spaced 3 inches on panel edges, 3 inches at intermediate supports and in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. The wood structural panel sheathing shall extend up over the solid sawn or glued-laminated header and shall be nailed in accordance with Figure 2308.6.5.2. A built-up header consisting of at least two 2-inch by 12-inch (51 mm by 305 mm) boards, fastened in accordance with Item 24 of Table 2304.10.1 shall be permitted to be used. A spacer, if used, shall be placed on the side of the built-up beam opposite the wood structural panel sheathing. The header shall extend between the inside faces of the first full-length outer studs of each panel. The clear span of the header between the inner studs of each panel shall be not less than 6 feet (1829 mm) and not more than 18 feet (5486 mm) in length. A strap with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4,400 N) shall fasten the header to the inner studs opposite the sheathing. One anchor bolt not less than 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) diameter and installed in accordance with Section 2308.3.1 shall be provided in the center of each sill plate. The studs at each end of the panel shall have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 3,500 pounds (15 570 N).

Where a panel is located on one side of the opening, the header shall extend between the inside face of the first full-length stud of the panel and the bearing studs at the other end of the opening. A strap with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N) shall fasten the header to the bearing studs. The bearing studs shall also have a hold-down device fastened to the foundation with an uplift capacity of not less than 1,000 pounds (4400 N). The hold-down devices shall be an embedded strap type, installed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. The PFH panels shall be supported directly on a foundation that is continuous across the entire length of the braced wall line. This foundation shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. Where the continuous foundation is required to have a depth greater than 12 inches (305 mm), a minimum 12-inch by 12-inch (305 mm by 305 mm) continuous footing is permitted at door openings in the braced wall line. This continuous footing shall be reinforced with not less than one No. 4 bar top and bottom. This reinforcement shall be lapped not less than 24 inches (610 mm) with the reinforcement required in the continuous foundation located directly under the braced wall line.

Where a PFH is installed at the first story of two-story buildings, each panel shall have a length of not less than 24 inches (610 mm).



Section 2308.6.8.1 is amended to read as follows:

2308.6.8.1 Foundation requirements. Braced wall lines shall be supported by continuous foundations.

Exception: For structures with a maximum plan dimension not more than 50 feet (15240 mm), continuous foundations are required at exterior walls only for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category A, B, or C.

For structures in Seismic Design Categories D and E, exterior braced wall panels shall be in the same plane vertically with the foundation or the portion of the structure containing the offset shall be designed in accordance with accepted engineering practice and Section 2308.1.1.

Section 2308.6.9 is amended to read as follows:

2308.6.9 Attachment of sheathing. Fastening of braced wall panel sheathing shall not be less than that prescribed in Table 2308.6.1 or 2304.10.1. Wall sheathing shall not be attached to framing members by adhesives. Staple fasteners in Table 2304.10.1 shall not be used to resist or transfer seismic forces in structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E, or F.

Exception: Staples may be used to resist or transfer seismic forces when the allowable shear values are substantiated by cyclic testing and approved by the building official.

All braced wall panels shall extend to the roof sheathing and shall be attached to parallel roof rafters or blocking above with framing clips (18 gauge minimum) spaced at maximum 24 inches (6096 mm) on center with four 8d nails per leg (total eight 8d nails per clip). Braced wall panels shall be laterally braced at each top corner and at maximum 24 inches (6096 mm) intervals along the top plate of discontinuous vertical framing.

(Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.210 Amendments to Chapter 31 of the Palmdale Building Code.
Chapter 31, Special Construction, of the Palmdale Building Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Building Code is hereby modified as follows:

Subsection 3109.3 is amended to read as follows:

3109.3 Public Swimming Pools Enclosures shall comply with all provisions of the Health Department and Section 3109.4.1 through 3109.4.3.

Subsection 3109.4.1, Barrier Height and Clearances, is amended to read as follows:

3109.4.1 Barrier Height and Clearances

The top of the barrier shall be at least 60 inches (1219 mm) above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade and the bottom of the barrier shall be 2 inches (51 mm) measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance at the bottom of the barrier may be increased to 4 inches (102 mm) when grade is a solid surface such a concrete deck, or when the barrier is mounted on the top of the aboveground pool structure. When barriers have horizontal members spaced less than 45 inches (1143 mm) apart, the horizontal members shall be placed on the pool side of the barrier. Any decorative design work on the side away from the swimming pool, such as protrusions, indentations or cutouts, which render the barrier easily climbable, is prohibited.

Subsection 3109.4.1.7, Gates, is amended to read as follows:

3109.4.1.7 Gates. Access gates shall comply with the Sections 3109.4.1.1 through 3109.4.1.6. and shall be equipped to accommodate a locking device. Pedestrian access gates shall be self-closing and have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches (1372 mm) from the bottom of the gate, (1) the release mechanism shall be located on the pool side of the barrier at least 3 inches (76 mm) below the top of the gate, and (2) the gate and barrier shall have no opening greater than 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) within 18 inches (457 mm) of the release mechanism. Pedestrian gates shall swing away from the pool and comply with Section 1008.1.8. and 1109.1.2. Any gates other than pedestrian access gates shall be equipped with lockable hardware or padlocks and shall remain locked at all times when not in use. A sign shall be posted which states that the gate is part of a pool enclosure and must be locked or under direct adult supervision at all times. A gate that serves as the main driveway to a garage or carport cannot use the padlock and sign provisions and shall comply with the self-closing and self-latching provisions above.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.235 Reserved.
(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.240 Adoption of the Palmdale Existing Building Code.
Chapters 2 to 16, inclusive, and Appendix Chapter A1 of the California Existing Building Code, 2016 Edition, published by the International Code Council and the California Building Standards Commission of the State of California, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below and shall be known as the Palmdale Existing Building Code and can be referenced as the PEBC. (Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.245 Adoption of Chapter 65, Signs.
A new Chapter 65, Signs, is adopted as the sign provisions of the Palmdale Building Code, to read and to be cited as follows:

CHAPTER 65 SIGNS

6501 – DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives shall be defined as follows:

BUILDING LINE. For the purpose of this chapter, a “property line” shall also mean a building line whose boundaries are established by a building line ordinance.

FACE OF BUILDING is the general outer surface, not including cornices, bay windows or other ornamental trim, of any main exterior wall of a building.

GROUND SIGN is a detached sign erected upon or supported by the ground.

PROJECTING SIGN is a sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a building or structure and projecting out there from.

ROOF SIGN is a sign erected upon or above a roof or parapet wall of a building or structure.

SIGN is a display board, screen, structure, object or part thereof used to announce, declare, demonstrate, display or otherwise advertise and attract the attention of the public.

WALL SIGN is a sign attached to or erected against the wall of a building or structure, with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of the wall.

6502 – GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

6502.1 Scope.

This chapter is intended to regulate the construction, erection, alteration, repair and maintenance of all signs and their supports in the City of Palmdale except ground signs extending not more than 6 feet (1829 mm) above grade.

6502.2 Permits.

A building permit as specified in Section 106 shall be required for every sign and sign structure regulated by this chapter. Where electrical lighting illuminates signs, a separate electrical permit shall be obtained as required by the Electrical Code of the City of Palmdale Code.

6502.3 Plans.

Two copies of plans and specifications shall be submitted with the application for permit for each sign except cloth and banner signs. Such plans shall show complete details, method of attachment or support, location, and materials to be used. Plans for supports of all roof signs and other signs subject to excessive stresses shall be accompanied by structural computations.

Sufficient data shall be submitted to show that the supporting surface and other members of an existing building to which a sign is to be attached are in good condition, and are adequately strong to support the load.

6502.4 Designs and Construction.

Sign frames and supporting construction shall be designed and constructed as provided in the structural engineering design provisions of this code.

EXCEPTION: 1. Structural steel members shall not be less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick if nongalvanized, and 3/16-inch (4.8 mm) thick if all members, including bolts and fastenings, are galvanized. Bolts and rivets used in supporting sign structures, supporting 100 square feet (9029 m2) in area or more shall be not less than 1/2 in (12.7 mm) diameter. On such structures supporting signs less than 100 square feet (9029 m2) in area, bolts and rivets shall not be less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm) in diameter.

Supports shall be designed so that all loads and reactions shall be transmitted to the ground through the structural framework and walls of supporting buildings or structures. Signs erected on buildings or structures shall be securely attached by means of adequate metal brackets, listed expansion bolts, through bolts or lag screws. No material, part, portion or equipment thereof or therefor shall be used which may become dangerous because of vibration, corrosion, disintegration or for any other reason whatsoever. Wire other than stranded cable shall not be considered as adequate fastening, except for cloth and banner signs. If supports of an existing structure are found to be inadequate, they shall be adequately strengthened before the sign is erected.

6502.5 Projection and Clearance.

Signs may project over a public street, public sidewalk or building line a distance as determined by the clearance of the bottoms thereof above the level of the sidewalk or grade immediately below, as follows:

Clearance less than 8 feet (2438 mm), 6-inch (152 mm) projection;

Clearance from 8 feet (2438 mm) to 10 feet (3048 mm), 1-foot (305 mm) projection; and

Clearance above 8 feet (2438 mm), for each additional 2-foot (610 mm) clearance, an additional 1 foot (305 mm) projection;

Provided that no structure shall have a projection of more than 5 feet (1524 mm), and provided further that a projecting sign built above and in connection with a marquee may have such a projection of 5 feet (1524 mm) without clearance between sign and marquee; and provided further that no structure shall project beyond the curb line, regardless of clearance above grade.

Signs projecting more than 6 inches (152 mm) from the face of a building over private property used or intended to be used by the general public shall have a minimum clearance of 8 feet (2438 mm) above said sidewalk or grade.

6502.6 Materials.

Signs and their supports may be constructed of any material allowed in this chapter for the classification and location of sign to be erected. Glass used in signs shall be of the size, thickness and type given in Table 65-1 of this chapter.

EXCEPTION: Surfaces of signs not more than 55 feet (16,764 mm) above grade may be of plastic material, which has a flame-spread rating of 225, or less when tested in accordance with U.B.C. Standard 8-1 in the way intended for use.

6502.7 Prohibited Locations.

No sign shall project into any alley whatsoever below a height of 14 feet (4267 mm) above grade or more than 6 inches (152 mm) when over 14 feet (4267 mm).

No sign shall be erected in such a manner that any portion of its surface or supports will interfere in any way with the free use of any fire escape, exit or standpipe, or ob-

struct any required ventilator, door or stairway. No sign shall obstruct the free use of any window on the same premises. No sign shall be erected in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.

6502.8 Combination Signs.

Each portion of a sign, which is subject to more than one classification, shall meet the requirements for the classification to which such portion is subject.

6502.9 Identification.

Every sign shall have an identifying number, and except for ground signs, shall have the weight of the sign plainly placed on the exterior surface of the sign body in a location where such information will be readily visible after installation and erection.

6502.10 Maintenance.

Signs and sign structures shall be maintained at all times in a state of good repair, with all braces, bolts, clips, supporting frame and fastenings free from deterioration, termite infestation, rot, rust or loosening. At all times they shall be able to safely withstand the wind pressure for which they were originally designed, and in no case shall their wind resistance be less than 15 pounds per square foot (718.2 N/m2).

6503 – GROUND SIGNS

An approved preservative shall protect all members of wooden ground signs that extend into the ground. Approved plastic as defined in Chapter 52 may be used for surface of signs exceeding 55 feet (16764 mm) in height, provided the sign is constructed of noncombustible materials.

6504 – PROJECTING SIGNS

Projecting signs attached to a building shall be of noncombustible materials, or of not less than one-hour fire-resistive construction as specified in Chapter 7. The thickness of any such sign shall not exceed the following:

For a maximum projection of 5 feet (1524 mm), a thickness of 2 feet (610 mm).

For a maximum projection of 4 feet (1219 mm), a thickness of 2 feet 6 inches (762 mm).

For a maximum projection of 3 feet (914 mm), a thickness of 3 feet (914 mm).

6505 – WALL SIGNS

Wall signs exceeding a height of 15 feet (4572 mm) above grade shall have a surface of noncombustible material, but may have ornamental moldings and latticework of combustible material. No wall sign shall have a projection greater than 24 inches (610 mm) over any public street, other public property or building line, as defined herein. No wall sign shall extend above the roof or highest parapet wall immediately adjacent thereto.

6506 – ROOF SIGNS

6506.1 Access.

Passages clear of all obstructions shall be left under all signs exceeding a height of 4 feet (1219 mm) above the roof thereunder or immediately adjacent thereto. There shall be one such passage or access opening for each building covered, at least every 50 feet (15240 mm) in the length of the sign, and when such signs are at right angles to a face of the building, within 20 feet (6096 mm) of parapet or exterior walls. Such passages shall not be less than 3 feet (914 mm) wide and 4 feet (1219 mm) high and shall be at the parapet or roof level.

6506.2 Height.

No solid roof sign or solid portion of a roof sign on a Type II, III, IV or V building or structure shall exceed a height of 30 feet (9144 mm) above the top of the parapet wall nearest the sign, or above the highest point of the roof directly under the sign in case there is no parapet wall, unless constructed as an integral part of the building or structure or unless its supporting frame extends directly to the ground. The height above a Type I structure is unlimited.

6506.3 Construction.

Roof signs shall be designed as required in Section 6502. They shall be of noncombustible material, except that wood moldings and 2-inch-thick (51 mm) plank walkways may be used. Blocks, angles or supports fastened to the roof shall be so located as not to interfere with the drainage of the roof, where necessary, flashing or counter flashing shall be placed.

6507 – SPECIAL SIGNS

6507.1 Marquee Signs.

Signs may be placed on, attached to or constructed in a marquee and such signs shall, for the purpose of determining projection, clearance, height and material, be considered a part of and shall meet the requirements for a marquee. Projecting signs attached to a building may also be attached to a marquee.

6507.2 Cloth and Banner Signs.

Cloth and banner signs placed on buildings shall be strongly constructed and securely attached flat against the building. They shall be removed as soon as they are torn or damaged.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.250 Adoption of Chapter 66, Special Safety Provisions.
A new Chapter 66, Special Safety Provisions, is adopted as the special safety provisions of the Palmdale Building Code, to read and to be cited as follows:

CHAPTER 66 SPECIAL SAFETY PROVISIONS

6601 – GENERAL PROVISIONS

6601.1 Structures Regulated.

The provisions of this chapter are intended to regulate structures that are not otherwise regulated by this code, but that affect or may affect the physical safety of human beings. This shall include the installation, maintenance and operations of public assembly tents over 90 days, amusement devices, towers, membrane structures not regulated by Chapter 31, Division H, and other structures.

An AMUSEMENT DEVICE OR STRUCTURE is any device or structure such as rebound tumbling equipment, merry-go-rounds, Ferris wheels, captive airplanes, dark houses and similar devices or structures which the public is invited or permitted to ride or use for the purpose of amusement.

6601.2 Permits.

No person shall erect or construct or proceed with the erection or construction of any amusement device, or other structure regulated by this chapter without first filing an application and obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Official. A permit shall be required each time said structure is erected or moved. Any person desiring a permit under this chapter shall, when filing an application, pay the Building Official a fee as set forth in Section 107.

6601.3 Construction Requirements.

Amusement devices, and all structures, equipment or devices regulated by this chapter, whether specifically mentioned or not, shall be made structurally safe, with due allowance for impact, wear and injury during use. Where not otherwise specifically provided in this code, the construction, installation, maintenance and use of everything regulated by this chapter shall provide adequate safety for the loads to which they may be subjected. A current certificate or license from the State of California for the amusement device shall serve as evidence that the device complies with the intent of this section unless a visual inspection reveals otherwise.

6601.4 Certificate of Occupancy.

No structure regulated by this chapter shall be used or occupied unless or until an inspection has been made and a certificate of occupancy has been issued each time said structure is erected or moved.

6601.5 Unsafe Structure or Device.

Whenever any structure or device regulated by this chapter is being used or occupied contrary to the provisions of this code or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the Building Official may order such use or occupancy discontinued by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in using or occupying or causing to be used or occupied such structure or device, and all such persons shall forthwith discontinue such use or occupancy until authorized by the Building Official to continue the same.

6602 – AMUSEMENT DEVICES

6602.1 General.

This section shall regulate amusement devices or structures.

6602.2 Location on Property.

Location of structures and devices regulated by this section shall be such as to provide adequate safety to the occupants of or adequate egress from said structure or device, or adjacent structures or devices, in case of fire or panic.

6602.3 Construction.

All structures or devices regulated by this section shall be constructed and maintained as required in Section 6601.

6602.4 Special Safety Measures.

In case of doubt, the Building Official, at any time, may order a structure or device regulated by this chapter to be tested in his or her presence with loads equal to double the weight of the proposed occupants, loaded either uniformly or eccentrically. When necessary for safety, the Building official may limit the speed of operation of such devices or order sufficient alterations to make them safe.

6602.5 Exit Facilities.

Exits and exit passageways shall be provided from or between structures or devices to ensure safety in case of panic or disaster.

6602.6 Special Hazards.

Adequate fire extinguishing apparatus shall be provided subject to the approval of the Building Official.

6602.7 Reinspection.

The Building Official may cause all structures and devices regulated by this section to be reinspected, and fees for such inspection shall be paid as required by Section 107.

6603 – REBOUND TUMBLING EQUIPMENT

Rebound tumbling equipment, as used in this chapter and Section 107, is a fabric bed or surface designed to provide resilience by virtue of its own elasticity or that provided by an elastic or spring suspension system, or by both, within a stable and tested frame that is intended to be used for jumping, bouncing or acrobatic tumbling.

6604 – REBOUND TUMBLING CENTER

Rebound tumbling center, as used in this chapter, is a place where rebound tumbling equipment is provided and maintained for public use.

6605 – LAYOUT OF REBOUND TUMBLING EQUIPMENT

Rebound tumbling equipment shall be located on a level surface in such a way as to be within view of the operator or attendant at all times. The spacing of equipment units shall conform to the following minimum dimensions as measured from the inside edge of the frame:

1. Three feet (914 mm) between sides of units.

2. Four feet (1219 mm) between ends of units.

3. Five feet (1524 mm) from ends to nearest fence, building or other similar construction.

4. Three feet (914 mm) from sides or corners to nearest fence, building or other similar construction.

The area surrounding the rebound tumbling equipment shall be surfaced to prevent a dust nuisance and shall have a reasonably level surface of pea gravel or equivalent type of material from a safety and dust-control standpoint.

6606 – CONSTRUCTION OF PITS

Pits for rebound tumbling centers shall be so constructed that they will not interfere with the operation of the equipment and that they be of a depth not less than 3 feet (914 mm) or more than 4 feet (1219 mm) at centers. Such pits shall be so framed that the rebound tumbling equipment is held in a level position and is supported on a solid stable surface. Lumber used as framing for pits shall not be less than 2 inches (51 mm) in thickness and shall be securely connected together.

6607 – CONSTRUCTION OF EQUIPMENT

Precautionary measures shall be taken to prevent broken springs on rebound tumbling equipment from disengaging from the assembly.

6608 – USE OF PADDING

The frames of rebound tumbling equipment shall be completely padded to provide reasonable safety. Pads 2 inches (51 mm) thick filled with cotton liners shall be deemed to meet this requirement.

6609 – FENCING

The entire rebound tumbling center shall be completely enclosed by fencing not less than 5 feet (1524 mm) in height.

6610 – INSPECTION

The Building Official shall inspect annually every rebound tumbling center.

6611 – AUTOMOBILE RACING FACILITIES

6611.1 Scope.

Every person or corporation owning or operating oval and other closed track automobile racing facilities shall erect and maintain protective fencing between grandstands or bleacher areas in accordance with Section 6611.2. This section shall not apply where racing is limited to quarter midget cars, go-carts and similar smaller vehicles.

6611.2 Protective Fencing.

The location and construction of fencing shall comply with the following:

6611.2.1 Location.

Fencing shall be installed between the grandstands or bleachers and the track surface in the following situations:

1. When such surface is a curve and within 100 feet (30,480 mm) of the grandstands or bleachers.

2. When such surface is other than a curve and is within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of the grandstands or bleachers.

3. Notwithstanding Subsections 1 and 2, when such surface is within 50 feet (15,240 mm) of grandstands or bleachers and such grandstands and bleachers are located within the infield or other area surrounded by the track.

6611.2.2 Height.

Fencing shall extend 12 feet (3658 mm) above the highest grade of the racing surface.

6611.2.3 Construction.

At an adjacent to curves, the fencing shall be of galvanized wire mesh, minimum No. II gauge, with a maximum spacing between wires of 2 1/2 inches (63 mm). Galvanized steel posts spaced not greater than 12 feet (3658 mm) on center shall be designed to resist a minimum loading of 100 pounds applied perpendicular to the fence 5 feet (1524 mm) from its base. Two-and-one-half-inch-diameter (63 mm) standard weight, Schedule 40, steel pipe (2 7/8 inch outside diameter) (73 mm outside diameter) imbedded in a concrete foundation 3 feet (914 mm) deep and 18 inches (457 mm) in diameter will satisfy this requirement. Continuous seven-strand 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) diameter galvanized steel cable shall be provided horizontally at the top and bottom of the fencing. Additional continuous 1/4-inch (6.4 mm) horizontal cables shall be provided at a 4-foot (1219 mm) maximum spacing. Such cable shall be mechanically fastened to the post. At locations other than curves, the spacing between wires may be increased to 4 inches (102 mm).

6611.3 Curves.

For the purpose of this section, curves are defined as those portions of the track having a radius of less than 1,000 feet (304.8 m) at the inside edge and shall include a distance of 50 feet (15,240 mm) from each end of the curve.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.255 Adoption of Chapter 67, Security Provisions.
A new Chapter 67, Security Provisions, is adopted as the security provisions of the Palmdale Building Code, to read and be cited as follows:

CHAPTER 67 SECURITY PROVISIONS

6701 – PURPOSE

The purpose of this chapter is to set forth minimum standards of construction for resistance to unlawful entry.

6702 – SCOPE

The provisions of this chapter shall apply to enclosed Groups B, F, M, R and S occupancies and enclosed private garages.

6703 – LIMITATIONS

No provision of this chapter shall require or be construed to require devices on exit doors or on sleeping room emergency exits contrary to the requirements specified in Chapter 10 and Section 310.4.

6704 – ALTERNATE SECURITY PROVISIONS

The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any device or method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code when such alternate provides equivalent security based on a recommendation of the county sheriff or the City Public Safety Office.

6705 – DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:

CYLINDER GUARD is a protective metal device of hardened steel, or with a hardened steel insert, that covers or surrounds the exposed portion of the lock cylinder for the purpose of protecting the cylinder from wrenching, prying, cutting, driving through or pulling out by attack tools.

DEADBOLT is a bolt which has no automatic spring action and which is operated by a key cylinder, thumb turn or lever, and is positively held fast when in the projected position.

DEADLOCKING LATCH is a latch in which the latch bolt is positively held in the projected position by a guard bolt, plunger or auxiliary mechanism.

LATCH is a device for automatically retaining the door in a closed position upon its closing.

6706 – TESTS – SLIDING GLASS DOORS

Panels shall be closed and locked. Tests shall be performed in the following order:

6706.1 Test A.

With the panels in the normal position, a concentrated load of 300 pounds shall be applied separately to each vertical pull stile incorporating a locking device, at a point on the stile within 6 inches (152.4 mm) of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the door.

6706.2 Test B.

Repeat Test A while simultaneously adding a concentrated load of 150 pound to the same area of the same stile in a direction perpendicular to the plane of glass toward the interior side of the door.

6706.3 Test C.

Repeat Test B with the 150-pound (667.2 N) force in the reversed direction toward the exterior side of the door.

6706.4 Tests D, E and F.

Repeat Tests A, B and C with the movable panel lifted upwards to its full limit within the confines of the door frame.

6706.5 Identification.

Sliding glass door assemblages subject to the provisions of this section shall bear a label or other approved means of identification indicating compliance with these tests. The label shall be a type authorized through a recognized testing agency that provides periodic follow-up inspection service.

6707 – TESTS – SLIDING GLASS WINDOWS

Sash shall be closed and locked. Tests shall be performed in the following order:

6707.1 Test A.

With the sliding sash in the normal position, a concentrated load of 150 pounds shall be applied separately to each sash member incorporating a locking device, at a point on the sash member within 6 inches (152.4 mm) of the locking device, in the direction parallel to the plane of glass that would tend to open the window.

6707.2 Test B.

Repeat Test A while simultaneously adding a concentrated load of 75 pounds to the same area of the same sash member in the direction perpendicular to the plane of glass toward the interior side of the window.

6707.3 Test C.

Repeat Test B with the 75 pounds of force in the reversed direction toward the exterior side of the window.

6707.4 Tests D, E and F.

Repeat Tests A, B and C with the movable sash lifted upwards to its full limit within the confines of the window frame.

6707.5 Identification.

Sliding glass window assemblages subject to the provisions of this section shall bear a label or other approved means of identification indicating compliance with these tests. The label shall be a type authorized through a recognized testing agency, which provides periodic follow up inspection service.

6708 – DOORS – GENERAL

A door forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit or of an area occupied by one tenant of a building shall be constructed, installed, and secured as set forth in Sections 6709, 6711 and 6712, when such door is directly reachable or capable of being reached from a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway, private garage, portion of the building which is available for use by the public or other tenants, or similar area. A door enclosing a private garage with an interior opening leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with said Sections 6709, 6710, 6711 and 6712.

6709 – DOORS – SWINGING DOORS

6709.1

Swinging wooden doors which are operable from the inside without the use of a key shall be of one of the following constructions or shall be of a construction having equivalent forced entry resistance:

6709.1.1

Solid-core doors not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness.

6709.1.2

Wood panel-type doors with panels fabricated of lumber not less than 1 3/8 inches (34.9 mm) thick, provided shaped portions of the panels are not less than 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thick. Individual panels shall not exceed 300 square inches (0.19 m2) in area. Stiles and rails shall be of solid lumber with overall dimensions of not less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness and 3 inches (76 mm) in width. Mullions shall be considered a part of adjacent panels unless sized as required herein for stiles and rails, except mullions not over 18 inches (457 mm) long may have an overall width of not less than 2 inches (51 mm). Carved areas shall have a thickness of not less than 3/8 inch (9.5 mm). Dimensional tolerances published in recognized industry standards may be utilized.

6709.1.3

Hollow-core doors or doors less than 1 3/8 inches (35 mm) in thickness, either of which are covered on the inside face with 16-gauge sheet metal attached with screws at 6 inches (152 mm) maximum centers around the perimeter.

Lights in doors shall be as set forth in Sections 6714 and 6715.

6709.2

A single swinging door, the active leaf of a pair of doors, and the bottom leaf of Dutch doors shall be equipped with a deadbolt and a latch. A dead latch shall be used if a key-locking feature is incorporated in the latching mechanism. The deadbolt and latch may be activated by one lock or by individual locks. Deadbolts shall contain hardened inserts, or the equivalent, so as to repel cutting tool attack. The deadbolt lock or locks shall be key-operated from the exterior side of the door and engaged or disengaged from the interior side of the door by a device not requiring a key, tool or excessive force.

EXCEPTIONS:

1. The latch may be omitted from doors in Group B occupancies.

2. In other than residential occupancies, locks may be key-operated, or otherwise operated from the inside when not prohibited by Chapter 10 or other laws and regulations.

3. A swinging door of greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) width may be secured as set forth in Section 6711.

4. In residential occupancies, doors not required by Section 310.4 or 1004.1 may be equipped with security type hardware which requires a key to release from the interior side of the door if the sleeping rooms are protected with a fire warning system as set forth in Section 310.9.

A straight deadbolt shall have a minimum throw of 1 inch (25.4 mm) and the embedment shall not be less than 5/8 inch (15.9 mm) into the holding device receiving the projected bolt. A hook shape or expanding lug deadbolt shall have a minimum throw of 3/4 inch (19 mm). All deadbolts of locks which automatically activate two or more deadbolts shall embed at least 1/2 inch (12.7 mm), but need not exceed 3/4 inch (19 mm), into the holding devices receiving the projected bolts.

6709.3

The inactive leaf of a pair of doors and the upper leaf of Dutch doors shall be equipped with a deadbolt or deadbolts as set forth in Section 6709.2.

EXCEPTIONS:

1. The bolt or bolts need not be key-operated, but shall not be otherwise activated, from the exterior side of the door.

2. The bolt or bolts may be engaged or disengaged automatically with the deadbolt or by another device on the active leaf or lower leaf.

3. Manually operated hardened bolts that are at the top and bottom of the leaf and which embed a minimum of 1/2 inch (12.7 mm) into the device receiving the projected bolt may be used when not prohibited by Chapter 10 or other laws and regulations.

6709.4

Doorstops on wooden jambs for in-swinging doors shall be of one-piece construction with the jamb or joined by a rabbet.

6709.5

Non removable pins shall be used in pin-type hinges that are accessible from the outside when the door is closed.

6709.6

Cylinder guards shall be installed on cylinder locks for deadbolts whenever the cylinder projects beyond the outside face of the door or is otherwise accessible to attack tools.

6710 – DOORS – SLIDING GLASS DOORS

Sliding glass doors shall be equipped with locking devices and shall be so installed that, when subjected to tests specified in Section 6706, they remain intact and engaged. Movable panels shall not be rendered easily operable or removable from the frame during or after the tests. Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim-type cylinder locks installed in hollow metal doors whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools. Locking devices installed on sliding glass doors providing the exit required by Section 1003 or providing for the emergency escape or rescue required by Section 310.4 shall be releasable from the inside without the use of a key, tool or excessive force.

6711 – DOORS: OVERHEAD AND SLIDING DOORS

Metal or wooden overhead and sliding doors shall be secured with a deadbolt lock, padlock with a hardened steel shackle, or equivalent when not otherwise locked by electric power operation. Locking devices, when installed at the jamb of metal or wooden overhead doors, shall be installed on both jambs when such doors exceed 9 feet (2743 mm) in width. Metal or wooden sliding doors exceeding 9 feet (2743 mm) in width and provided with a jamb-locking device shall have the door side opposite the lock restrained by a guide or retainer. Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim-type cylinder locks installed in hollow metal doors whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools.

6712 – DOORS – METAL ACCORDION GRATE OR GRILLE-TYPE DOORS

Metal accordion grate or grille-type doors shall be equipped with metal guides at top and bottom, and a cylinder lock or padlock and hardened steel shackle shall be provided. Cylinder guards shall be installed on all mortise or rim-type cylinder locks installed in hollow metal doors whenever the cylinder projects beyond the face of the door or is otherwise accessible to gripping tools.

6713 – LIGHTS – GENERAL

A window, skylight or other light forming a part of the enclosure of a dwelling unit or of an area occupied by one tenant of a building shall be constructed, installed and secured as set forth in Sections 6714 and 6715, when the bottom of such window, skylight or light is not more than 16 feet (4877 mm) above the grade of a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway, private garage, portion of the building which is available for use by the public or other tenants, or similar area. A window enclosing a private garage with an interior opening leading directly to a dwelling unit shall also comply with Sections 6714 and 6715.

6714 – LIGHTS – MATERIAL

Lights within 40 inches (1016 mm) of a required locking device on a door when in the closed and locked position and openable from the inside without the use of a key, and lights with a least dimension greater than 6 inches (152 mm) but less than 48 inches (1219 mm) in Groups B, F, M and S occupancies, shall be fully tempered glass, laminated glass of at least 1/4 inch (6.4 mm) thickness, approved burglary resistant material, or guarded by metal bars, screens or grilles in an approved manner.

6715 – LIGHTS – LOCKING DEVICES

6715.1

Locking devices installed on windows providing the emergency egress required by Section 310.4 shall be releasable from the inside without use of a key, tool or excessive force.

6715.2

Sliding glass windows shall be provided with locking devices that, when subject to the tests specified in Section 6707, remain intact and engaged. Movable panels shall not be rendered easily operable or removable from the frame during or after the tests.

6715.3

Other operable windows shall be provided with substantial locking devices, which render the building as secure as the devices required by this section. In Groups B, F, M and S occupancies, such devices shall be a glide bar, bolt, cross bar, and/or padlock with hardened steel shackle.

6715.4 Special.

Louvered windows, except those above the first story in Group R occupancies which cannot be reached without a ladder, shall be of material or guarded as specified in Section 6714, and individual panes shall be securely fastened by mechanical fasteners that require a tool for removal and are not accessible on the outside when the window is in the closed position.

6716 – OTHER OPENINGS – GENERAL

Openings, other than doors or lights, which form a part of the enclosure, or portion thereof, housing a single occupant, and the bottom of which is not more than 16 feet (4877 mm) above the grade of a street, highway, yard, court, passageway, corridor, balcony, patio, breezeway or similar area, or from a private garage, or from a portion of the building which is occupied, used or available for use by the public or other tenants, or an opening enclosing a private garage attached to a dwelling unit with openings therein, shall be constructed, installed and secured as set forth in Section 6717.

6717 – HATCHWAYS, SCUTTLES AND SIMILAR OPENINGS

6717.1

Wooden hatchways of less than 1 3/4-inch thick (44 mm) solid wood shall be covered on the inside with 16-gage sheet metal attached with screws at 6-inch-maximum (152 mm) centers around perimeter.

6717.2

The hatchway shall be secured from the inside with a slide bar, slide bolt, and/or padlock with a hardened steel shackle.

6717.3

Outside pin type hinges shall be provided with non-removable pins or a means by which the door cannot be opened through removal of hinge pins while the door is in the closed position.

6717.4

Other openings exceeding 96 square inches (0.062 m2) with a least dimension exceeding 8 inches (203 mm) shall be secured by metal bars, screens or grilles in an approved manner.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.260 Adoption of Chapter 68, Relocation Permits Provisions.
A new Chapter 68, Relocation Permit Provisions, is adopted as the relocation permit provisions of the Palmdale Building Code, to read and to be cited as follows:

6801 – RELOCATION BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED

A person shall not move a building or structure onto any premises until such person first secures a relocation-building permit as hereinafter provided.

6802 – RELOCATION BUILDING PERMIT NOT REQUIRED

A permit is not required where the only relocation involved is that of moving a building temporarily to the regularly occupied business premises of a house mover, nor is a permit required for a contractor’s tool house, construction building or similar structure which is moved as construction requires.

6803 – APPLICATIONS

Every application to the Building Official for a relocation building permit shall be in writing on a form furnished by the Building Official and shall set forth such information as the Building Official may reasonably require in order to carry out the purpose of this chapter.

6804 – INVESTIGATION REQUIRED

A rendering, perspective drawing or other illustration acceptable shall accompany every application to the Building Official for a relocation building permit to the Building Official showing, in color, the appearance of the completed building on the proposed site. If there is to be no substantial change of the exterior of the building in its new location, and if a photograph or photographs taken at the existing site will adequately represent the appearance of the completed building on the proposed site, the Building Official may waive the requirement of a rendering or equivalent drawing. In addition, the Building official may require the submission of such plans, photographs and other substantiating data, in connection with a relocation building permit application, and may initiate any investigation that the Building Official deems necessary and helpful in determining any matters presented by the application.

6805 – APPLICATION FEES

The applicant for a relocation building permit shall pay an application and investigation fee, as provided by Section 107, to the Building Official for inspection of the building at its present location and investigation of the proposed site.

6806 – PERMIT FEES

Relocation building permit fees for repairs or alterations to relocated buildings shall be required in accordance with Section 107 of this code.

6807 – ISSUANCE OF PERMIT

If the condition of the building or structure, in the judgment of the Building Official, admits of practicable and effective repair, the Building official may issue a relocation building permit to the owner of the property where the building or structure is to be located subject to conditions as hereinafter provided otherwise, the permit shall be denied.

6808 – PROHIBITED BUILDINGS

Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the Building Official shall not issue relocation buildings permit for any building or structure which:

1. Is so constructed or in such condition as to be dangerous.

2. Is infested with pests or is unsanitary.

3. Is unfit for use if it is a dwelling or habitation.

4. Is so dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such a condition of deterioration or disrepair that its relocation at the proposed site would cause appreciable harm to or be materially detrimental to the property or improvements in the district within a radius of 1,000 feet (304.8 m) from the proposed site.

5. Is prohibited for the proposed use by the City land use ordinance.

6. Is of a type prohibited at the proposed location by this or any other law or ordinance.

7. Because of age, size, design or architectural treatment, does not substantially conform to the design, plan and construction of the buildings located in the district within a radius of 1,000 feet (304.8 m) from the proposed site so that its relocation would be detrimental to the property or improvements in said district.

6809 – CONDITIONS OF PERMIT

In granting any relocation building permit, the Building Official may impose such terms and conditions, as he or she deems reasonable and proper. These terms and conditions shall include, but are not limited to, compliance with provisions of this code for new buildings or structures to the extent that is reasonable and practical; the period of time required to complete all work; and the requirement of changes, alterations, additions or repairs to be made to or upon the building or structures to ensure that the relocation will not be materially detrimental or injurious to public safety, public welfare, to the property and improvements, in the district, as limited herein, to which it is to be relocated.

6810 – UNFINISHED RELOCATED BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES

Where the work required to be done pursuant to the terms and conditions of a relocation-building permit has not been performed within the period of time allowed by such permit, or within the extension of time granted thereto in writing by the Building Official, the building or structure shall be deemed and is hereby found to be substandard. The nuisance shall be abated in accordance with provisions of the Housing or Abatement of Dangerous Buildings or city nuisance abatement codes as appropriate.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.265 Chapter 70, Excavation and Grading.
Chapter 70, Excavation and Grading, is adopted as the excavation and grading provisions of the Palmdale Building Code to read and to be cited as follows:

CHAPTER 70 EXCAVATION AND GRADING

SECTION 7001 – SCOPE

This chapter sets forth regulations for the control of excavation, grading, and earthwork construction, including fills or embankments, and for the control of grading site runoff, including erosion, sediments and construction related pollutants. These regulations establish minimum standards and are not intended to prevent the use of alternate materials, methods or means of conforming to such standards, provided such alternate has been approved. The building official or City Engineer shall approve such an alternate provided he or she finds that the alternate, for the purpose intended, is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this code in quality, strength, effectiveness, durability and safety. The building official or City Engineer shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claims regarding the alternate.

SECTION 7002 – DEFINITIONS

For the purpose of this chapter certain terms are defined as follows:

APPROVAL shall mean the proposed work or completed work conforms to this code in the opinion of the building official.

AS-GRADED is the extent of surface conditions on completion of grading.

BEDROCK is the relatively solid, undisturbed rock in place either at the ground surface or beneath superficial deposits of gravel and/or soil.

BENCH is a relatively level step excavated into firm earth material on which fill is to be placed.

BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) is a storm water pollution mitigation measure that is required to be employed in order to comply with the requirements of the NPDES permit issued to the City of Palmdale.

BORROW is earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading.

CIVIL ENGINEER shall mean a professional engineer in the branch of civil engineering holding a valid certificate of registration issued by the State of California.

COMPACTION shall mean the densification of a fill by mechanical means.

DESIGN ENGINEER shall mean the civil engineer responsible for the preparation of the plans for the grading work.

DESILTING BASINS are physical structures constructed for the removal of sediments from surface water runoff.

EARTH MATERIAL is any rock, natural soil or fill or any combination thereof.

ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST. See “geologist.”

ENGINEERING GEOLOGY is the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil works.

EROSION is the displacement of soil by the action of wind or water.

EXCAVATION is the mechanical removal of earth material.

FIELD ENGINEER shall mean the civil engineer responsible for performing the functions as set forth in Section 7021.

FILL shall mean deposits of soil, rock or other similar irreducible materials placed by humans.

GEOLOGIST shall mean a person holding a valid certificate of registration as a geologist in the specialty of engineering geology issued by the State of California under provisions of the Geologist and Geophysicist Act of the Business and Professions Code.

GRADE is the vertical location of the ground surface.

EXISTING GRADE is the grade prior to grading.

FINISH GRADE is the final grade of the site that conforms to the approved plan.

FUGITIVE DUST shall mean any solid particulate matter that becomes airborne directly or indirectly as a result of the activities of man.

GRADING shall mean any excavation or fill or combination thereof.

KEY is a designed compacted fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of the proposed fill slope.

LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT shall mean a person who holds a certificate to practice landscape architecture in the State of California under the landscape architecture provisions of Division 3, Chapter 3.5, of the Business and Professions Code.

LINE shall refer to horizontal location of the ground surface.

NATURAL GRADE is the vertical location of the ground surface prior to any excavation or fill.

ROUGH GRADE is the elevation of the ground surface established by grading that approximates the final elevation shown on the approved design.

SITE is any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof, under the same ownership, where grading is proposed or performed.

SLOPE is an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance.

SOILS ENGINEER is a civil engineer experienced in soil mechanics who investigates and reports on the stability of existing or proposed slopes, controls the installation and compaction of fills, recommends soil-bearing values, and provides design criteria and calculations for special earth structures such as buttress fills. It is not the intent of this definition or this chapter to require that the civil engineer be authorized by the state to use the title “soils engineer.”

SURFACE DRAINAGE shall refer to flows over the ground surface.

SOIL TESTING AGENCY is an agency regularly engaged in the testing of soils and rock under the direction of a civil engineer experienced in soil testing.

STORM DRAIN SYSTEM is a conveyance or system of conveyances, including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches and man-made channels, designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water.

STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN is a site drawing with details, notes, and related documents that identify the measures taken by the permittee to (1) control erosion and prevent sediment and construction-related pollutants from being carried off-site by storm water and (2) prevent non storm water discharges from entering the storm drain system.

TERRACE is a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

SECTION 7003 – GRADING PERMITS

Permits Required. A person shall not perform any grading without first obtaining grading permits to do so from the City Engineer. A separate permit shall be obtained for each site.

EXCEPTION: A grading permit shall not be required for:

1. An excavation which is less than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth below the existing ground surface, measured vertically downward from natural grade to the deepest point of the excavation.

2. A fill which is not intended to support structures and which does not obstruct a drainage course if such fill (a) is placed on natural grade that has a slope not steeper than five horizontal to one vertical and is less than 1 foot (305 mm) deep, or (b) is less than 3 feet (914 mm) in depth at its deepest point, measured vertically upward from natural grade to the surface of the fill, and does not exceed 50 cubic yards (38.2 m3), or (c) does not exceed 20 cubic yards (15.3 m3) on any one lot.

3. An excavation below finish grade for basements and footings of structures authorized by a valid building permit or trench excavations for the purpose of installing underground utilities.

4. Grading within property dedicated or used for cemetery purposes where such grading is more than 100 feet (30,480 mm) from the property line and is not intended to support structures. No permit shall be required for the excavation or filling of graves at any location within such property.

5. Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel aggregate or clay, where established and provided for by law, provided that such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in, or pressure upon, any adjacent or contiguous property.

6. Grading in an isolated, self-contained area if the building official finds that no danger to private or public property can now or hereafter result from the grading operations.

7. The depositing of rubbish or other material at any refuse-disposal facility operated under a permit granted according to the terms of Division 4, entitled “Solid Waste,” of Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code.

8. An excavation or fill in connection with the making of an earth fill dam, reservoir or levee when other laws, statutes or ordinances regulate the quality of such work.

9. An excavation, fill, and/or measures approved by the Soil Conservation District or cooperative agency of the Department of Agriculture.

10. An excavation or fill for road or slope purposes and shown on plans that are approved by the Department of Public Works as being necessary for the support, construction or maintenance of a public road.

11. Exploratory excavations under the direction of soils engineers or engineering geologists.

12. Grading for an oil and/or gas drilling site which is located in an existing oil field as designated by the State Division of Oil and Gas and is 1,000 feet (304.8 m) from a public highway and 500 feet (152.4 m) from the nearest residence. The proposed grading must not result in the deposition of silt and debris onto downstream property.

7003.2 Unpermitted Grading.

A person shall not own, use, occupy or maintain any site containing unpermitted grading. For the purposes of this code, unpermitted grading shall be defined as any grading that was performed, at any point in time, without the required permit(s) having first been obtained from the City Engineer, pursuant to Subsection 7003.1, supra.

7003.3 Availability of Permit at Site.

No person shall perform any grading for which a permit is required under this chapter unless a copy of the grading permit is in the possession of a responsible person and is available at the site.

SECTION 7004 – APPLICATION TO EXISTING GRADING

7004.1 Hazardous Conditions.

Whenever the building official or city engineer determines that any existing excavation, embankment or fill has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers structures, or adversely affects the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation, embankment or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the building official or City Engineer shall, within the period specified therein, repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation, embankment or fill so as to eliminate the hazard.

7004.2 Maintenance of Protective Devices and Rodent Control.

The owner of any property on which grading has been performed pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this code, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and repair all drainage structures and other protective devices and burrowing rodent control, when they are shown on the grading plans filed with the application for grading permit and approved as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit.

7004.3 Correlation with Other Sections.

The provisions of this section are independent of this code relating to building and property rehabilitation.

This section may be invoked even though the same facts have been used to determine that there is a substandard property that is subject to said code.

SECTION 7005 – GRADING PERMIT REQUIREMENTS

7005.1 Application.

To obtain a grading permit, the applicant shall first file an application in writing on a form furnished for that purpose. Every such application shall:

1. Describe the land on which the proposed work is to be performed by lot, block, tract, and by a street address or by similar description sufficient to readily identify and definitely locate the site.

2. State the name and address of the owner of said land, the person who is to perform the work, and the field engineer if such work is to be performed as engineered grading.

3. Be accompanied by plans, specifications and calculations as may be required by Section 7005.2.

4. State the volume of the material to be handled.

5. Be signed by the applicant or authorized agent, who may be required to submit evidence of such authority.

6. Give such other information as reasonably may be required by the building official or City Engineer.

7005.2 Plans and Specifications.

With each application for a grading permit and when required by the City Engineer for enforcement of any provisions of this code, three sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted. Except as waived by the City Engineer, the plans shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer and shall show the following:

1. A vicinity sketch or other means of adequately indicating the site location.

2. Boundary lines of the property on which the work is to be performed.

3. Each lot or parcel of land into which the site is proposed to be divided.

4. All of the proposed uses of the site and, if the site is to be divided, the proposed use of each lot or parcel of land.

5. Location of any existing buildings or structures on the property where the work is to be performed, and the location of any buildings or structures on adjacent land which are within 15 feet (4572 mm) of the property line.

6. Accurate contours showing the topography of the existing ground.

7. Elevations, location, extent and slope of all proposed grading shown by contours, cross sections or other means and location of any rock disposal area buttress fills or other special features, if such are proposed to be included in the work.

8. A statement of the quantities of material to be excavated and/or filled and the amount of such material to be imported to, or exported from, the site.

9. A statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for work covered by the permit.

10. A statement signed by the owner acknowledging that a field engineer, geotechnical engineer and engineering geologist, when appropriate, will be employed to perform the services required by this code, whenever approval of the plans and issuance of the permit are to be based on the condition that such professional persons be so employed. These acknowledgments shall be on a form furnished by the building official.

11. The recommendations in the soil engineering and engineering geology reports shall be incorporated in the grading plans.

12. Detailed plans of all drainage-devices, walls, cribbing or other protective devices to be constructed in connection with, or as a part of, the proposed work, together with a map showing the drainage area and estimated runoff of the area served by any drains. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance.

13. Storm water provisions are required to be shown on the plan in accordance with the requirement of Section 106.4.3 of the code. See Section 7013 for specific requirements.

14. Any additional plans, drawings or calculations deemed necessary by the building official or City Engineer to show conformance of the proposed work with the requirements of this code or related ordinances.

15. A drainage plan for that portion of a lot or parcel to be utilized as a building site (building pad), including elevations of floors with respect to finish site grade and locations of proposed stoops, slabs and fences that may affect drainage. The dates of the soils engineering and/or engineering geology (geotechnical) reports together with the names, addresses and telephone numbers of the firms or individuals who are in responsible charge of preparing the reports.

Fees. Grading permit and plan checking fees shall be as specified in the City of Palmdale Fee Ordinance.

7005.4 Engineering Geological Reports.

The city engineer or building official may require an engineering geological investigation and report, based on the most recent grading plan. The engineering geological report shall include an adequate description of the geology of the site and conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development.

7005.5 Soil Reports.

The city engineer or building official may require a soils investigation and report based on the most recent grading plan. Such reports shall include data regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils and recommendations for grading procedures and design criteria for corrective measures, if required.

7005.6 Review of Reports.

All reports shall conform with the requirements of Chapter 1 of the Building Code and shall be subject to review by the city engineer or building official. Supplemental reports and data may be required as the city engineer or building official deems necessary. Recommendations included in the reports and approved by the building official shall be incorporated in the grading plan or specifications.

7005.7 Preplan Check Site Inspection.

When the city engineer or building official finds that a visual inspection of the site is necessary to establish drainage requirements for the protection of property, existing buildings or the proposed construction, a site inspection shall be made prior to plan check of grading plans.

7005.8 Landscape Permits.

Whenever a landscape permit is required as part of a grading project, the grading, irrigation and landscape plans shall be coordinated between the design engineer and landscape architect. The landscape plans shall be based on the most recent grading plan. Should there be any final elevation differences between the two plans, the elevations shown on the grading plans shall govern.

SECTION 7006 – PERMIT LIMITATIONS AND CONDITIONS

7006.1 General Conditions.

The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the permit or on the grading plans and specifications approved by the building official.

7006.2 Jurisdictions of Other Agencies.

Permits issued under the provisions of this code shall not relieve the owner of the responsibility for securing permits or licenses that may be required from other departments or divisions of the governing agencies.

7006.3 Conditions of Approval.

In granting any permit under this code, the City Engineer or Building Official may attach such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to prevent creation of a nuisance or hazard to public or private property. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to:

1. Improvement of any existing grading to bring it up to the standards of this code.

2. Requirements for fencing of excavations or fills that would otherwise be hazardous.

3. Fugitive dust control measures. See Section 7013 for specific requirements.

Modification of Approved Plans. Any modifications of or changes in the approved grading plans must be approved by the City Engineer. Modifications which affect basic tract design or land use must have the approval of the appropriate control agency.

Special Permit. Agricultural or Road Grading. Where the grading proposed is solely for the purpose of preparing land for agricultural purposes or for the construction of a roadway to be used as access for maintaining the use of the land at the time of the permit, the City Engineer or Building Official may issue a special permit therefor and modify the requirements of this chapter when he or she finds:

1. The site of the proposed work has an area of not less than 10 acres (4.05 ha).

2. The work will be reasonably safe for the intended use and will not result in a hazard to adjoining property or existing structures.

3. Adequate provision will be made for drainage and erosion control.

SECTION 7007 – DENIAL OF PERMIT

7007.1 Hazards.

The City Engineer or Building Official shall not issue a grading permit in any case where he or she finds that the work, as proposed by the applicant, is likely to adversely affect the stability of adjoining property, result in the deposition of debris on any public way, interfere with any existing drainage course or be in an area determined to be subject to geological hazard. If it can be shown to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or Building Official that the hazard can be essentially eliminated by the construction of retaining structures, buttress fills, drainage devices or by other means, the City Engineer or Building Official may issue the permit with the condition that such work be performed.

7007.2 Land Use.

The City Engineer or Building Official shall not issue a grading permit for work on a site unless the proposed uses shown on the grading plan for the site will comply with the City of Palmdale Zoning Ordinance.

SECTION 7008 – SECURITY

7008.1 Security Required.

A permit shall not be issued for grading unless the owner shall first post with the city engineer security in one of the following forms:

1. A bond furnished by a corporate surety authorized to do business in this state.

2. A cash bond.

3. An instrument of credit from a financial institution subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the grading are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, or a letter of credit issued by such a financial institution.

Security required by this section may include incidental off-site grading on property contiguous with the site to be developed, provided written consent of the owner of such contiguous property is filed with the city engineer.

The City Engineer may waive the requirements for a security for:

1. Grading being done by or for a governmental agency.

2. Grading necessary to remove a geological hazard, where such work is covered by an agreement and security.

3. Filling of holes or depressions, provided such grading will not affect the drainage from or to adjacent properties.

7008.2 Amount of Security.

The amount of security shall be based on the number of cubic yards of material in either excavation or fill, whichever is greater, plus the cost of all drainage or other protective devices or work necessary to eliminate geological hazards. That portion of the security valuation based on the volume of material in either excavation or fill shall be computed as 100 percent of the estimated cost, regardless of the cubic yardage. When the rough grading has been completed in conformance with the requirements of this code, the City Engineer may at his or her discretion consent to a proportionate reduction of the security to an amount estimated to be adequate to ensure completion of the grading work, site development or planting remaining to be performed. The costs referred to in this section shall be as estimated by the building official.

7008.3 Conditions.

All security shall include the conditions that the principal shall:

1. Comply with all of the provisions of the code, applicable laws, and ordinances.

2. Comply with all of the terms and conditions of the grading permit.

3. Complete all of the work authorized by the permit.

7008.4 Term of Security.

The term of each security shall begin upon the filing thereof with the city engineer and the security shall remain in effect until the work authorized by the grading permit is completed and approved by the City Engineer.

Default Procedures. In the event the owner or the owner’s agent fails to complete the work or fails to comply with all terms and conditions of the grading permit, it shall be deemed that a default has occurred. The city engineer shall give notice thereof to the principal and security or financial institution on the grading permit security, or to the owner in the case of a cash deposit or assignment, and may order the work required to complete the grading in conformance with the requirements of this code. The surety or financial institution executing the security shall continue to be firmly bound under an obligation up to the full amount of the security for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred by the city engineer in causing any and all such required work to be done. In the case of a cash deposit or assignment, the unused portion of such deposit or funds assigned shall be returned or reassigned to the person making said deposit or assignment.

Right of Entry. The City Engineer or Building Official or the authorized representative of the Surety Company or financial institution shall have access to the premises described in the permit for the purpose of inspecting the work. In the event of default in the performance of any term or condition of the permit, the surety or financial institution or the building official, or any person employed or engaged in the behalf of any of these parties, shall have the right to go upon the premises to perform the required work. The owner or any other person who interferes with or obstructs the ingress to or egress from any such premises of any authorized representative of the surety or financial institution or of the City of Palmdale engaged in the correction or completion of the work for which a grading permit has been issued, after a default has occurred in the performance of the terms or conditions thereof, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

SECTION 7009 – SAFETY PRECAUTIONS

If at any stage of the work the City Engineer or Building Official determines by inspection that further grading as authorized is likely to endanger any public or private property, result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course, the City Engineer or Building Official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall forthwith stop such work. The City Engineer or Building Official may authorize the work to proceed if the City Engineer or Building Official finds adequate safety precautions can be taken or corrective measures incorporated in the work to avoid likelihood of such danger, deposition or interference. If the grading work as done has created or resulted in a hazardous condition, the City Engineer or Building Official shall give written notice requiring correction thereof as specified in Section 7004 of this code. If the City Engineer or Building Official finds any existing conditions not as stated in the grading permit or not as shown on the grading plan, the City Engineer or Building Official may order the work stopped until a revised grading plan which includes provisions for such existing conditions has been submitted and approved.

SECTION 7010 – STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (EROSION CONTROL)

No grading permit shall be issued for work to be commenced between October 1 of any year and April 15 of the following calendar year, unless the plans for such work include a storm water management plan with details of protective measures, including desilting basins or other temporary drainage or control measures, or both, as may be necessary to protect adjoining public and private property from damage by erosion, flooding or the deposition of mud, debris or construction-related pollutants which may originate from the site or result from such grading operation.

If grading has been started prior to November 1, all protective measures shall be installed prior to November 1. If grading is started on or after November 1, all protective measures shall be installed before grading begins. As grading progresses, all protective measures shall be maintained in good working order to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or Building Official until April 15 of the following year, unless final grading approval has been granted by the City Engineer or Building Official prior to that date and all permanent drainage and erosion-control systems, if required, are in place.

SECTION 7011 – STORM DAMAGE PRECAUTIONS, INCOMPLETE WORK

Where a grading permit is issued and the work is commenced after April 15 and before October 1 of any year and the plans for such work do not include details of the protective measures described in Section 7010, and it appears that the grading and installation of the permanent drainage devices as authorized by the permit will not be completed prior to November 1, then on or before October 1 the owner of the site on which the grading is being performed shall file or cause to be filed with the City Engineer or Building Official revised plans which include details of the protective measures described in and in all other respects follow the provisions of Section 7010. The revised plans required by this section shall be accompanied by an application for plan check services and plan check fees equal in amount to 10 percent of the original grading permit fee.

SECTION 7012 – STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (EROSION CONTROL), EFFECT OF NONCOMPLIANCE

Should the owner fail to submit the plans or fail to provide the protective measures required by Section 7010 or 7011 by the dates specified therein, it shall be deemed that a default has occurred under the conditions of the grading permit security. Thereupon, the City Engineer or Building Official may enter the property for the purpose of installing, by city forces or by other means, the drainage, erosion control and other devices shown on the approved plans, or if there are no approved plans, as the city engineer or building official may deem necessary to protect adjoining property from storm damage, or the City Engineer or Building Official may cause the owner of the site to be prosecuted as a violator of this code or the building official or city engineer may take both actions. The City Engineer or Building Official shall have the authority to collect the penalties imposed by Section 7012 upon determining that the site is not in compliance with the requirements of this section. Payment of penalty shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this code in the execution of the work.

In addition to the above actions, the following penalties shall be imposed:

1. If a designed erosion-control plan is not submitted as prescribed in Section 7011:

Grading Permit Volume

Penalty

1 – 10,000 cubic yards (1 – 7,645.5 m3)

$50.00 per day

10,000 – 100,000 cubic yards (7,646.3 – 76,455 m3)

$250.00 per day

2. If protective devices for erosion control are not installed as prescribed in Section 7010 and approved by the building official or city engineer:

Grading Permit Volume

Penalty

1 – 10,000 cubic yards (1 – 7,645.5 m3)

$100.00 per day

10,000 – 100,000 cubic yards (7,646.3 – 76,455 m3)

$500.00 per day

More than 100,000 cubic yards (76,455 m3)

$1,000.00 per day

7012.1 Costs and Penalties.

If not paid within 30 days from the date of the notice, the penalties imposed by Section 7012 shall become a special assessment against the property.

7012.2 Notice of Violation.

7012.2.1 General.

The City Engineer or Building Official may record a notice of violation with the county recorder’s office when a property is in violation of Section 7010 of this code. Recordation of such notice shall be subject to the provisions of Sections 7012.2.2 and 7012.2.3. The remedy provided by this section is cumulative to any other enforcement action permitted by this code.

7012.2.2 Recordation.

If (1) the City Engineer or Building Official determines that any property is in violation of Section 7010 of this code; and if (2) the city engineer or building official gives written notice as specified below of said violation; and if (3) within 30 days of said notice, the property is not brought into compliance with this code, the City Engineer Or Building Official may, at his or her sole discretion, at any time thereafter, record with the county recorder’s office a notice that the property is in violation of this code.

Contents of Notice. The written notice given pursuant to this section shall indicate:

1. The nature of the violation(s); and

2. Notice that if the violation is not remedied to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or Building Official within 30 days, the City Engineer or Building Official may, at any time thereafter, record with the county recorder’s office a notice that the property is in violation of this code. The notice shall be posted on the property and shall be mailed to the owner of the property as indicated on the last equalized county assessment roll. The mailed notice may be sent by registered, certified or first class mail.

7012.2A Rescission.

Any person who desires to have recorded a notice rescinding the notice of violation may present evidence of compliance and payment of penalty fees and costs to the City Engineer or Building Official. The costs incurred by the City Engineer or Building Official in the investigation of such violations and the processing of the notice and notification of concerned parties and inspection costs shall be as specified in currently adopted Palmdale Fee Ordinance. If the City Engineer or Building Official determines that such fees have been paid and such costs have been recovered by the city, or that such fees and costs have been placed on the tax rolls as a special assessment pursuant to Section 25845 of the Government Code, the City Engineer or Building Official shall record a notice rescinding the prior notice of violation.

SECTION 7013 – RESPONSIBILITY OF PERMITTEE

7013.1 Compliance with Plans and Code.

The permittee or the permittee’s agent shall carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and in compliance with all the requirements of this code.

7013.2 Coordinator.

The permittee shall act as the coordinator between the consultants, contractor and City Engineer or Building Official. The permittee shall present to the city engineer or building official the names of all consultants prior to obtaining a grading permit. In the event of changed conditions, the permittee shall be responsible for informing the City Engineer or Building Official of such change and shall provide revised plans and reports for approval. All slope planting shall also be subject to the requirements of City of Palmdale Landscape Ordinance. If a landscape permit is not required, the slope planting shall be a part of the grading permit. If the slope planting is within an area in which a landscape permit is required under City of Palmdale Landscape Ordinance, all slope planting shall also meet the requirements of this chapter and shall be a part of the landscape permit.

7013.3 Inspections.

It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to notify the City Engineer when the work is ready for the inspections required by Section 7020. The notification shall be at least one working day in advance of the inspection.

7013.4 Protection of Utilities.

The permittee shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services.

7013.5 Protection of Adjacent Property.

The permittee is responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property, and no person shall excavate on land sufficiently close to the property line to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage which might result. Special precautions shall be made to prevent imported or exported materials from being deposited on the adjacent public way and/or drainage courses.

7013.6 Storm Water Control Measures.

The permittee shall put into effect and maintain all mitigation measures required under the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to the City of Palmdale. Such measures are precautionary measures necessary to protect adjacent watercourses and public or private property from damage by erosion flooding and deposition of mud debris, and construction-related pollutants.

7013.7 Termination of Consultants.

The permittee shall notify the city engineer or building official within 48 hours if any consultant resigns or is terminated.

7013.8 Best Management Practices.

The permittee shall maintain the site in such a manner as to minimize the impacts of storm water and construction related pollutants due to the grading and related construction activities on adjacent public and private property and drainage courses. The required best management practices shall include, but not be limited to, those identified in this section.

7013.8.1

All equipment used for grading and related activities shall be stored, serviced and refueled in a designated area specifically designed to prevent waste oils, fuels, solvents and other pollutants from contaminating the soil or being conveyed by storm water.

7013.8.2

All fuels, solvents, oil, and other foreign substances and their containers shall be stored in accordance with their listing and protected from the weather in such a manner as to prevent them from contaminating the soil or being conveyed by storm water.

7013.8.3

A covered receptacle shall be available on-site for collection of trash and debris to be disposed of off-site.

The site shall be maintained in such a manner as to prevent the deposition of trash and debris onto adjacent public and private property.

7013.8.4

All vehicles or equipment shall be free of mud and debris before leaving the site so as not to track or deposit such material onto the public way. The roadway entrance must be stabilized in such a manner as to prevent the off-site tracking of soil or mud. Provisions shall be made for immediate cleaning of the public way when accidental depositions occur.

7013.9 Fugitive Dust Control Measures.

The permittee shall put into effect and maintain control measures so as to not cause or allow emissions of fugitive dust from any active grading operation, open stockpile area, or disturbed area such that the presence of dust remains visible in the atmosphere beyond the property line of the emission source. Control measures may include, but are not limited to, the suspension of grading operations, the application of water, the application of chemical stabilizers, the installation of temporary coverings, the installation of silt fencing, or the establishment of vegetative ground cover.

SECTION 7014 – IMPORT AND EXPORT OF EARTH MATERIALS

In addition to other provisions of this code, the following requirements shall apply when earth materials in excess of 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) are to be exported from or imported to a grading site by transporting such materials over a publicly maintained street.

1. The point or points of access to the public street or streets for export or import shall be shown on the grading plan and shall be located as approved by the city engineer.

2. Special safety precautions equivalent to the following standards shall be provided where the egress (outhaul) road connects with the public street.

2.1 The last 50 feet (15,240 mm) of the outhaul road immediately adjoining the street if downgrade to the street shall have a grade no steeper than 3 percent.

2.2 An unobstructed sight distance of not less than 300 feet (91440 mm) in each direction up and down the public street shall be provided at the point of egress. Such sight distance shall be measured from a point 8 feet (2438 mm) above grade in the outhaul road; that point shall be 10 feet (3048 mm) outside the edge of the street pavement or, if no pavement, 10 feet (3048 mm) outside the edge of the normally traveled portion of the public street.

3. Traffic-control devices shall be provided and maintained at the connection of the ingress and egress roads with the public way as may be required by the city of Palmdale traffic engineer.

4. Haul Route Permit and plan shall be required showing the approved route and deposition site. The plan shall indicate all required permits and approvals for the deposition site.

7014.2 Planning and Zoning Compliance.

No grading permit shall be issued for the import or export of more than 10,000 cubic yards (7645.5 m3) of earth material to or from a grading site where such work would be classified as an “off-site transport grading project” as defined in Title 22 unless the project is in conformance with “Planning and Zoning,” of the City of Palmdale.

SECTION 7015 – EXCAVATIONS

7015.1 Maximum Slope.

Cuts shall not be steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical unless the owner furnishes a geotechnical engineering or an engineering geology report, or both, stating that the site has been investigated and giving an opinion that a cut at a steeper slope will be stable and not create a hazard to public or private property. Substantiating calculations and supporting data may be required where the City Engineer or Building Official determines that such information is necessary to verify the stability and safety of the proposed slope. The City Engineer or Building Official may require the excavation to be made with a cut face flatter in slope than one and one-half horizontal to one vertical if the City Engineer or Building Official finds it necessary for stability and safety.

7015.2 Slope Surface Protection.

All slopes must be stabilized against surface erosion. Stabilization may be accomplished through the application of erosion-control blankets, soil stabilizers or other means as approved by the City Engineer or Building Official.

7015.3 Drainage.

Drainage, including drainage terraces and overflow protection, shall be provided as required by Section 7018.

SECTION 7016 – FILLS

7016.1 Compaction.

Fills shall be compacted throughout their full extent to a minimum of 90 percent of maximum density as determined by ASTM Soil Compaction Test D 1557-78 Method “D,” where applicable; where not applicable, a test acceptable to the City Engineer or Building Official shall be used.

Field density shall be determined by a method acceptable to the city engineer or building official.

Fill slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical shall be constructed by the placement of soil a sufficient distance beyond the proposed finish slope to allow compaction equipment to operate at the outer surface limits of the final slope surface. The excess fill is to be removed prior to completion or rough grading.

Other construction procedures may be utilized when it is first shown to the satisfaction of the City Engineer or Building Official that the angle of slope, construction method and other factors will accomplish the intent of this section.

7016.1.1

Fills not intended to support structures need not be compacted to these standards if the City Engineer or Building Official determines that such compaction is unnecessary as a safety measure.

In making this determination, the City Engineer or Building Official may require that an investigation be made by a soils engineer to establish the characteristics of the soil, the amount of settlement to be expected and the susceptibility of the soil to erosion or slippage.

7016.1.2

Slope surfaces may be prepared for planting by scarifying, by the addition of topsoil, or by other methods, provided such slopes when so prepared otherwise comply with the requirements of this section.

Preparation of Ground for grading. The existing ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill or other incompetent material. Where the slope of the existing ground surface is five horizontal to one vertical or steeper, the fill shall be supported on level benches cut into competent material. The bench under the toe of a fill on a slope steeper than five to one shall be at least 10 feet (3048 mm) wide. The area beyond the toe of fill shall be sloped for sheet overflow or a paved drain shall be provided. When fill is to be placed over a cut before placing the fill and before acceptance by the geotechnical engineer, the bench under the toe of fill shall be at least 10 feet (3048 mm) wide but the cut shall be made before placing the fill and before acceptance by the geotechnical engineer or engineering geologist or both as a suitable foundation for fill. Except where recommended by the geotechnical engineer or geologist as not being necessary, subdrains shall be provided under all fills placed in natural drainage courses and in other locations where seepage is evident. Such subdrainage systems shall be of a material and design approved by the geotechnical engineer and acceptable to the City Engineer or Building Official.

The permittee shall provide continuous inspection during the process of subdrain installation to conform to approved plans and the geotechnical engineer’s recommendation. Such inspection shall be done by the soil testing agency. The location of the sub-drains shall be shown on a plan by the geotechnical engineer. Excavations for the subdrains shall be inspected by the geologist when such subdrains are included in the recommendations of the geologist.

7016.3 Fill Slope.

The steepness of fill slopes shall be determined by a soils engineer who shall submit soil test data and engineering calculations to substantiate to the satisfaction of the building official the stability of the fill slope and slope surface under conditions of saturation. In the absence of such determination, no fill slope shall exceed a steepness of two horizontal to one vertical.

7016.4 Fill Material.

Detrimental amounts of organic material shall not be permitted in fills. Soil containing small amounts of roots may be allowed, provided that the roots are in a quantity and distributed in a manner that will not be detrimental to the future use of the site and that the use of such material is approved by the soils engineer. No rock or similar irreducible materials with a maximum dimension greater than 12 inches (305 mm) shall be buried or placed in fills except as recommended by the soils engineer and approved by the city engineer or building official, and as meeting the following requirements:

1. The oversized material shall be placed 10 feet (3048 mm) or more below finish grade.

2. A representative of the soils engineer shall be present while the oversized material is placed and covered.

3. The reports submitted by the soils engineer shall acknowledge the placement of the oversized material and specify whether the work was performed in accordance with the engineer’s recommendations and the approved plans.

4. The location of oversized rock dispersal areas shall be shown on the as-built plan.

5. Stockpiled soil, sand or gravel shall be covered or so stabilized as to prevent erosion by wind or water.

7016.5 Drainage.

Drainage, including drainage terraces and overflow protection, shall be provided as required by Section 7018.

7016.6 Slopes to Receive Fill.

Where fill is to be placed above the top of an existing slope steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, the toe of the fill shall be set back from the top edge of the slope a minimum distance of 6 feet (1829 mm) measured horizontally or such other distance as may be specifically recommended by a soils engineer or engineering geologist and approved by the building official or city engineer. Fills shall not toe out on slopes steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.

7016.7 Inspection of Fill.

For engineered grading, the soils engineer shall provide sufficient inspections during the preparation of the natural ground and the placement and compaction of the fill to be satisfied that the work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of plan approval and the appropriate requirements of this chapter. In addition to the above, the soils engineer shall be present during the entire fill placement and compaction of fills that will exceed a vertical height or depth of 30 feet (8839 mm) or result in a slope surface steeper than two horizontal to one vertical.

7016.8 Testing of Fills.

Sufficient tests of the fill soil shall be made to determine the density thereof and to verify compliance of the soil properties with the design requirements, including soil types and shear strengths in accordance with the standards established by the City Engineer or Building Official. The results of such testing shall be included in the reports required by this chapter.

SECTION 7017 – SLOPE SETBACKS

7017.1 General.

Cut and fill slopes shall be set back from site boundaries in accordance with this section. Setback dimensions shall be horizontal distances measured perpendicular to the site boundary. The grading design must be such that the property line between adjacent lots will be at the apex of the berm at the top of the slope. Property lines between adjacent lots cannot be located on a graded slope equal to five horizontal to one vertical or steeper. For the placement of buildings, structures or pools on or adjacent to slopes, see Section 1806.4 entitled “Foundations on or Adjacent to Slopes.”

7017.2 Top of Cut Slope.

The top of cut slopes shall not be made nearer to a site boundary line than one fifth of the height of cut with a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) and a maximum of 10 feet (3048 mm).

The setback may need to be increased for any required interceptor drains.

7017.3 Toe of Fill Slope.

The toe of a fill slope shall not be made nearer to the site boundary line than one half the height of the slope with a minimum of 2 feet (610 mm) and a maximum of 20 feet (6096 mm). Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is developed to such grading, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the building official deems necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading. These precautions may include, but are not limited to:

1. Additional setbacks.

2. Provision for retaining or slough walls.

3. Mechanical or chemical treatment of the fill slope surface to minimize erosion.

4. Provisions for the control of surface waters.

7017.4 Modification of Slope Location.

The setback and other restrictions imposed by this section may be increased where unusual soil or geologic conditions make such increase necessary for safety or stability or may be modified upon investigation and recommendation by a soils engineer or geologist where such modification will provide equivalent safety, stability and protection, and the City Engineer or Building Official so finds.

SECTION 7018 – DRAINAGE

7018.1 General.

The drainage structures and devices required by this chapter shall conform to the provisions of this section as well as recognized principles of hydraulics and City Design Standards.

7018.2 Disposal.

Drainage facilities shall be designed to carry surface waters to the nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural watercourse approved by the city engineer or other appropriate governmental agency as a safe place to deposit such waters. Desilting basins, filter barriers or other methods, as approved by the city engineer, shall be utilized to remove sediments from surface waters before such waters are allowed to enter streets, storm drains or natural watercourses. If the drainage device discharges onto natural ground, riprap or a similar energy dissipater may be required.

7018.3 Site Drainage.

Graded building sites (building pads) shall have a minimum slope of 2 percent toward a public street or drainage structure approved to receive storm waters. A lesser slope may be approved by the building official for sites graded in relatively flat terrain, or where special drainage provisions are made, when the city engineer finds such modification will not result in unfavorable drainage conditions.

The grading shall provide for drainage around proposed buildings and their appurtenances.

7018.4 Drainage Terraces Required.

The requirements for drainage terraces shall apply to all cut or fill slopes steeper than three horizontal to one vertical. For slopes not steeper than three horizontal to one vertical, the city engineer may require drainage and terrace designs to be submitted. Suitable access to permit proper cleaning and maintenance shall be provided for all drainage terraces. Cut or fill slopes more than 30 feet (9144 mm) in height shall have drainage terraces provided at vertical intervals not exceeding 25 feet (7620 mm) except that where only one terrace is required, it shall be at mid height. Such terraces shall not be less than 8 feet (2438 mm) in width (measured horizontally from the outside edge). When the total slope height exceeds 100 feet (30,480 mm), one terrace near mid height shall not be less than 20 feet (6096 mm) in width (measured horizontally from the outside edge). In lieu of the above, for cut and fill slopes greater than 120 feet (36,576 mm) in height, the applicant may submit a drainage and terrace design by a civil engineer for approval by the city engineer.

7018.5 Drainage Terraces Construction.

Drainage terraces shall have a longitudinal grade of not less than 5 percent nor more than 12 percent and a minimum depth of 1 foot (305 mm) at the flow line. There shall be no reduction in grade along the direction of flow unless the velocity of flow is such that slope debris will remain in suspension on the reduced grade. Such terraces shall be paved with concrete not less than 3 inches (76 mm) thick reinforced with 6-inch (152 mm) by 6-inch (152 mm) No. 10 by No. 10 welded wire fabric or equivalent reinforcing centered in the concrete slab. Drainage terraces exceeding 8 feet (2438 mm) in width need only be so paved for a width of 8 feet (2438 mm), provided such pavement provides a paved channel at least 1 foot (305 mm) in depth. Downdrains or drainage outlets shall be provided at approximately 300-foot (91.44 m) intervals along the drainage terrace or at equivalent locations. Downdrains and drainage outlets shall be of approved materials and of adequate capacity to convey the intercepted waters to the point of disposal.

7018.6 Overflow Protection.

Berms, swales or other devices shall be provided at the top of cut or fill slopes to prevent surface waters from overflowing onto and damaging the face of the slope. Gutters or other special drainage controls shall be provided where the proximity of runoff from buildings or other structures is such as to pose a potential hazard to slope integrity.

Swales used for slope protection shall conform to Section 7018.8. Berms used for slope protection shall not be less than 12 inches (305 mm) above the level of the pad and shall slope back at least 4 feet (1219 mm) from the top of the slope.

7018.7 Subsurface Drainage.

Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability.

7018.8 Interceptor Drains.

Paved interceptor drains shall be installed along the top of all cut slopes where the height of the cut is greater than 5 feet (1524 mm) measured vertically. Interceptor drains shall be paved with a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) of concrete or gunite and reinforced as required for drainage terraces. They shall have a minimum depth of 12 inches (305 mm) and a minimum paved width of 30 inches (762 mm) measured horizontally across the drain. The slope of the drain shall be approved by the City Engineer.

SECTION 7019 – EROSION CONTROL

7019.1 Slopes.

The faces of cut and fill slopes shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. This control must consist of effective planting as described elsewhere in this section, or other devices satisfactory to the City Engineer. All slope planting shall also be subject to the requirements of City of Palmdale Landscape Ordinance. If a landscape permit is not required, the slope planting shall be a part of the grading permit. If the slope planting is within an area in which a landscape permit is required under City of Palmdale Landscape Ordinance, all slope planting shall also meet the requirements in this chapter and shall be a part of the landscape permit.

7019.2 Planting.

The surface of all cut slopes more than 5 feet (1524 mm) in height and fill slopes more than 3 feet (914 mm) in height shall be protected against damage by erosion by planting with grass or ground cover plants. Slopes exceeding 15 feet (4572 mm) in vertical height shall also be planted with shrubs, spaced not to exceed 10 feet (3048 mm) on centers; trees, spaced not to exceed 20 feet (6096 mm) on centers; or a combination of shrubs and trees at equivalent spacing, in addition to the grass or ground cover plants. The plants selected and planting methods used shall be suitable for the soil and climatic conditions of the site and shall be in accordance with standard specifications on file in the office of the city engineer. Planting need not be provided for cut slopes rocky in character and not subject to damage by erosion and any slopes protected against erosion damage by other methods when such methods have been specifically recommended by a soils engineer, engineering geologist, or equivalent authority and found to offer erosion protection equal to that provided by the planting specified in this section. Plant material shall be selected which will produce a coverage of permanent planting effectively controlling erosion.

Consideration shall be given to deep-rooted plant material needing limited watering, to low maintenance during the lifetime of the project, to high root-to-shoot ratio (weight of above-ground parts versus root system), to wind susceptibility and to fire-retardant characteristics.

7019.3 Irrigation.

Slopes required to be planted by Section 7019.2 shall be provided with an approved system of irrigation that is designed to cover all portions of the slope. Irrigation system plans shall be submitted and approved prior to installation. A functional test of the system may be required. The requirements for permanent irrigation systems may be modified upon specific recommendation of a landscape architect or equivalent authority that, because of the type of plants selected, the planting methods used and the soil and climatic conditions at the site, irrigation will not be necessary for the maintenance of the slope planting.

7019.4 Plans and Specifications.

Planting and irrigation plans shall be submitted for slopes required to be planted and irrigated by Sections 7019.2 and 7019.3. Except as waived by the City Engineer for minor grading, the plans for slopes 20 feet (6096 mm) or more in vertical height shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer or landscape architect.

7019.5 Rodent Control.

Fill slopes steeper than two horizontal and one vertical within a grading project located adjacent to undeveloped and unoccupied land determined by the agricultural commissioner to be infested by burrowing rodents, shall be protected from potential slope damage by a preventative program of rodent control.

7019.6 Release of Security.

The planting and irrigation systems required by this section shall be installed as soon as practical after rough grading. Prior to final approval of grading and before the release of the grading security, the planting shall be well established and growing on the slopes and, where required by Section 7019.5, there shall be evidence of an effective rodent-control program.

7019.7 Other Devices.

Where necessary, check dams, cribbing, riprap or other devices or methods shall be employed to control erosion.

SECTION 7020 – GRADING DESIGNATION AND INSPECTION

7020.1 General.

Grading involving a fill intended to support structures of the development of more than one lot or parcel of land, or in excess of 5,000 cubic yards (3822.8 m3) of material, or grading where the city engineer determines special conditions or unusual hazards exist shall conform with Section 7020.4, entitled “Engineered Grading Requirements.” Grading other than “engineered grading” shall be designated “regular grading.”

7020.2 Regular Grading Requirements.

The grading shall be inspected by the city engineer as set forth in Section 7020.3, “Inspection of Excavation and Fills.”

The city engineer may require inspection and testing by a soil testing agency. If required, the soil testing agency’s responsibility shall include, but need not be limited to, approval concerning the inspection of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, and the compaction of fills.

7020.3 Inspection of Excavation and Fills.

The City Engineer, upon notification from the permittee or the permittee’s agent, shall inspect the grading at the following stages of the work and shall either approve the portion then completed or shall notify the permittee or the permittee’s agent wherein it fails to comply with the requirements of this code.

7020.3.1 Initial Inspection.

When the site has been cleared of vegetation and unapproved fill and it has been scarified, benched or otherwise prepared for fill.

No fill shall have been placed prior to this inspection.

7020.3.2 Rough Inspection.

When approximate final elevations have been established; drainage terraces, swales and other drainage devices graded and ready for paving; berms installed at the top of the slopes; and the statements required by Section 7020 have been received.

7020.3.3 Final Inspection.

When grading has been completed; all drainage devices installed; slope planting established, irrigation systems installed; and the as graded plans and required statements and reports have been submitted. In addition to the called inspections specified above, the city engineer may make such other inspections as may be deemed necessary to determine that the work is being performed in conformance with the requirements of this code.

Investigations and reports by an approved soil testing agency, soils engineer and/or engineering geologist may be required.

7020.3.4 Non-Inspected Grading.

No person shall own, use, occupy or maintain any non-inspected grading. For the purposes of this code, non-inspected grading shall be defined as any grading for which a grading permit was first obtained, pursuant to Section 7003.1, supra, but which has progressed beyond any point requiring inspection and approval by city engineer without such inspection and approval having been obtained.

7020.4 Engineered Grading Requirements.

For engineered grading, it shall be the responsibility of the persons listed below to perform the designated functions and provide reports as set forth in Section 7021. These responsibilities and functions are in addition to those of the City Engineer as set forth in Section 7020.3.

7020.4.1 Design engineer.

The design engineer shall prepare the grading plans and shall incorporate recommendations from the soil engineering geology reports on such plans.

7020.4.2 Field engineer.

The responsibilities of the field engineer shall include the establishment and approval of line, grade and surface drainage.

The design engineer and field engineer need not be the same person. At the completion of the rough grading and final grading, the field engineer shall submit the statements and reports required by Section 7021.

7020.4.3 Soils engineer.

The soils engineer shall provide professional inspection within such engineer’s area of technical specialty, which shall include observation during grading and testing for required compaction. The soils engineer shall provide sufficient observation during the preparation of the natural ground and placement and compaction of the fill to verify that such work is being performed in accordance with the conditions of the approved plan and the appropriate requirements of this code. Revised recommendations relating to conditions noted during grading and differing from the approved soils engineering and engineering geology reports shall be coordinated with the engineering geologist and submitted to the permittee, the building official or City engineer, the engineering geologist and the field engineer.

7020.4.4 Engineering geologist.

The engineering geologist shall provide professional inspection within such geologist’s area of technical specialty, which shall include professional inspection of the bedrock excavation or excavation for subdrains, buttress fills and shear keys to determine if conditions encountered are in conformance with the approved report. Revised recommendations relating to conditions differing from the approved engineering geology reports shall be submitted to the soils engineer.

7020.4.5 Grading contractor.

The grading contractor shall submit the statement required by Section 7021 at the completion of rough grading.

Planting and irrigation. When planting and irrigation are required by Section 7019, the statement required by Section 7021 shall be submitted prior to the final approval of the grading by the City Engineer. Reports that reflect conditions which are not in agreement with the approved grading plans shall be submitted to the field engineer and the City Engineer or Building Official by the appropriate consultants.

7020.5 Notification of Nonconformance.

If, in the course of fulfilling their responsibilities under this code, the field engineer, soils engineer or engineering geologist finds that the work is not being done in conformance with this code or the plans approved by the city engineer, or in accordance with good accepted practices, the permittee and the City Engineer or Building Official shall be immediately notified in writing of the nonconformity and of the corrective measures to be taken.

7020.6 Termination of Services.

The termination of the service of the field engineer, soils engineer or geologist prior to the completion of the work shown on the approved grading plans shall be reported to the City Engineer in writing within 48 hours. The report shall be by the person terminated and shall include the status of the work at the last inspection. The work shall be stopped until the replacement has agreed to accept the responsibility within the area of his or her technical competence for verification upon completion of the work.

7020.7 Violation.

It is a violation of this code for any person to verify to the satisfactory completion of work as required by this chapter if such work is subsequently found by the city engineer or building official to have been in substantial noncompliance with the approved design or code requirement at the time of verification.

7020.8 Notification of Completion.

The permittee shall notify the city engineer when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, and all erosion-control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan, and the required reports have been submitted.

SECTION 7021 – REPORTS AND STATEMENTS – FINAL REPORTS

Upon completion of the rough grading work and at the final completion of the work, the following reports, drawings and supplements thereto are required for engineered grading or when professional inspection is performed for regular grading, as applicable. An as-graded grading plan prepared by the field engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 7020.4 shall show original ground surface elevations, as-graded ground surface elevations, lot drainage patterns, limits of over excavated areas, and the locations and elevations of surface drainage facilities and of the outlets of subsurface drains. As-constructed locations, elevations and details of subsurface drains shall be shown as reported by the soils engineer.

Field engineers shall state that the work within their area of responsibility was done in accordance with the final approved grading plan.

Reports prepared by the soils engineer retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 7020.4, which include locations and elevations of field density tests, summaries of field and laboratory tests, other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during tests and their effect on the recommendations made in the approved soils engineering investigation report.

Soils engineers shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved soils engineering report and applicable provisions of this code.

Reports prepared by the engineering geologist retained to provide such services in accordance with Section 7020.4, which include a final description of the geology of the site and any new information disclosed during the grading and the effect of this information on recommendations incorporated in the approved grading plan.

Engineering geologists shall submit a statement that, to the best of their knowledge, the work within their area of responsibility is in accordance with the approved engineering geology report and applicable provisions of this code. Where necessary, such report shall include a final geologic map and cross sections and recommendations noting geologic hazards and sewage disposal areas when the site inspection was required under Section 7020.1. The grading contractor shall submit in a form prescribed by the city engineer a statement of conformance to the as-graded plan and the specifications.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.270 Adoption of Chapter 98, Unoccupied Buildings and Structures.
A new Chapter 98, Unoccupied Buildings and Structures, is adopted as the unoccupied buildings and structures provisions of the Palmdale Building Code, to read and to be cited as follows:

CHAPTER 98 UNOCCUPIED BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES

9801 – NOTICES TO SECURE BUILDING OR STRUCTURE

When the Building Official finds that any unoccupied building or structure is not properly secured, locked or closed; is accessible to juveniles, transients and undesirables; and is a health, fire or safety hazard to the adjacent community, the Building Official shall serve the record owner and (if not the owner) the person having control of such building or structure with a notice to secure or close the structure so as to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access to it.

9802 – CONTENTS OF NOTICE

The notice provided for in Section 9801 shall inform the record owner and (if not the owner) the persons having control of such building or structure that:

9802.1

They must forthwith secure or close the building or structure to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access thereto in accordance with the current FHA or VA standards for securing buildings:

9802.2

If, in their opinion, the building or structure is sufficiently secure and closed or if, for any other reason, they cannot be required to comply with Section 9802.1, within 10 days after receipt of the notice, they may request a hearing by filing with, or mailing to, the Building Official a demand for such hearing in accordance with the appeal provisions of this code.

9802.3

If the required work is not performed within 10 days after the notice is served and if a timely demand for hearing is not made, the City may perform the work at the expense of the said owner.

9803 – NOTIFICATION TO OTHER PERSONS

The Building Official may, but is not required to, send copies of any notice provided for in Section 9801 to the holder of any mortgage, trust deed or other liens or encumbrance; the holder or owner of any lease; or the holder of any other estate or interest in or to the building or structure or the land upon which it is located.

9804 – POSTING

A copy of the notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the building or structure, which is the subject of the notice. Further, the Building Official may cause to be posted on such building a sign or signs to read:

VACATED BUILDING – DO NOT ENTER OR DAMAGE BY ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BUILDING AND SAFETY.

Such sign may contain additional information and warnings that, in the opinion of the Building Official, are expedient. Such notice shall remain posted until the building again is lawfully occupied. A person shall not remove such notice without the written permission of the Building Official. A person, other than a person having the right of occupancy, shall not enter the building.

9805 – SERVICE

Proper service of any notice required by this chapter shall be by personal service or by first class mail upon the record owner, any lien holder and any person having control of such building or structures. In the event the Building official is unable to serve any notice on any person as specified above, proper service on such person shall be by posting the notice in a conspicuous place on the building or structure.

The failure of any owner or other person to receive a notice shall not affect in any manner the validity of any proceedings under this chapter.

9806 – REQUEST FOR HEARING

Within 10 days after service upon the record owner of a notice pursuant to Section 9801, the said record owner or any other person deeming himself or herself aggrieved may request a hearing.

9807 – NOTICE OF HEARING

Upon receiving a request for hearing, the Building Official shall set the matter for hearing before the Board of Appeals and shall serve notice not less than 10 days before the hearing upon the person requesting such hearing and upon every person upon whom the notice provided for in Section 9801 was served.

9808 – PROCEDURE

Except as inconsistent with any other provisions of this chapter, all procedures taken by the Board of Appeals of Housing Code and Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as appropriate and the city shall be as provided in this code.

9809 – SECURING STRUCTURES BY CITY

If a person is properly served a notice pursuant to Section 9801 to secure or close a building to prevent unauthorized persons from gaining access and if neither that person nor any other person requests a hearing, or if after a hearing the Board of Appeals or Housing Advisory and Appeals Board of the Housing Code or the Board of Appeals for the Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, as appropriate determines that such person is obliged to secure or close such building, the City may perform the work as provided in this ordinance in the case of substandard or unsafe buildings if such building is not secured or closed within 10 days after service of notice, if no hearing is requested, or within the time specified by the Board of Appeals.

9810 – PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT

At the request of the Building Official, the Director of the Public Works department shall secure or close any building or structure subject to the provisions of Section 9809 so as to limit unauthorized access. The Director of Public Works shall keep an accurate record of the cost of such work.

9811 – LIEN

Any lien for the cost incurred by the City in securing a building or structure from unlawful entry shall be subordinate to any mortgage, trust deed or other lien of any person who received no notice pursuant to either Section 9801 or 9807.

9812 – BUILDING OFFICIAL

Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to preclude, prohibit or restrict the Building Official from securing the prompt demolition or repair of buildings found to be substandard or unsafe under other provisions of the code.

9813 – EMERGENCY PROCEDURES

Whenever the conditions described in Section 9801 constitute such an immediate hazard that access to the building or structure must be limited or closed immediately or within less than the designated period and either the sheriff or the chief of the fire department so finds and so notifies the Building Official, then he or she shall limit access to such building through the Director of Public Works (as provided in Section 9810) or by contract, or otherwise, after giving such notice to the record owner or the person in charge, or both as the circumstances will permit or without any notice whatever when, in the opinion of the sheriff or chief of the fire department, immediate action is necessary.

9814 – HEARING AS TO NECESSITY AND COST

The provisions of this chapter that provide for hearings shall apply to any person having any right, title or interest in any building secured pursuant to Section 9813. Such person may request a hearing as to the necessity and reasonable cost of the work performed pursuant to Section 9813 within 10 days after the building is secured or within 10 days after receiving notice of such work.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.300 Adoption of Palmdale Electrical Code.
Articles 90 through 840 inclusive and Chapter 9 of the “California Electrical Code,” 2016 Edition, published by the National Fire Protection Association and the Building Standards Commission of the State of California, are hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below and shall be known and cited as the Palmdale Electrical Code of the City of Palmdale. The Palmdale Electrical Code may be referred to herein as the PEC. (Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.330 Copy of electrical code maintained by City Clerk.
A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the California Electrical Code adopted herein by reference shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and maintained for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.340 Adoption of Palmdale Electrical Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.
See PMC 8.04.200, Adoption of administrative provisions for the Palmdale Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, Residential Code and Green Building Code. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.400 Adoption of the Palmdale Fire Code.
As amended, Title 32, Fire Code, of the Los Angeles County Code, adopting with certain changes and amendments the 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code and 2015 Edition of the International Fire Code, is adopted and incorporated herein by reference and shall constitute, and may be cited as, the “Palmdale Fire Code.” A copy of the Palmdale Fire Code has been deposited in the office of the City Clerk and is maintained for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.410 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the Palmdale Fire Code, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

(A) “Board of Supervisors” means the Palmdale City Council.

(B) “County” or “County of Los Angeles” means the City of Palmdale.

(C) “Jurisdictional area” means the City of Palmdale.

(D) “No fireworks zone” means that area shown on that certain map entitled “No Fireworks Zone of Palmdale, California” and dated April 1, 2010, incorporated herein by reference and kept on file in the office of the City Clerk and maintained for use and examination by the public. The “no fireworks zone” is generally described as the area within the City of Palmdale which lies along the following lines:

Point of beginning at the intersection of Rancho Vista Boulevard and 30th Street West, areas south and west of Rancho Vista Boulevard, north of the common boundary line of Tracts 62490 and 45003 to Avenue N-8; south and west of Avenue N-8 from Rancho Vista Boulevard to 55th St. West; west of 55th Street West to the common tract boundary line of Tracts 43810 and 43883; south of tract boundary of Tract 43810 from 55th Street West to 60th Street West (Godde Hill Road).

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.430 Fireworks – Safe and sane fireworks permitted.
A new Section 3308.2 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.2. Safe and Sane Fireworks Permitted.

A. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Palmdale Fire Code, “safe and sane” fireworks as defined by Section 12529 of the California Health and Safety Code may be sold and discharged within the City (except those areas of the City excluded in subsection (C) of this section) during the period beginning at 12:00 noon on the twenty-eighth day of June and ending at 12:00 noon on the fifth day of July of each year pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and not otherwise.

B. No “safe and sane” fireworks may be sold or discharged on any date or time other than those specified in subsection (A) of this section.

C. No “safe and sane” fireworks, nor any other fireworks, may be sold or discharged in the areas of the City designated as a Very High Fire hazard Severity Zone by PMC 8.04.203 or in the “No Fireworks Zone.”

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.440 Fireworks – Dangerous prohibited.
A new Section 3308.3 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.3. Dangerous Fireworks Prohibited.

Except pursuant to a license or permit issued by the Fire Marshall, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess, store, manufacture, transport, give, hold for others, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail or wholesale, or use, discharge or explode, within the City, any fireworks which are classified as dangerous fireworks, as that term is defined by the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. Safe and sane fireworks shall include only those fireworks that have been classified and registered as “safe and sane” by the State Fire Marshal.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.450 Fireworks – Permit – Required.
A new Section 3308.4 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.4. Fireworks Permit Required.

No person shall sell fireworks within the City without first having applied for and received a permit from the office of the State Fire Marshal. Additionally, no person shall sell fireworks within the City without first having applied for and received a permit therefor in compliance with the terms of this chapter.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.460 Fireworks – Permit – Application – Procedure.
A new Section 3308.5 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.5. Fireworks Permit – Application – Procedure.

(A) Applications for a permit:

(1) Shall be made in writing and shall be submitted with an approved temporary use permit; and a $300,000 combined single limit liability insurance policy, with a rider attached to the policy designating the City as an additional insured thereunder;

(2) Shall be filed with the Director of Planning or designee based upon the following procedure and shall be approved in the order in which they are received; provided, that there are spaces available as specified in PMC 8.04.500(E):

(a) For organizations which obtained a permit the previous year, applications shall be filed on or after March 15th of each year, but in all cases prior to April 1st of each year,

(b) For those organizations that did not obtain a permit during the previous year or which are making their first application, a preapplication shall be filed on or after March 1st of each year, but in all cases prior to March 15th of each year, to verify eligibility. Subsequently, an application shall be filed on or after March 15th of each year, but in all cases prior to April 1st of each year;

(3) Shall set forth the proposed location of any and all fireworks stands in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 2, Article 27, Section 27.03B.1(e) of the Palmdale zoning ordinance;

(4) Shall be accompanied by a fee of $220.00.

(B) Applicants for such permits shall be notified by the Director of Planning or designee of their approval or rejection on or before the first of June of each year.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.470 Fireworks – Permit – Application – Contents.
A new Section 3308.6 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.6. Fireworks – Permit Application – Contents.

Each application shall show the following:

(A) Name and address of applicant;

(B) Proof of the applicant’s status as a nonprofit organization in the form of Internal Revenue Service and Franchise Tax Board documentation;

(C) The names and addresses of the officers, if any, of the applicant;

(D) The location where the applicant will sell fireworks;

(E) When the applicant was organized and established;

(F) The location of the applicant’s principal and permanent meeting place; and

(G) The applicant’s State Board of Equalization sales tax permit number.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.480 Fireworks – Permit – Deposits.
A new Section 3308.7 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.7. Fireworks Permit – Deposits.

Upon receipt of written application for a permit pursuant to this chapter the City Manager shall cause an investigation to be made and submit to the City Council a report of findings and recommendations for or against the issuance of the permit, together with reasons therefor. After receipt of the recommendations and report, the City Council shall have the power in its discretion to grant or deny the application. Any permit granted by the City Council may be subject to such reasonable conditions and restrictions as may be imposed by the City Council, and such conditions and restrictions shall be complied with by the permittee. The Council shall require a cash deposit with the City Clerk in the sum of $200.00 for each fireworks stand to be used by applicant, as a condition of granting a permit. One hundred dollars of the deposit shall be refunded to the permittee upon compliance with PMC 8.04.500 and 8.04.510, but the deposit shall be forfeited and retained by the City in the event of noncompliance with PMC 8.04.500 and 8.04.510. The other $100.00 shall be retained by the City as a license fee for the business and no other business license shall be required of the applicant for conducting the business. The amount of the fees set forth in this section shall be paid, unless the City Council subsequently adopts a resolution setting forth different fees, in which event the fees provided for in said resolution shall be paid.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.490 Fireworks – Permit – Eligible organizations.
A new Section 3308.8 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.8 Fireworks Permit – Eligible Organizations.

No permit shall be issued to any person except nonprofit associations or corporations organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic betterment or charitable purposes. Each such organization must have its principal and permanent meeting place in the City, or draw more than 50 percent of its active members from within the incorporated City and must have been organized and established in the area that is within the City preceding the filing of the application for the permit, and must have a bona fide membership of at least 20 members.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.500 Fireworks – Stand – Operation.
A new Section 3308.9 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.9. Fireworks Stand – Operation.

The following regulations shall be complied with in the operation of fireworks stands:

(A) No person other than the licensee organization shall operate the stand for which the license is issued, or share or otherwise participate in the profits of the operation of the stand.

(B) No person other than the individuals who are members of the licensee organization, or the spouses or children 18 years of age or older, of the members shall sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks at the stand.

(C) No person shall be paid consideration for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks at the stand.

(D) Each person, group or organization shall be limited to one permit per year and each permit shall be limited to one stand.

(E) Only one such permit shall be issued for each 3,000 persons or fraction thereof residing in the City.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.510 Fireworks – Stand – Construction.
A new Section 3308.10 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.10. Fireworks Stand – Construction.

All retail sales of “safe and sane” fireworks shall be permitted only from within a temporary fireworks stand, and the sale from any other building or structure is prohibited. Such temporary stands shall be subject to the following provisions:

(A) Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the building code of the City; however, stands shall be of wood or metal construction not exceeding a depth of more than 12 feet, built with solid roof, rear wall and ends. The front shall be solid wood or metal three feet six inches in height from ground level to the display shelf. The display shelf shall have a panel of unbreakable or wire mesh glass or one-fourth-inch mesh screen wires a minimum of 18 inches in height between the public and the display of fireworks. All stands shall be erected under the supervision of the Inspector who shall require that stands be constructed in a manner which will reasonably ensure the safety of attendants and patrons. An electrical permit and compliance with electrical codes are required.

(B) If, in the judgment of the Fire Department Inspector, the construction of the stands or the conduct of the operators therein do not conform to the provisions of this chapter, the officer may order the stands immediately closed.

(C) No person shall be allowed in the interior of the stands except those directly employed in the sale of fireworks.

(D) There shall be at least one supervisor, 21 years of age or older, on duty at all times.

(E) No fireworks shall remain unattended at any time, regardless of whether the fireworks stand is open for business or not. No person shall sleep or remain inside any stand when it is not open for business.

(F) No stand shall be located within 25 feet of any non-fire-resistive building (brick, stucco, etc.).

(G) “NO SMOKING” signs shall be prominently displayed, both inside and outside the stand, letters to be not less than three inches in height. No smoking shall be permitted within the stand or within 15 feet of the stand.

(H) All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared for a distance of 25 feet from the location of the stand. No rubbish shall be allowed to accumulate in or around any fireworks stand, nor shall a fire nuisance be permitted to exist.

(I) No stand shall be erected before June 20th of any year. The premises on which the stand is erected shall be cleared of all structures and debris not later than noon of the eighth day of July following.

(J) All stands must be equipped with at least two-and-one-half-gallon water-type fire extinguishers, which fire extinguishers must be approved as to efficiency and safety by the Fire Department Inspector.

(K) Stands shall have exits at least 30 inches in width at both ends of the structure. In instances where stands exceed 32 inches in length, then one additional exit at least 30 inches in width shall be provided so that the maximum distance between exits does not exceed 24 feet. No supplies or other materials shall be stored in front of the exit doors. Exit doors shall open outward from the stand. No parking of vehicles shall be permitted within five feet of exits.

(L) Fireworks unsold or remaining on premises after the authorized sales period shall be returned to the approved storage facilities of a licensed fireworks wholesaler, or to a magazine or storage place approved by the fire chief.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.520 Responsibility.
A new Section 3308.11 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.11. Responsibility.

(A) All persons concerned in the commission of any violation of the provisions of this chapter, whether it be misdemeanor, infraction or administrative violation subject to administrative penalties, and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, or aid and abet in its commission, or, being present, are spectators and encourage its commission, or, not being present, have advised and encouraged its commission, or knowingly allow its commission on property owned by such person, and all persons counseling, advising, or encouraging children under the age of 16 years, or mentally impaired persons, to commit any offense, or who, by fraud, contrivance, or force, occasion the drunkenness of another for the purpose of causing him to commit any offense, or who, by threats, menaces, command, or coercion, compel another to commit any offense, are principals in any offense so committed and are guilty of and responsible for any offense so committed.

(B) Any person who personally or through another wilfully, negligently or in violation of law sets a fire, allows a fire to be set, or allows a fire kindled or attended by such person to escape from his or her control, allows any hazardous material to be handled, stored or transported in a manner not in accordance with nationally recognized standards, allows any hazardous material to escape from his or her control, neglects to properly comply with any written notice of the chief, or wilfully or negligently allows the continuation of a violation of the Palmdale Fire Code and amendments thereto is liable for the expense of fighting the fire or for the expenses incurred during a hazardous materials incident, and such expense shall be a charge against that person. Such charge shall constitute a debt of such person and is collectible by the public agency incurring such expense in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.530 Violations and penalties.
A new Section 3308.12 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.12. Violations and Penalties.

(A) Every person violating any provision of the Palmdale Fire Code or of any permit or license granted hereunder, or any rule, regulation or policy promulgated pursuant hereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless promulgated pursuant hereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor unless such violation is otherwise specifically declared to be an infraction by the fire code. Each such violation is a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which such violation is committed.

(B) Every violation determined to be an infraction hereunder is punishable in such manner and to such extent as is provided by Chapter 1.12 PMC.

(C) For the purposes of this section, a forfeiture of bail shall be equivalent to a conviction.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.540 Infractions.
A new Section 3308.13 is hereby added and incorporated into the Palmdale Fire Code to read as follows:

3308.13 Infractions.

Reference the Los Angeles County Fire Code for designated infractions.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.550 Amendments to Chapter 49, Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface, of the Palmdale Fire Code.
Section 4902.1, Definitions, of the Palmdale Fire Code as adopted by incorporation of Title 32, Fire Code, of the Los Angeles County Code, is amended to read as follows:

Local Agency Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone shall read as follows:

Local Agency Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone – see Palmdale Building Code, Chapter 7A.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.555 Amendment to Appendix B, Fire Flow Requirements for Buildings.*
Section B105.4, Land Subdivision Projects, is amended to read as follows:

For the subdivision of undeveloped land, due to the undetermined building size and type of construction, the required fire-flow shall be 4,000 gallons per minute (18927 L/min) for duration of four hours with public hydrant spacing of 300 feet. The required fire-flow for the subdivision of land consisting of lots having existing structures shall be in accordance with Table B105.1 for fire-flow and duration.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

*    Code reviser’s note: Ordinance 1410 adds this section as PMC 8.04.550. It has been editorially renumbered to avoid duplication of numbering.

8.04.600 Adoption of the Palmdale Plumbing Code.
Chapters 2 to 13, inclusive, Chapters 15 and 16 and Appendix Chapters A, B, D, G, H, and I of the California Plumbing Code, 2016 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and the California Building Standard Commission of the State of California, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below and shall be known as the Palmdale Plumbing Code and can be referenced as the PPC. (Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.610 Copy of plumbing code maintained by City Clerk.
A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the California Plumbing Code adopted herein by reference shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and maintained for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.630 Adoption of Palmdale Plumbing Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.
See PMC 8.04.200, Adoption of administrative provisions for the Palmdale Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, Residential Code and Green Building Code. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.700 Adoption of Palmdale Mechanical Code.
Chapters 2 to 17 inclusive and Appendix Chapters D and F of the California Mechanical Code, 2016 Edition, published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials and the Building Standards Commission of the State of California, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below and shall be known as the Palmdale Mechanical Code of the City of Palmdale and can be referenced as the PMC. (Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.710 Copy of mechanical code maintained by City Clerk.
A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the California Mechanical Code adopted herein by reference shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and maintained for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.730 Adoption of the Palmdale Mechanical Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.
See PMC 8.04.200, Adoption of administrative provisions for the Palmdale Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, Residential Code and Green Building Code. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.750 Adoption of Palmdale Residential Code.
Chapters 2 to 10, inclusive, Chapter 44 and Appendix Chapter H, Patio Covers, of the California Residential Code, 2016 Edition, published by the International Code Council and the Building Standards Commission of the State of California, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below and shall be known as the Palmdale Residential Code of the City of Palmdale and can be referenced as the PRC. (Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.751 Copy of residential code maintained by City Clerk.
A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the California Residential Code adopted herein by reference shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and maintained for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.752 Adoption of the Palmdale Residential Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.
See PMC 8.04.200, Adoption of administrative provisions for the Palmdale Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, Residential Code and Green Building Code. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.753 Amendments to Chapter 3 of the Palmdale Residential Code.
Table R301.2(1) is amended to read as follows:

TABLE R301.2(1) CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA

GROUND SNOW LOAD

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORYf

SUBJECT TO DAMAGE FROM

WINTER DESIGN TEMPe

ICE BARRIER UNDERLAYMENT REQUIREDh

FLOOD HAZARDSg

AIR FREEZING INDEXi

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPj

Speedd (mph)

Topographic effectsk

Special wind regionI

Wind-borne debris zonem

Weatheringa

Frost line Depthb

Termitec

20 lbs/sq. ft.

85

No

No

No

D2

Negligible

12

Yes

21

No

See PMC Sec. 15.28

1500

60°

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

a. Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., “negligible,” “moderate” or “severe”) for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652.

b. The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.

c. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.

d. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R30l.2(4)]. Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.

e. Temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the building official.

f. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.

g. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with (a) the date of the jurisdiction’s entry into the National Flood Insurance Program (date of adoption of the first code or ordinance for management of flood hazard areas), (b) the date(s) of the Flood Insurance Study and (c) the panel numbers and dates of all currently effective FIRMs and FBFMs or other flood hazard map adopted by the authority having jurisdiction, as amended.

h. In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “NO.”

i. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the l00-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32°)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

j. The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

k. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

l. In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES” and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

m. In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdictions shall indicate “NO” in this part of the Table.

(Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.754 Amendments to Chapter 4 of the Palmdale Residential Code.
Chapter 4, Foundations, of the Palmdale Residential Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Residential Code is hereby modified as follows:

Sections R403.1.2, R403.1.3 and R403.1.5 of the Palmdale Residential Code as adopted by the incorporation of the California Residential Code are amended to read as follows:

R403.1.2 Continuous footing in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2. The braced wall panels at exterior walls of buildings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 shall be supported by continuous footings. All required interior braced wall panels in buildings shall be supported by continuous footings.

R403.1.3 Seismic reinforcing. Concrete footings located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, as established in Table R301.2(1), shall have minimum reinforcement. Bottom reinforcement shall be located a minimum of 3 inches (76 mm) clear from the bottom of the footing.

In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 where construction joint is created between a concrete footing and a stem wall, a minimum of one No. 4 bar shall be installed at not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center. The vertical bar shall extend to 3 inches (76 mm) clear of the bottom of the footing, have a standard hook and extend a minimum of 14 inches (357 mm) into the stem wall.

In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 where a grouted masonry stem wall is supported on a concrete footing and stem wall, a minimum of one No. 4 bar shall be installed at not more than 4 feet (1219 mm) on center. The vertical bar shall extend to 3 inches (76 mm) clear of the bottom of the footing and have a standard hook.

In Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2 masonry stem walls without solid grout and vertical reinforcing are not permitted.

Exception: In detached one- and two-family dwellings located in Seismic Design Category A, B or C which are three stories or less in height and constructed with stud bearing walls, plain concrete footings without longitudinal reinforcement supporting walls and isolated plain concrete footings supporting columns or pedestals are permitted.

R403.1.5 Slope. The top surface of footings shall be level. The bottom surface of footings shall be permitted to have a slope not exceeding one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope). Footings shall be stepped where it is necessary to change the elevation of the top surface of the footing or where the surface of the ground slopes more than one unit vertical in 10 units horizontal (10-percent slope).

For structures located in Seismic Design Categories D0, D1 and D2, stepped footings shall be reinforced with four 1/2-inch diameter (12.7 mm) deformed reinforcing bars. Two bars shall be placed at the top and bottom of the footings as shown in Figure R403.1.5.



FIGURE R403.1.5
STEPPED FOOTING

(Ord. 1448 § 2, 2013; Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.755 Amendments to Chapter 5 of the Palmdale Residential Code.
Chapter 5, Wood, of the Palmdale Residential Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Residential Code is hereby modified as follows:

Section R503.2.4 is added to Chapter 5 of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code to read as follows:

R503.2.4 Openings in horizontal diaphragms. Openings in horizontal diaphragms with a dimension perpendicular to the joist that is greater than 4 feet (1.2 m) shall be constructed in accordance with Figure R503.2.4.



a. Blockings shall be provided beyond headers.

b. Metal ties not less than 0.058 inch [1.47 mm (16 galvanized gage)] by 1.5 inches (38 mm) wide with eight 16d common nails on each side of the header-joist intersection. The metal ties shall have a minimum yield of 33,000 psi (227 MPa).

c. Openings in diaphragms shall be further limited in accordance with Section R301.2.2.2.5.

FIGURE R503.2.4
OPENINGS IN HORIZONTAL DIAPHRAGMS

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.756 Amendments to Chapter 6 of the Palmdale Residential Code.
Chapter 6, Wall Construction, of the Palmdale Residential Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Residential Code is hereby modified as follows:

Lines 34 through 37 of Table R602.3(1) of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code are amended to read as follows:



Table R602.3(2) of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:





Table R602.10.1.2(2) of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:







d. Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:1 in SDC D0, D1, and D2. Methods DWB, SFB, PBS, and HPS are not permitted in SDC D0, D1, and D2.

2010 LARUCP R6-04. Table R602.10.2 of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

TABLE R602.10.2
INTERMITTENT BRACING METHODSa

8d common (2 1/2" x 0.131) nails at 6" spacing (panel edge) at 12" spacing (intermediate supports), 3/8" edge distance to panel edge



a. Methods GB and PCP braced wall panel h/w ratio shall not exceed 1:1 in SDC D0, D1, and D2. Methods LIB, DWB, SFB, PBS, HPS, and PFG are not permitted in SDC D0, D1, and D2.

Figure R602.10.3.2 of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:



Figure R602.10.3.3 of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:



FIGURE R602.10.3.3
METHOD PFH: PORTAL FRAME WITH HOLD-DOWNS AT DETACHED GARAGE DOOR OPENINGS

Table R602.10.4.1 of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:



Figure R602.10.4.1.1 of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:



Section R602.10.7.1 of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is deleted in its entirety. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.757 Amendments to Chapter 8 of the Palmdale Residential Code.
Chapter 8, Roof-Ceiling Construction, of the Palmdale Residential Code as adopted by incorporation of the California Residential Code is hereby modified as follows:

Section R802.8 of the 2010 Edition of the California Residential Code is amended to read as follows:

R802.8 Lateral support. Roof framing members and ceiling joists having a depth-to-thickness ratio exceeding 2 to 1 based on nominal dimensions shall be provided with lateral support at points of bearing to prevent rotation. For roof rafters with ceiling joists attached per Table R602.3(1), the depth-thickness ratio for the total assembly shall be determined using the combined thickness of the rafter plus the attached ceiling joist.

(Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.775 Adoption of Palmdale Green Building Standards Code.
Chapters 2 to 8, inclusive, and Appendix Chapters A4 and A5 of the California Green Building Standards Code, 2016 Edition, published by the Building Standards Commission of the State of California, are adopted and incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below and shall be known as the Palmdale Green Code of the City of Palmdale and can be referenced as the PGC. (Ord. 1487 § 2 (Exh. A), 2016)

8.04.776 Copy of green code maintained by City Clerk.
A copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the California Green Code adopted herein by reference shall be kept in the office of the City Clerk and maintained for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.777 Adoption of the Palmdale Green Code Chapter 1, Administrative Provisions.
See PMC 8.04.200, Adoption of administrative provisions for the Palmdale Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, Electrical Code, Residential Code and Green Building Code. (Ord. 1410 § 2 (Exh. A), 2010)

8.04.800 Adoption of housing code by reference.
Except as herein provided or amended, Chapters 1 to 16 inclusive of the 1997 Uniform Housing Code published by the International Conference of Building Officials are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below and shall be known as Chapters 1 to 16 inclusive of the Palmdale housing code. (Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.810 Copy of housing code maintained by Building Official.
A copy of the Palmdale housing code shall be filed in the office of the Building Official for review. (Ord. 1408 § 3, 2010; Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.820 Violations and penalties.
It is unlawful for a person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, connect, convert, demolish, equip or perform any other work on any building or structure or portion thereof, or perform any grading in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this code.

It is unlawful for any person to own, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or portion thereof in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this code.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The provisions of this section are in addition to and independent of any other sanctions, penalties or costs which are or may be imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.830 Definitions amended.
Definitions shall be amended with additions of the following definitions:

(A) “Housing Advisory and Appeals Board” shall mean the Appeals Board of the Palmdale building code.

(B) “Repair and demolition fund” shall mean the City’s general fund.

(Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.900 Adoption of code.
Except as herein provided or amended, Chapters 1 to 9 inclusive of the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, are incorporated herein by reference as if fully set forth below and shall be known as Chapters 1 to 9 inclusive of the Palmdale abatement of dangerous buildings code. (Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.910 Code available for review.
A copy of the Palmdale abatement of dangerous buildings code shall be filed in the office of the Building Official for review. (Ord. 1408 § 3, 2010; Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.920 Violations and penalties.
It is unlawful for a person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, connect, convert, demolish, equip or perform any other work on any building or structure or portion thereof, or perform any grading in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this code.

It is unlawful for any person to own, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or portion thereof, in the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this code.

Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this code is committed, continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any such violation such person shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. The provisions of this section are in addition to and independent of any other sanctions, penalties or costs which are or may be imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.930 Fees.
When a building permit is required or any code enforcement action is taken under this code, all applicable fees of the Palmdale building code shall apply. (Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

8.04.940 Definitions amended.
Section 301, General, shall be amended by the addition of the following:

(A) “Appeals Board” is the appeals board of the Palmdale Building Code.

(B) “Repair and demolition fund” means the city’s general fund.

(C) Dangerous buildings shall include any construction which has stopped work for two years. Evidence of work shall be the passing of an inspection in the normal progress of work.

(Ord. 1299 § 8, 2007)

Chapter 8.05
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS
Sections:

8.05.010    Purpose.

8.05.020    Definitions.

8.05.030    Expedited permitting process.

8.05.040    Permit application processing.

8.05.050    Severability of unreasonable restrictions.

8.05.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with Government Code Section 65850.5 and Civil Code Section 714 and to promote and encourage the use of solar energy systems by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for residential rooftop solar energy systems while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such systems. Palmdale’s unique climactic and topographical conditions create a snow load greater than that normally found in California and, as such, the City of Palmdale is authorized to modify the standards found in the California Solar Permitting Guidebook. (Ord. 1527 § 1, 2019)

8.05.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the same definitions as set forth in Government Code Section 65850.5 or Civil Code Section 714, as applicable, as they may be amended from time to time. As of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows:

(A) “Significantly” has the following meanings: For solar domestic water heating systems or solar swimming pool heating systems that comply with state and federal law, “significantly” means an amount exceeding 10 percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than $1,000, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10 percent, as originally specified and proposed. For photovoltaic systems that comply with state and federal law, “significantly” means an amount not to exceed $1,000 over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding 10 percent as originally specified and proposed.

(B) “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following: (1) a solar energy system that is no larger than 10 kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or 30 kilowatts thermal; (2) a solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City, County, or City and County and Section 714(c)(3) of the Civil Code; (3) a solar energy system that is installed on a duplex or single-family dwelling; and (4) a solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction.

(C) “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in Section 801.5(aa)(1) and (2) of the Civil Code, which is either of the following: (1) any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating; or (2) a structural design feature of a building, including either of the following: (a) any design feature whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating; or (b) any photovoltaic device or technology that is integrated into a building, including, but not limited to, photovoltaic windows, siding, and roofing shingles or tiles. (Ord. 1527 § 1, 2019)

8.05.030 Expedited permitting process.
(A) Streamlined Process. Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.5 and Civil Code Section 714, the Building Official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential solar systems and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review.

(B) Checklist Effective with Commission Approval. The Building Official’s checklist and procedures shall become effective upon approval by the Planning Commission, which approval may be granted by motion or resolution. Such procedures may be amended by the Planning Commission from time to time. The City’s adopted checklist and procedures shall be published on the City’s website, and shall be binding upon all applicants.

(C) Checklist Contents. The checklist and procedures may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook and adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. Such checklist must ensure that all requirements of this chapter are met, including the following:

(1) Certification of Water Heating Systems Required. Solar energy systems used for heating water in single-family residences and solar collectors used for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined in the plumbing and mechanical codes.

(2) Solar Energy Standards. A solar energy system for producing electricity shall also meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability.

(3) Property Owner Associations. In the technical review of a solar energy system, the Building Official shall not condition its approval on the approval of such a system by an association as that term is defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code.

(4) Building Standards Code. Solar energy systems must comply with all requirements of the California Building Standards Code, as it may be amended from time to time by the City. Such revisions may include, but are not limited to, City amendments relating to snow loads and high winds. (Ord. 1527 § 1, 2019)

8.05.040 Permit application processing.
(A) Adverse Impact Prohibited. Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of a solar energy system will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by solar energy system equipment and associated conduits; and areas of the solar energy system.

(B) Permit Applications. A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the City’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. If the Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, the Building Official shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and supporting documents meet the City’s checklist requirements and are consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.5, issue a permit for the solar energy system.

(C) Electronic Submission Permitted. Permit applications covered by this chapter and associated supporting documentation may be submitted via email to the Building Official, but such documentation shall only be considered received on the date the Building Official personally responds via email that the documents were received. In accepting such permit applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant.

(D) Appeal. The Building Official’s determination may be appealed to the Planning Commission. Such appeal shall be governed by the procedures of Division 2 (Review Procedures) of PMC Title 17 (Zoning), except that the determination of the Planning Commission shall be final and cannot be appealed to the City Council. After conducting the public hearing, the reviewing body shall issue its determination in writing, based upon substantial evidence in the record.

(E) Inspections. A pre-inspection of the roof penetrations is required to ensure that the footings of the solar energy system are properly installed. For small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review, only one final inspection is required, which shall be done in a timely manner. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails the final inspection, then subsequent inspection(s) are authorized. (Ord. 1527 § 1, 2019)

8.05.050 Severability of unreasonable restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, if, upon request of an applicant pursuant to this section, the Building Official determines that any section of this chapter, or any method, condition or mitigation established pursuant to this chapter, establishes a standard which “significantly” increases the cost of the system (see PMC 8.05.020(A)) or significantly decreases its efficiency or specified performance, or that disallows an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits, then such requirement shall not be enforced by the Building Official. In such event, the Building Official will notify the Director of Economic and Community Development in writing that the official is waiving the requirement, and the reason the requirement should be waived. (Ord. 1527 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 8.08
GENERAL HAZARDS
Sections:

Article I. General Provisions

8.08.010    Title.

8.08.020    Purpose.

8.08.030    Deputies.

8.08.040    Reference to ordinance or statute.

8.08.050    Exceptions.

8.08.060    Interpretation of language.

8.08.070    Penalty for violation.

Article II. Definitions

8.08.080    Generally.

8.08.090    Article.

8.08.100    Board.

8.08.110    County.

8.08.120    County Engineer.

8.08.130    Excavation.

8.08.140    Parcel of land.

8.08.150    Party concerned.

8.08.160    Person.

8.08.170    Section.

8.08.180    Shall and may.

8.08.190    Sheriff.

8.08.200    Superintendent.

Article III. Oil Well Sumps, Sand and Gravel Pits and Similar Excavations

8.08.210    Protection required.

8.08.220    Exceptions.

8.08.230    Fences.

8.08.240    Gates.

8.08.250    Alternate construction.

8.08.260    Unused sumps, cellars and ditches to be cleaned.

Article IV. Wells, Test Holes, Cesspools, Cisterns and Septic Tanks

8.08.270    Protection required.

8.08.280    City protection.

8.08.290    Exceptions.

Article V. Swimming Pools

8.08.300    Protection.

8.08.310    Signs – Required.

8.08.320    Signs – New pools.

8.08.330    Fence design.

8.08.340    Wood fences.

8.08.350    Wire fences.

8.08.360    Masonry fences.

8.08.370    Alternate construction.

8.08.380    Fences over six feet high.

8.08.390    Gates and doors – Latches.

8.08.400    Gates and doors – Size and locking required.

8.08.410    Portable pools.

8.08.420    Penalty for violation.

Article VI. Water Hazards

8.08.430    Findings.

8.08.440    Abatement.

8.08.450    Protection.

8.08.460    Gates.

Article VII. Boxes and Chests

8.08.470    Protection.

8.08.480    Exception.

8.08.490    Sheriff action.

Article VIII. Hazardous Oil Machinery

8.08.500    Protection.

8.08.510    Exception.

8.08.520    Penalty for violation.

Article I. General Provisions

8.08.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “general hazards ordinance.” (Ord. 379 § 101, 1980)

8.08.020 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life, limb, safety, and public welfare by requiring protection from hazardous bodies of water, wells and other defined excavations and abandoned chests not presently covered by statutes of the state. (Ord. 379 § 102, 1980)

8.08.030 Deputies.
Whenever, by the provisions of this chapter, a power is granted to a public officer or a duty imposed upon the officer, the power may be exercised or duty performed by a deputy of the officer or by a person authorized pursuant to law by the officer, unless it is expressly otherwise provided. (Ord. 379 § 103, 1980)

8.08.040 Reference to ordinance or statute.
Whenever any reference is made to any portion of this chapter, or of any other ordinance, or to any statute, the reference shall apply to all amendments and additions thereto now or hereafter made. (Ord. 379 § 104, 1980)

8.08.050 Exceptions.
Should any exception to the provisions of this chapter be held invalid or should any provisions of this chapter be held invalid because of any exception, the exception shall be eliminated from the chapter. The Board declares that it intends this chapter to apply to every excavation which by reason of constitutional limitations cannot be excepted from the provisions of this chapter and to every excavation the exception of which would invalidate this chapter or any portion thereof. (Ord. 379 § 106, 1980)

8.08.060 Interpretation of language.
(A) Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses.

(B) Genders. Each gender includes the other two genders.

(C) Number. The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. (Ord. 379 §§ 107, 108, 109, 1980)

8.08.070 Penalty for violation.
Violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted constitutes the violation a separate offense. (Ord. 379 § 110, 1980)

Article II. Definitions

8.08.080 Generally.
Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions in this article shall govern the construction of this chapter. (Ord. 379 § 201, 1980)

8.08.090 Article.
“Article” means an article of this chapter unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned. (Ord. 379 § 202, 1980)

8.08.100 Board.
“Board” means the City Council. (Ord. 379 § 203, 1980)

8.08.110 County.
“County” or “County of Los Angeles” means the City. (Ord. 379 § 204, 1980)

8.08.120 County Engineer.
“County Engineer” means the City Engineer. (Ord. 379 § 205, 1980)

8.08.130 Excavation.
“Excavation” means any hole or depression in the ground or body of water created wholly or in part by artificial means including excavation, dam, fill or combination thereof. (Ord. 379 § 206, 1980)

8.08.140 Parcel of land.
“Parcel of land” means a contiguous quantity of land, in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same claimant or person. (Ord. 379 § 207, 1980)

8.08.150 Party concerned.
“Party concerned” means the person, if any, in real or apparent charge and control of the object or premises involved, the person who, by the last equalized assessment roll appears to be the owner of the premises involved, the record owner, the holder of any mortgage, trust deed, or other lien or encumbrance of record, the owner or holder of any lease of record, the record holder of any other estate or interest in or to the object or premises. (Ord. 379 § 208, 1980)

8.08.160 Person.
“Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. (Ord. 379 § 209, 1980)

8.08.170 Section.
“Section” means a section of this chapter unless some other ordinance or statute is specifically mentioned. (Ord. 379 § 211, 1980)

8.08.180 Shall and may.
“Shall” is mandatory. “May” is permissive. (Ord. 379 § 210, 1980)

8.08.190 Sheriff.
“Sheriff” means the Sheriff of the City. (Ord. 379 § 212, 1980)

8.08.200 Superintendent.
“Superintendent” means:

(A) The City Engineer while enforcing Sections 50241, 50242, 50243, 50244 and 50254 of the Government Code;

(B) The Sheriff while enforcing Sections 50234 and 50236 of the Government Code. (Ord. 379 § 213, 1980)

Article III. Oil Well Sumps, Sand and Gravel Pits and Similar Excavations

8.08.210 Protection required.
Every person making, maintaining or using and every person owning or in control of the premises on which there exists an oil well sump of any depth or a sand and gravel pit, clay pit or similar excavation exceeding three feet in depth shall erect and continuously maintain around the excavation at all places, if an oil well sump, and in other cases at all places where the slope exceeds one foot vertical to one and one-half feet horizontal if not under water, or one foot vertical to four feet horizontal if under water, a fence complying with the requirements of this article. (Ord. 379 § 301, 1980)

8.08.220 Exceptions.
This article does not apply to:

(A) An oil well sump constantly and immediately attended while drilling operations are continuously proceeding;

(B) Harbors, marinas and artificial lakes exceeding one acre in surface area used for recreational purposes;

(C) A temporary excavation for the installation of a public utility, if not abandoned. (Ord. 379 § 302, 1980)

8.08.230 Fences.
Fences required by this article shall be not less than five feet high mounted on one-and-one-quarter-inch diameter galvanized steel posts with not less than three strands of barbed wire mounted at a 45-degree angle from the top of the fence. The fence shall be constructed of chain link or other industrial type fencing of not less than 11 gauge wire and of not greater than two-inch nominal mesh. The posts supporting the fence shall be set 36 inches in a concrete base and shall be spaced approximately 10 feet apart. Tension wires of at least No. 9 gauge coil spring wire, or equivalent, shall be stretched at the top and bottom of the fence fabric and shall be fastened to the fabric at 24-inch intervals. There shall be no aperture below the fence large enough to permit any child to crawl under the fence. (Ord. 379 § 303, 1980)

8.08.240 Gates.
Gates shall be of a structure substantially the same as the required fence and shall be kept locked when not attended by an adult. (Ord. 379 § 304, 1980)

8.08.250 Alternate construction.
If the City Engineer finds that any other type of construction has resulted in, or will result in, a fence or wall in all respects the equivalent in protection, strength and durability to a fence constructed as provided in PMC 8.08.230, the alternate type of construction may be used. (Ord. 379 § 305, 1980)

8.08.260 Unused sumps, cellars and ditches to be cleaned.
Every person operating or maintaining an oil well shall cause all sumps, cellars and ditches which were used or installed or maintained for use in connection with any well and which have not been used for 90 days for the operation of, or the drilling of, the well, or any other well in the vicinity, to be cleaned out and all oil, rotary mud and rubbish removed therefrom. (Ord. 379 § 306, 1980)

Article IV. Wells, Test Holes, Cesspools, Cisterns and Septic Tanks

8.08.270 Protection required.
Every person who digs, drills, excavates, constructs, owns or controls, and every person owning, or having possession of any premises on which exists an oil or water well, test hole, cesspool, cistern, septic tank, seepage pit or similar excavation shall cap, close or otherwise protect the opening to the well, hole, cesspool, cistern, septic tank, seepage pit, or similar excavation in such a manner as to prevent persons from falling therein, and in such a manner that the capping, closing or other protection cannot be removed by accident or inadvertence, or such persons shall fill the well, cesspool or pit. (Ord. 379 § 401, 1980)

8.08.280 City protection.
Whenever any person fails or refuses to perform any act required by this article, the City may itself cap, cover or fill the well, or the City may follow the procedure provided for in Article VIII of this chapter. (Ord. 379 § 402, 1980)

8.08.290 Exceptions.
This article does not apply to:

(A) Wells, cesspools, cisterns, septic tanks or seepage pits under construction when constantly and immediately attended by workmen or other adult persons;

(B) Wells, pits or shafts less than three feet in depth or with an opening not exceeding six inches in diameter;

(C) Abandoned excavations covered by Section 24400, 24401 or 24402 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 379 § 403, 1980)

Article V. Swimming Pools

8.08.300 Protection.
Every person who owns or is in possession of any premises on which there is situated a swimming pool, fish pond, or other outside body of water created by artificial means, designed or used for swimming or other immersion purposes, by men, women, or children, any portion of which is two feet deep or more and the surface area of the water in which does not exceed 10,000 square feet shall erect and maintain on the lot or premises, and completely surrounding the body of water, lot or premises, a fence, wall or other structure, which fence, wall or other structure complies with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 379 § 501, 1980)

8.08.310 Signs – Required.
Every person who owns, operates or maintains a private swimming pool for the use of himself, his family or friends in the City shall post or display a sign or poster which is clearly visible from any point immediately adjacent to the pool, which is protected against the elements, and which describes and illustrates the proper procedures for giving both mouth-to-mouth and manual artificial respiration. Every such sign or poster shall also contain the following statements or information:

(A) A statement that in case of need, mouth-to-mouth or manual artificial respiration should be started immediately and should be continued until a physician arrives or until mechanical resuscitators are applied;

(B) The words “FIRE DEPARTMENT PARAMEDIC RESCUE UNIT” followed by the telephone number of the nearest County Fire Department dispatcher;

(C) The location and telephone number of the nearest emergency hospital or other emergency treatment facility and of the nearest physician; and

(D) The telephone number of the nearest ambulance service. (Ord. 379 § 501.1, 1980)

8.08.320 Signs – New pools.
Every contractor or other person, firm, copartnership, association or corporation constructing any private swimming pool which is subject to the provisions of PMC 8.08.310 shall, upon completion of the swimming pool, erect a sign or poster which in all respects complies with the requirements of PMC 8.08.310. (Ord. 379 § 501.2, 1980)

8.08.330 Fence design.
The fence, wall, or other structure required by this article shall be not less than five feet high, measured from the existing surface to the top of the fence or wall on the side of the fence or wall opposite the side towards the pool, with no openings except doors or gates, with an area greater than 50 square inches, except that a rectangular opening having no horizontal dimension exceeding four inches may have a greater area. (Ord. 379 § 502, 1980)

8.08.340 Wood fences.
Wood fences shall have posts not less than three inches by three inches, spaced not over 10 feet on centers, and embedded at least 18 inches into the ground. Posts, other than redwood, shall be treated with a preservative. Fencing shall be at least one-half inch in thickness and fastened securely to at least two rails not less than two inches by three inches in cross-section. (Ord. 379 § 503, 1980)

8.08.350 Wire fences.
Wire fences shall be constructed of wire mesh of not less than 11 gauge galvanized steel wire supported on one-and-one-fourth-inch diameter galvanized pipe spaced not over 10 feet on centers. Posts shall be embedded at least 12 inches into concrete fill-in holes not less than six inches in diameter and 18 inches in depth. (Ord. 379 § 504, 1980)

8.08.360 Masonry fences.
Masonry fences shall be supported on a foundation of concrete extending not less than 12 inches below grade, not less than 12 inches in width, and not less than six inches in thickness. Wall steel, when required, shall be embedded 16 diameters into the footing. (Ord. 379 § 505, 1980)

8.08.370 Alternate construction.
If the City Engineer finds that any other type of construction has resulted in, or will result in, a fence in all respects the equivalent in strength and durability to a fence constructed as provided in PMC 8.08.040, 8.08.050, or 8.08.060, such type of construction may be used. (Ord. 379 § 506, 1980)

8.08.380 Fences over six feet high.
All fences or walls exceeding six feet in height shall comply with the provisions of County Ordinance No. 2225. (Ord. 379 § 507, 1980)

8.08.390 Gates and doors – Latches.
All gates or doors opening through the fence or structure protecting a swimming pool as required by this article shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching devices no less than four feet above grade capable of keeping the gate or door securely closed at all times when not in actual use. (Ord. 379 § 508, 1980)

8.08.400 Gates and doors – Size and locking required.
All doors or gates shall be of such size as to completely fill any opening in the fence or wall. The owner or person in possession of the premises on which the swimming pool exists shall keep the doors and gates closed and securely latched at all times when the swimming pool is not in use. (Ord. 379 § 509, 1980)

8.08.410 Portable pools.
This article does not apply to portable swimming pools which are so designed that the water in them can, at no time, exceed two feet in depth but does apply to all other portable swimming pools. (Ord. 379 § 510, 1980)

8.08.420 Penalty for violation.
Any person owning, maintaining, operating or in possession of a pond or pool as defined in this article and who is in violation of this chapter, is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be arrested and taken immediately before the magistrate by the Sheriff or released after giving his written promise to appear before the magistrate as provided in County Ordinance No. 6723. (Ord. 379 § 511, 1980)

Article VI. Water Hazards

8.08.430 Findings.
The Board finds that there are numerous bodies of water, both natural and manmade, throughout the City which are not included within the provisions of Article III, IV or V of this chapter, yet are a serious hazard to children and others because of their depth, size, vegetable growth therein, nature of soil, and for many other reasons. The Board further finds that these bodies of water are attractive to children and that children will use them for boating, floating and bathing. (Ord. 379 § 601, 1980)

8.08.440 Abatement.
Whenever any body of water, whether natural or manmade, or partially natural and partially manmade, is a hazard to children because of its size, depth, vegetable growth therein, nature of soil, or for any other reason, the Board may declare by resolution such body of water to be a public nuisance and abate the hazard as provided in Article 9 (beginning with Section 50230) of Chapter 1 of Part 1 of Division 1 of Title 5 of the Government Code, the provisions of which article are incorporated by reference as a portion of this chapter. (Ord. 379 § 602, 1980)

8.08.450 Protection.
If the body of water occupies more than one premises, the owner or person in possession of each such premises shall be responsible for the abatement of the nuisance which exists on his property. (Ord. 379 § 603, 1980)

8.08.460 Gates.
Gates shall be kept locked when not attended by an adult. (Ord. 379 § 604, 1980)

Article VII. Boxes and Chests

8.08.470 Protection.
Any person who discards or abandons or leaves in any place accessible to children any chest or box having a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more, which is no longer in use, which chest or box has an attached lid or door which may be opened or fastened shut by means of an attached latch, which has not had the door removed or the hinges and such portion of the lock mechanism removed to prevent latching or locking of the door, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 379 § 701, 1980)

8.08.480 Exception.
This article does not apply to any refrigerator icebox, or deep freeze locker in current use. This article does not prohibit or cover any act prohibited by Section 402b of the Penal Code or by any other state statute. (Ord. 379 § 702, 1980)

8.08.490 Sheriff action.
If the Sheriff finds any chest or box in violation of the provisions of this article he may remove the latch so that the chest or box cannot be fastened shut or he may remove the chest or box to a place not accessible to children. Neither of the actions bars a prosecution for violation of this article. (Ord. 379 § 703, 1980)

Article VIII. Hazardous Oil Machinery

8.08.500 Protection.
(A) A person owning, having possession of, or in control of, any oil well shall not maintain or allow to exist thereon, any moving parts or machinery in use and/or operable at the oil well, unless the machinery or moving parts are securely enclosed by a fence complying with the provisions of PMC 8.08.230, 8.08.250, or screening or housing sufficient to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons. If a fence is equipped with gates, the gates shall comply with PMC 8.08.240. A single fence, screen or housing may be used to enclose more than one oil well.

(B) Exception. Perimeter fencing need not be continuous where:

(1) The oil well is in an isolated area with no residences other than a caretaker within one-half mile; and

(2) The unfenced portion is located in terrain that is equivalent to the fenced portion in protection against trespassing. (Ord. 379 § 901, 1980)

8.08.510 Exception.
This article does not apply if a competent person is in constant attendance 24 hours per day at each oil well. (Ord. 379 § 902, 1980)

8.08.520 Penalty for violation.
Any person owning, maintaining, operating or in possession of hazardous oil well machinery as defined in this article and who is in violation of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and may be arrested and taken immediately before the magistrate by the Sheriff or released after giving his written promise to appear before the magistrate as provided in County Ordinance No. 6723. (Ord. 379 § 903, 1980)

Chapter 8.10
PUBLIC NUISANCES AND ABATEMENT PROCEDURES
Sections:

8.10.010    Purpose.

8.10.020    Declaration of public nuisance.

8.10.030    Definitions.

8.10.040    Enforcement.

8.10.050    Service of notice.

8.10.060    Notice and order to abate.

8.10.070    Request for hearing.

8.10.080    Request for hearing form.

8.10.090    Hearing.

8.10.100    Exchange of information.

8.10.110    Administrative hearing – Procedures.

8.10.120    Hearing decision.

8.10.130    Abatement.

8.10.140    City expenses – Record of costs.

8.10.150    Nuisance abatement lien and special assessment procedures.

8.10.160    Triple costs.

8.10.170    Emergency abatement.

8.10.180    Judicial and other remedies.

*    Prior legislation: Ords. 478 and 725.

8.10.010 Purpose.
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the City’s police powers and California Government Code Sections 38771 through 38773.7, including any successor statutes, for the purpose of defining public nuisances and establishing nuisance abatement procedures. Nothing contained in this chapter is intended to, nor shall it, preclude the City from pursuing any other available administrative, civil or criminal remedies concurrently or in addition to the proceedings established by this chapter to enforce this code. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.020 Declaration of public nuisance.
The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances within the City of Palmdale:

(A) Any public nuisance known at common law or in equity jurisprudence;

(B) Any public nuisance as defined by state law;

(C) Any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of the Palmdale Municipal Code;

(D) Any condition or use of property in violation of the provisions of the Palmdale Zoning Ordinance;

(E) Any attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to children whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an unoccupied lot. This includes any abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations; abandoned refrigerators and motor vehicles; or any structurally unsound fences or structures; or trash, garbage, rubbish, refuse, fences, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard for inquisitive minors;

(F) Inadequate or unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;

(G) Any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which is detrimental to the property of others. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or the depositing on or the scattering over the premises of any of the following:

(1) Rubbish including, without limitation, waste matter, litter, trash, refuse, debris or dirt which is or may become a menace to health, or which is or may become offensive to the senses;

(2) Lumber, junk, trash or debris;

(3) Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers;

(4) Stagnant water or excavations;

(5) Any device, decoration, design, fence, structure, clothesline or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its condition;

(H) Any condition of vegetation overgrowth, dirt or land erosion which encroaches into, over or upon any public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, streets, alleys or sidewalks, so as to constitute either a danger to the public safety or an impediment to public travel;

(I) Excessive overgrowth of vegetation, dead, decayed or diseased trees, growth of weeds or deposit of garden waste that are likely to harbor rats or vermin, constitute a fire or health hazard, or may be dangerous to the public health, safety or welfare. Weeds include plants which bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature and any other plants, including tumbleweeds, which attain such large growth as to become, when dry, a fire menace to adjacent property, plants which are otherwise noxious or dangerous when the conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to the public health, dry grass, stubble, brush, refuse or other combustible material which endangers the public safety by creating a fire hazard;

(J) Any swimming or architectural pools or spas not properly maintained so as to create a safety hazard or harbor insect infestation, or create a visible deteriorated or blighted appearance, including but not limited to: water in such pools or spas which has been allowed to stagnate, or to become stale or foul through lack of circulation; pools in which the bottom and sides of the pool or spa are not reasonably free of sediment, dirt, slime and algae; water not sufficiently clear so that the main drain outlet is clearly visible to an adult standing on the pool deck; a lack of fencing or other barriers required for swimming pool and spa enclosures as required by Chapter 8.08 PMC; and premises constituting a safety hazard inclusive of, but not limited to, lack of security, water stagnation, or abandoned pools, regardless of whether or not there is water in the pools;

(K) Poison oak and poison ivy when the condition of growth is such as to constitute a menace to the public health;

(L) Any dangerous land conditions or land instability on private property;

(M) Real property that repeatedly has been the situs of nuisance activity, including but not limited to: disturbing the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, harassment of passersby, illegal gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, acts of violence, public urination, acts of lewd conduct, unreasonably loud noise, or excessive littering; and

(N) Graffiti. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.030 Definitions.
The definitions set forth in Chapter 1.20 PMC are applicable to this chapter. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.040 Enforcement.
Whenever a City enforcement officer, building official, health officer, or such other City official as may be designated by the City Manager determines that any condition, building or premises within the City is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this code and/or constitutes a public nuisance, the officer shall give a written notice and order to abate to the owner of record as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and also to any other owner or responsible person known to the officer. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.050 Service of notice.
The notice and order to abate shall be served in the manner described in PMC 1.20.050 for service of administrative citations and conspicuously posted on the property containing a nuisance. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.060 Notice and order to abate.
The notice and order to abate shall notify the responsible persons that the officer has determined a public nuisance to exist; specify the condition or conditions to be corrected or remedied or actions required to abate, correct or bring the condition into compliance; specify a reasonable period within which this must be accomplished; describe the process to contest the officer’s determination by requesting a hearing; notify the responsible persons that failure to request a hearing will constitute a waiver of the right to a hearing and an admission that the public nuisance does exist and that the abatement order is reasonable and justified; and notify the responsible persons that in the event of the owner’s failure to correct the nuisance within the time prescribed, the City may cause the nuisance to be abated and the cost incurred on behalf of the City to become a lien on the property, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The notice and order to abate may be served as part of or in conjunction with an administrative citation. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.070 Request for hearing.
Any interested person may contest the officer’s determination that a public nuisance exists or the reasonableness of the abatement order by filing a request for an administrative hearing on a City-approved form with the Office of the City Clerk, 38300 Sierra Highway, Palmdale, CA 93550, within 20 calendar days from the issuance date of a notice and order to abate. Any responsible person who does not file a request for a hearing in the office of the City Clerk within the required period shall have waived the right to a hearing and admitted that the public nuisance described in the notice and order to abate does exist and that the abatement order is reasonable and justified. In that event the order to abate issued by the Enforcement Officer is final. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.080 Request for hearing form.
A request for a hearing shall state: the date and number of the notice and order to abate; the address or location of the property; the name, address, telephone and any facsimile numbers, where the person requesting the hearing may be contacted; a statement explaining why the notice and order to abate is being contested; and the date and signature of the person requesting the hearing. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.090 Hearing.
The hearing will be conducted within 60 days of the date a timely and complete request is received by the office of the City Clerk. The City will notify the persons requesting the hearing in writing by first class mail of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least 10 calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Service of this notice is deemed complete at time of mailing. The failure to receive a properly addressed notice of hearing shall not invalidate any hearing, City action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.100 Exchange of information.
At least three calendar days prior to the date set for hearing, the officer and the persons requesting the hearing shall mail a copy of all reports, statements or pictures to be provided to the hearing officer, to the other (by the officer to each person requesting the hearing and by each person requesting the hearing to the City Clerk), by first class mail. Failure to receive such documents shall not invalidate any hearing, City action or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.110 Administrative hearing – Procedures.
(A) The hearing officer designated or appointed by the City Manager shall hear all requests for hearings pursuant to this chapter in accordance with the procedures established herein.

(B) The person requesting a hearing may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the office of the City Clerk at least three City business days prior to the hearing. If such person fails to attend the scheduled hearing, and does not submit a written declaration in a timely manner, he or she shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. In such an instance, the hearing officer shall issue an abatement order and judgment in favor of the City.

(C) At the hearing, the hearing officer shall accept reliable evidence from any person if such evidence bears on the issue of whether a public nuisance exists on the subject property. The hearing officer is authorized to take testimony and is authorized to administer oaths or affirmations pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 2093(a).

(D) Administrative hearings are informal and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The City bears the burden of proof to establish, by competent evidence, the existence of a public nuisance and responsibility therefor, by a preponderance of evidence. The person requesting the hearing and officer shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. A person requesting the hearing may bring an interpreter to the hearing, provided there is no expense to the City therefor. The hearing officer may question any person who presents evidence or who testifies at any hearing.

(E) Hearings may be continued once at the request of a person requesting the hearing or the officer who issued the citation. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.120 Hearing decision.
Based upon the evidence regarding the alleged nuisance, the hearing officer shall determine whether or not a public nuisance exists on the subject property. As soon as is practicable following the close of such hearing, the hearing officer shall render a written decision on the matter. If a public nuisance is found to exist, the hearing officer shall issue an order requiring the abatement of the public nuisance in a reasonable time and manner as set forth in the order and shall also notify the owner(s) that in the event the responsible person(s) fail to correct the nuisance within the time prescribed, the City will cause the nuisance to be abated and the cost of such abatement will be recorded as a lien on the property, in accordance with the provisions of this code. The hearing officer shall promptly give written notice to the person requesting the hearing and to the owner(s) and any other interested person who requests, in writing, notice of such decision, including a copy of the order. The order issued by the hearing officer shall be deemed a final order and may be judicially reviewed pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. There is no right to an appeal to the City Council. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.130 Abatement.
At no cost to the City, the owner and other responsible person shall comply with all of the provisions of any final abatement order. If such persons fail, for any reason, to comply with a final abatement order within the time required in the order, the City Manager/designee shall cause the nuisance described in the abatement order to be abated by City forces or by private contractor. The City Attorney is authorized to take such action as needed to gain entry upon the property where the public nuisance exists for purposes of abating a public nuisance. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.140 City expenses – Record of costs.
The City shall keep an account of the costs, including incidental expenses, of abating the nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.150 Nuisance abatement lien and special assessment procedures.
(A) Lien. Pursuant to California Government Code Sections 38773, 38773.1, and 38773.5, and any successor statutes, persons failing to abate a public nuisance as ordered pursuant to this chapter shall be obligated to pay all City expenses of abating the nuisance and all administrative costs associated therewith. A nuisance abatement lien in favor of the City for such expenses of the City shall be created and recorded, pursuant to this section. The lien shall specify the amount of the lien, the name of the City, the date of the abatement order, the street address, legal description and assessor’s parcel number of the parcel on which the lien is imposed, and the name and address of the recorded owner of the parcel.

(B) Notice of Proposed Recordings. Prior to the recordation of the lien, an itemized notice of the lien amount and proposed recording shall be served on the property owner of record of the parcel of land on which the nuisance was abated by the City, based on the last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current. The notice shall be served in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 415.10, et seq. If the owner of record, after diligent search, cannot be found, the notice may be served by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place upon the property for a period of 10 days, and publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation published in the county in which the property is located.

(C) Recording. If the owner fails to pay the lien amount within 10 days of the notice, the City’s nuisance abatement lien shall then be recorded in the Los Angeles County recorder’s office, and from the date of recording shall have the force, effect, and priority of a judgment lien and may be collected in any manner provided by law for collection of judgment liens.

(D) Special Assessment. The City’s total costs described in this chapter may, as an alternative to lien procedure provided above, be collected as a special assessment against the lot or parcel on which the nuisance existed in accordance with the procedures specified in California Government Code Section 38773.5.

(E) Satisfaction. In the event that the lien or special assessment is discharged, released, or satisfied, either through payment or foreclosure, a notice of the discharge containing the information specified in the lien shall be recorded by the City.

(F) Fees. Any fees or costs incurred by the City for processing, recording of the lien and providing notice to the property owner may be recovered by the City as part of its foreclosure action to enforce the lien.

(G) Attorneys’ Fees. The prevailing party is entitled to recover its costs and attorneys’ fees in any action, administrative hearing or proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance, but only if the City requests attorneys’ fees when bringing a nuisance abatement action. If the City does not include such a request for attorneys’ fees in its initial moving papers, then neither party shall be awarded attorneys’ fees. The award of attorneys’ fees shall not exceed the reasonable amount of attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in such action. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.160 Triple costs.
Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with this chapter, except conditions abated pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 17980, the court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.170 Emergency abatement.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, whenever the City Manager/designee determines that a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, or in any other applicable law, exists, and that such public nuisance constitutes an immediate threat, hazard or danger to persons or property, the City Manager, without observing the procedures set forth in this chapter with reference to public nuisance abatement, may forthwith immediately cause the abatement of such public nuisance in such manner as the City Manager/designee determines is reasonably required. If the City Manager/designee deems it feasible, the City Manager/designee shall attempt to give the owner and occupant verbal notice of the existence of the public nuisance, and the proposed timing and method of abatement thereof. The City Manager shall, forthwith, report such circumstances to the City Council. The City shall notify in writing the owner or possessor of the property, place or area upon which a nuisance has been abated by the City of the cost of the abatement. Such notification shall be given in the same manner as required by PMC 8.10.050. The provisions of PMC 8.10.140, 8.10.150 and 8.10.160 shall be applicable. (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

8.10.180 Judicial and other remedies.
(A) Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the City Attorney from:

(1) Commencing a civil action in the superior court to enforce all or any of the provisions of any abatement order;

(2) Commencing a civil action to abate a public nuisance as an alternative to or in conjunction with an administrative proceeding pursuant to this chapter;

(3) Filing a civil action to recover the amount of a confirmed accounting from an owner or occupant of the lot to which it relates;

(4) Filing a criminal action to enforce this code; or

(5) Issuing an administrative citation to enforce this code.

(B) Where a civil action is filed, if the court issues an order or a judgment which finds a public nuisance to exist, and orders or approves the abatement of the public nuisance, or where the court validates an accounting, the court may also award the City its actual costs of abatement, including, without limitation, reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City in such judicial proceeding as provided in PMC 8.10.150(G). (Ord. 1324 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 8.16
RESTAURANT EMPLOYEE OUTER GARMENTS
Sections:

8.16.010    Definitions.

8.16.020    Clean outer garments required.

8.16.030    Clothing design.

8.16.040    Relation to statutes.

8.16.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

(A) This chapter applies to public eating places and food establishments as well as to restaurants as defined in this code and in Section 28522 of the Health and Safety Code.

(B) “Food or beverage” includes all articles used for food, drink, confectionery or condiment, whether simple or compound, and all substances and ingredients used in preparation thereof for human consumption.

(C) “Employee” means any person working in a restaurant, public eating place or food or beverage establishment or performing any operation covered by the provisions of this chapter and the Health Code and include beverage handlers, food handlers, waiters and waitresses. Any person serving, delivering or handling any food or beverage within any restaurant, public eating place or food establishment for consideration, wages, remuneration or reward is an employee for the purposes of this chapter.

(D) “Utensils” include any kitchenware, tableware, glasses, cutlery, containers, implements or other equipment with which food or beverage comes in contact during storage, display, preparation, serving or through use by an employee or consumer. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1966)

8.16.020 Clean outer garments required.
All employees, as defined in this chapter, while preparing, serving or handling or delivering food or beverage or utensils, shall wear clean, washable outer garments or other clean uniforms as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1966)

8.16.030 Clothing design.
Female employees shall wear hairnets, caps, headbands, or other suitable coverings which confine the hair. The outer garments or uniforms of female employees shall completely enclose and cover in nontransparent material the buttocks and pubic area and the breasts, including the nipples, from the top of the areola area to the bottom of the breast anatomy. The outer garments of a male employee shall at least enclose and completely cover with nontransparent material the buttocks and pubic area and, in addition, male employees shall wear at least as outer garments trousers or shorts on the lower torso and the upper torso shall be covered at least by a shirt or other suitable garment with sleeves covering the upper extremities at least three inches below the shoulder line and any opening down the front of such a shirt or other suitable garment shall not exceed three inches in width. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1966)

8.16.040 Relation to statutes.
The provisions of this chapter are not intended to supersede or replace the terms and provisions of the California Restaurant Act commencing with Section 28520 of the Health and Safety Code. This chapter has been enacted pursuant to Section 28693 of the Health and Safety Code as an additional and more strict standard pertaining to the outer garments to be worn by employees as therein defined. Except to the extent this chapter, this code, and the Health Code are more strict than Section 28686 of the Health and Safety Code as well as the terms and provisions of the California Restaurant Act, all of the terms and provisions of the California Restaurant Act and Section 28686 of the Health and Safety Code shall apply. (Ord. 94 § 1, 1966)

Chapter 8.20
ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLES
Sections:

8.20.010    Findings and declarations.

8.20.020    Definitions.

8.20.030    Exemptions.

8.20.040    Removal from private property.

8.20.050    Administrative costs.

8.20.060    Abatement – Authorized.

8.20.070    Abatement – Notice.

8.20.080    Abatement – Hearing – Authorized.

8.20.090    Abatement – Hearing – Procedure.

8.20.100    Disposal.

8.20.110    Notice to state.

8.20.120    Cost assessment.

8.20.130    Abandonment unlawful.

8.20.140    Refusal to remove abandoned vehicle.

8.20.150    Provisions supplemental.

8.20.160    Administration.

8.20.170    Penalty for violation.

8.20.010 Findings and declarations.
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the City Council makes the following findings and declarations:

The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property not including highways is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1979)

8.20.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

(A) The term “highway” means a way or place or whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. Highway includes street.

(B) The term “owner of the land” means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll.

(C) The term “owner of the vehicle” means the last registered owner and legal owner of record.

(D) The term “public property” does not include “highway.”

(E) The term “vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 372 § 1, 1979)

8.20.030 Exemptions.
(A) This chapter shall not apply to:

(1) A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

(2) A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when the storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise; or

(3) A vehicle or parts thereof, which is located behind a solid fence six feet in height or which is not plainly visible from a highway.

(B) Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 372 § 2, 1979)

8.20.040 Removal from private property.
When the City Council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 372 § 5, 1979)

8.20.050 Administrative costs.
The City Council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. (Ord. 372 § 6, 1979)

8.20.060 Abatement – Authorized.
Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the City, the City Manager shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedures prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 372 § 7, 1979)

8.20.070 Abatement – Notice.
A 10-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by certified or registered mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owners of record of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine the ownership. The notices of intention shall be in substantially the following forms:

NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE

(Name and address of owner of the land)

(Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle – notice should be given to both if different)

As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), and as the last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle, make, model, license, etc.,) you are hereby notified that the undersigned pursuant to Chapter 8.20 of the Palmdale Municipal Code, the City of Palmdale has determined that there exists upon said land an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle (or parts thereof) registered to ________________, license number ________________, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of (municipal code chapter number). You and each of you are hereby ordered to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice, and are notified that upon your failure to do so the same will be abated and removed by the City of Palmdale and the costs hereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to each of you.

You may request an administrative hearing to contest this Order and Notice by filing a Request for Hearing with the City Clerk of the City of Palmdale at 38300 Sierra Highway, Palmdale, California 95350, within 10 days after the date of this Notice of Intention to Abate and Remove. If the property or vehicle owner requests a hearing, said owner may appear in person at the hearing or may submit a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, explaining the reasons for the denial, in lieu of appearing. The submission of such a sworn statement within the required time shall be considered a request for a hearing that does not require the presence of the owner submitting the statement. Any person who does not file a request for a hearing in the office of the City Clerk within the required time, shall have waived the right to a hearing and admitted that the vehicle or parts thereof do not constitute a public nuisance, agreed that the City has the right to and may abate the nuisance and admitted liability for the abatement costs incurred by the City.

Notice Mailed _______________
    (date)

s/ ______________
(locally designated officer)

(Ord. 1323 § 1, 2007; Ord. 526 § 1, 1984; Ord. 372 § 8, 1979)

8.20.080 Abatement – Hearing – Authorized.
(A) Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land received by the City Clerk within 10 days after the mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held by the administrative hearing officer appointed by the City Manager, on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located.

(B) If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within the 10-day period, the statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing which does not require his presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail or certified mail, at least 10 days before the hearing to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said 10 days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the City shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. (Ord. 1323 § 2, 2007; Ord. 372 § 9, 1979)

8.20.090 Abatement – Hearing – Procedure.
(A) All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the administrative hearing officer appointed by the City Manager, who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property.

(B) The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his or her reasons for the denial.

(C) The hearing officer may impose conditions and take such other actions as deemed appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purposes of this chapter. The hearing officer may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in this chapter and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

(D) If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from the owner of the land.

(E) If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, they shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 1323 § 3, 2007; Ord. 372 § 10, 1979)

8.20.100 Disposal.
Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, or five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if the notice is required by PMC 8.20.090, or 15 days after the decision of the hearing officer authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 1323 § 4, 2007; Ord. 372 § 11, 1979)

8.20.110 Notice to state.
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 372 § 12, 1979)

8.20.120 Cost assessment.
If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to PMC 8.20.090 are not paid within 30 days of the date of the order, or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other City taxes. (Ord. 372 § 13, 1979)

8.20.130 Abandonment unlawful.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store, or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property not including highways within the City for a period in excess of five days unless the vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless the vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junkyard. (Ord. 372 § 14, 1979)

8.20.140 Refusal to remove abandoned vehicle.
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof or refuse to abate the nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where the state law is applicable. (Ord. 372 § 15, 1979)

8.20.150 Provisions supplemental.
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the City. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by this City, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 372 § 3, 1979)

8.20.160 Administration.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the City Manager. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause to be removed any vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 372 § 4, 1979)

8.20.170 Penalty for violation.
Upon conviction of a violation of this chapter any person so convicted shall be subject to a fine of not more than $500.00. Each act in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 372 § 15, 1979)

Chapter 8.24
PARK AND RECREATION AREAS
Sections:

8.24.010    Title.

8.24.020    Definitions.

8.24.030    Compliance required.

8.24.040    Power exercised by deputy.

8.24.050    Applicability of regulations.

8.24.060    Harmful objects.

8.24.070    Rubbish.

8.24.080    Shooting.

8.24.090    Fireworks.

8.24.100    Destruction of park property.

8.24.110    Fires.

8.24.120    Disturbances.

8.24.130    Animals.

8.24.140    Dogs and cats.

8.24.141    Dog exercise and recreation areas.

8.24.150    Equestrian and pack animals.

8.24.160    Grazing.

8.24.170    Molesting animals.

8.24.180    Motor vehicles.

8.24.185    Skateboards, roller skates, scooters and bicycles.

8.24.190    Model vehicles.

8.24.200    Winter sports equipment.

8.24.205    Golf activities.

8.24.210    Vending.

8.24.220    Intoxication.

8.24.230    Alcoholic beverages and dangerous drugs.

8.24.240    Hours.

8.24.250    Recreational vehicles.

8.24.260    Overnight camping.

8.24.270    Changing clothes.

8.24.280    Washing dishes.

8.24.290    Posted property.

8.24.291    Indoor City recreation or activity centers.

8.24.292    Palmdale Amphitheater.

8.24.293    DryTown Water Park.

8.24.294    Best of the West Softball Complex.

8.24.300    Personal liability.

8.24.310    Enforcement.

8.24.320    Penalty for violation.

8.24.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “park ordinance.” (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 2.3, 1974)

8.24.020 Definitions.
(A) “Alcoholic beverages” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid containing more than trace amounts of alcohol and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

(B) “Article” means an article of this chapter unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned.

(C) “City” means the City of Palmdale.

(D) “Director” means the Director of Recreation and Culture, his/her deputy, or other person authorized by him/her, pursuant to law, to act in his stead.

(E) “Motor vehicles” means any multiwheeled, treaded, or sled-type vehicle that is propelled by a motor or engine. “Motor vehicles” includes any vehicle commonly known as a “motorized recreation vehicle.”

(F) “Narcotics or dangerous drugs” means those narcotics or drugs listed or defined in the Health and Safety Code as now or hereafter amended.

(G) “Park” includes every park, roadside rest area, golf course, reservoir, riding and hiking trail, and every other recreation facility owned, managed, or controlled by the City and under the jurisdiction of the Director.

(H) “Park waters” means any lake, reservoir, pond, or other body of water within a park.

(I) “Person” includes every person, firm or corporation.

(J) “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

(K) “Section” means a section of this chapter unless some other statute or ordinance is specifically mentioned.

(L) “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path.

(M) “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.

(N) “Scooter” means any board or flat object which has wheels attached to it by any means whatsoever and which is intended to be propelled by pushing, pulling, or by the forces of gravity and to which there is affixed a device or mechanism for steering.

(O) “Smoke” and “smoking” mean the carrying or holding of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted smoking product or equipment used to burn any tobacco products, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance. Smoking includes emitting or exhaling the fumes of any pipe, cigar, cigarette, or any other lighted smoking equipment used for burning any tobacco product, weed, plant, or any other combustible substance. Smoking includes the use of an electronic cigarette or any other electronic and/or battery-operated device used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substance.

(P) “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

(Q) “Vend” or “vending” shall mean to sell or offer for sale any goods, food, wares, or merchandise.

(R) “Vessel” includes every description of watercraft used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water. “Vessel” includes a raft, but does not include a surfboard, paddleboard, or a standard surf mat. (Ord. 1516 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1456 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 §§ 1.1 – 1.11, 1974)

8.24.030 Compliance required.
A person shall not enter, be, or remain in any park unless he complies with all of the regulations set forth in this chapter applicable to such park, with all rules posted at the park, and with all other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. The Director shall have the authority to order any person who violates the provisions of this chapter to leave the premises of, and stay away from, any particular park. The failure to comply with an order to leave or stay away from any park is a separate offense and may be prosecuted as either an infraction or misdemeanor. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 2.1, 1974)

8.24.040 Power exercised by deputy.
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon, the Director or other public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by a deputy of the public officer or other person so authorized pursuant to law, by the Director except as otherwise provided by this chapter. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 2.4, 1974)

8.24.050 Applicability of regulations.
The rules and regulations set forth in this chapter apply to all parks as defined in PMC 8.24.020 except as otherwise expressly stated. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.1, 1974)

8.24.060 Harmful objects.
A person shall not place, throw, leave, keep, or maintain any object in such a manner or in such a place that any person or animal may be injured or any structure or vehicle may be damaged thereby. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.2, 1974)

8.24.070 Rubbish.
A person shall not throw, place, or dispose of any garbage, refuse, waste paper, bottles, or cans in any place in a park other than into a garbage can, recycling can, or other receptacle maintained therein for that purpose. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.3, 1974)

8.24.080 Shooting.
A person shall not discharge or shoot any firearms, air gun, slingshot, bow and arrow, or any other device that discharges a projectile in any park except at ranges designated for such purpose by the Director. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.4, 1974)

8.24.090 Fireworks.
A person shall not take or transport into any park, or have in his possession therein, or fire or discharge therein, any firecracker, rocket, torpedo, fireworks, or other explosive substance. This section shall not apply to a “pyrotechnic operator,” as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 12527, providing a “public display of fireworks,” as defined by Health and Safety Code Section 12524, authorized by the City.

This section shall not apply to the temporary transport, storage and sale of safe and sane fireworks as permitted by PMC 8.04.430 et seq. if the City Manager or his or her designee has approved the park site for temporary lease for the purpose of fireworks sales. The City Manager may place limitations and requirements on fireworks booths in City parks that he or she deems appropriate for City facilities such as rent, increased insurance, indemnity and other requirements. All other provisions of this code relating to fireworks, including, but not limited to, the application process, permitting requirements, deposits, eligibility, operation, booth construction and related regulations, shall apply. (Ord. 1414 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.5, 1974)

8.24.100 Destruction of park property.
A person, other than a duly authorized park employee in the performance of his duties, shall not:

(A) Dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate, or cut any tree, plant, shrub, grass, fruit, or flower or any portion thereof growing in any park;

(B) Remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock, sand, or gravel from any park;

(C) Cut, break, injure, deface, or disturb any rock, building, cage, pen, monument, sign, fence, bench, structure, apparatus, equipment, or property in a park or any portion thereof; or mark, etch or place thereon or on any portion thereof any mark, writing, or printing; or attach thereto any sign, card, display or other similar device. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.6, 1974)

8.24.110 Fires.
A person shall not light or maintain any fire in any park other than in a stove, fire circle, or area designated for such purpose, except upon written authorization from the Director. All fires lighted or maintained pursuant to this section shall be in compliance with all applicable rules and regulations of the County air pollution control district and any Fire Department having jurisdiction over the respective park areas. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.7, 1974)

8.24.120 Disturbances.
A person shall not disturb the peace and quiet of any park by:

(A) Any unduly loud or unusual noise; or

(B) Tooting, blowing or sounding any siren, horn, signal, or noise-making device; or

(C) Any obscene, violent or riotous conduct; or

(D) The use of obscene language therein. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 470 § 24, 1982; Ord. 241 § 3.8, 1974)

8.24.130 Animals.
A person shall not bring into a park any cattle, horse, mule, goat, sheep, swine, reptile, fowl, or other animal of any kind except as specifically provided in this chapter or as otherwise permitted by the Director. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.9, 1974)

8.24.140 Dogs and cats.
(A) Except as provided below, a person may bring and maintain in any outdoor park a dog or cat.

(B) Dogs and cats are prohibited at the following facilities: DryTown Water Park, Palmdale Amphitheater, and Best of the West Softball Complex.

(C) The Director may, from time to time, prohibit dogs and cats from entering any individual park, or portion thereof, by posting such a prohibition at the entrance of the park or around the prohibited area. All persons shall comply with the posted rules.

(D) Dogs specially trained as guide dogs, signal dogs, or service dogs are allowed at all parks during park hours.

(E) Except as provided in PMC 8.24.141, all dogs and cats must be kept on a leash or chain, not exceeding six feet in length, at all times while on park property.

(F) All dogs and cats must remain under the full control of its owner or custodian at all times while on park property. The owner or custodian is responsible for all actions of the dog or cat while on park property.

(G) It shall be unlawful to leave excrement or other pet refuse on park property, except in a garbage can or other trash receptacle. (Ord. 1320 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.10, 1974)

8.24.141 Dog exercise and recreation areas.
(A) The Director is authorized to designate individual parks, or portions thereof, as dog exercise and recreation areas. These areas may be referred to as “dog parks” or “authorized off-leash areas.” The Director is authorized to promulgate rules and regulations regarding the nature and use of the dog exercise and recreation areas and shall post such rules and regulations at, or near, each dog exercise and recreation area. It shall be unlawful to violate any rule or regulation of this chapter or any rule or regulation posted at, or near, a dog exercise and recreation area.

(B) Dogs are the only animals allowed to use dog exercise and recreation areas. A person shall not bring into any designated dog exercise and recreation area any pet or other animal of any kind, other than a dog, except with the written permission of the Director.

(C) Dogs in designated dog exercise and recreation areas are not required to be leashed, as required by PMC 8.24.140(E). However, dogs must be leashed, as required by PMC 8.24.140(E), during ingress to and egress from designated dog exercise and recreation areas.

(D) The presence of a dog in a designated dog exercise and recreation area shall constitute implied consent of the person either owning or controlling the dog to the regulations imposed by the Palmdale Municipal Code and the Director.

(E) The presence of a dog in a designated dog exercise and recreation area shall constitute a waiver of liability, on behalf of the person owning and controlling the dog, to the City of Palmdale, as well as an agreement and undertaking to protect, indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City of Palmdale for any injury or damage caused by the dog. (Ord. 1320 § 2, 2007)

8.24.150 Equestrian and pack animals.
A person may only lead or ride a horse, mule, donkey, or other similar animal on designated trails or in designated equestrian areas subject to all rules and regulations governing their use or in other park areas upon written permission of the Director, subject to the regulations of the use permit. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.11, 1974)

8.24.160 Grazing.
A person shall not permit any cattle, horses, goats, sheep, swine, fowl, or any domestic animal to graze in any park, except on property designated for such purpose. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.12, 1974)

8.24.170 Molesting animals.
A person shall not molest, hunt, disturb, injure, shoot at, take, net, poison, wound, harm, kill, or remove from any park any kind of animal except:

(A) When necessary to avoid bodily harm;

(B) If a person is a duly authorized park employee and is doing so in the performance of his duties. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.13, 1974)

8.24.180 Motor vehicles.
A person shall not bring to, or operate in, any park any motor vehicle except at such times and at such places as permitted by the Director in written regulations or permits issued by him from time to time, and any such operation of a motor vehicle shall be in accordance with the conditions contained in the regulation or permit. A person shall not park any motor vehicle in any park except in areas designated by the Director for parking. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.14, 1974)

8.24.185 Skateboards, roller skates, scooters and bicycles.
(A) A person shall not skate, use, ride or otherwise operate a skateboard, roller skates, scooter, or a bicycle, as defined in PMC 8.24.020 and 8.32.010, in any park.

(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a person may skate, use, ride or operate roller skates or a skateboard in a skatepark as set forth in and in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 8.32 PMC.

(C) Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a person may use, ride, or otherwise operate a bicycle in a park specifically designated and posted for that purpose by the Director.

(D) Any person who violates this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1181 § 1, 2001; Ord. U-1181 § 1, 2001)

8.24.190 Model vehicles.
A person shall not operate model automobiles, motorcycles, rockets, airplanes, helicopters, boats, or crafts except with the written permission of the Director. Use of model vehicles shall be limited to those areas designated for said use and subject to all rules and regulations contained in the written permission. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.15, 1974)

8.24.200 Winter sports equipment.
A person shall not hitch or pull by any vehicle upon, along, or across any road or driveway any toboggan, sled, skis, or any other type of winter sports equipment. A person shall not use any toboggan, sled, skis, or any other type of winter sports equipment upon, along, or across any road or driveway. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.16, 1974)

8.24.205 Golf activities.
A person shall not play or practice golf or swing any golf club within any park, except in such areas and to the extent as may be authorized by posted signs authorized by the Director. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006)

8.24.210 Vending.
(A) Vending is allowed in City parks subject to the following regulations:

(1) All sidewalk vendors must comply with the applicable regulations in PMC 5.04.590;

(2) Vending is prohibited in any park before the park opens or after one-half hour prior to park closure;

(3) Vending shall occur only on sidewalks or paved walkways within the parks;

(4) No sidewalk vendor shall vend within 100 feet of another sidewalk vendor;

(5) Vending is prohibited in, or within the immediate vicinity of, any park area subject to a rental agreement or during any special event. For purposes of this section, “special event” shall mean any city event and any community event subject to a special event permit or temporary use permit pursuant to Chapter 17.27 PMC. This prohibition shall only be effective for the limited duration of the rental agreement or event;

(6) No vending shall be allowed in any pool area. For purposes of this section, “pool area” shall mean any pool or water park attraction and any adjacent area circumscribed by a fence or building.

(B) Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited in any park subject to a concessionaire agreement.

(C) Vending is prohibited in parks subject to a deed restriction prohibiting private commercial activities. Parks with such restrictions shall be posted with no vending signs.

(D) This section shall not apply to:

(1) Any persons authorized to vend in City parks pursuant to a concessionaire or other agreement with the City; or

(2) Any persons authorized to vend in City parks pursuant to a special event permit or temporary use permit issued in accordance with Chapter 17.27 PMC. (Ord. 1516 § 2, 2018; Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.17, 1974)

8.24.220 Intoxication.
A person shall not enter, remain in, or be in any park while he is under the influence of any alcoholic beverage or narcotic or dangerous drug. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.18, 1974)

8.24.230 Alcoholic beverages and dangerous drugs.
A person shall not enter, be, or remain in any park while in possession of, transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away, or consuming any alcoholic beverage except at a concession facility duly authorized by the City and properly licensed. A person shall not enter, be, or remain in any park while in possession or transporting, purchasing, selling, giving away or consuming any narcotics or dangerous drugs. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.19, 1974)

8.24.240 Hours.
A person shall not enter, be, or remain in any park or in any building in any park between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. except where such person is camping as provided for under PMC 8.24.260 or as authorized by a written permit issued by the Director. The Director may, from time to time, change the hours of use as stated in this section for any individual park by posting the hours at the entrance of the park. All persons shall comply with the changed hours. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.20, 1974)

8.24.250 Recreational vehicles.
A person shall not bring a recreational vehicle, as defined in PMC 15.28.010, into any park not having a designated overnight camping area except when authorized by the Director, City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.21, 1974)

8.24.260 Overnight camping.
(A) A person shall not camp or sleep overnight in any park except where a family-type camping area is so designated and then only in accordance with the rules and regulations governing the use of the area. The Director may issue a permit to any youth group of a character-building nature and to any special interest group permitting its members as a group to camp overnight at a designated location in a park if he finds:

(1) That, in the case of a youth group, the group was organized in good faith and not for the purpose of obtaining a permit under this section and the members of the group will be supervised during the camping by an adequate number of responsible adults and the overnight camping will not interfere with or in any way be detrimental to the park or interfere with the uses thereof; and

(2) That the group has agreed to the conditions contained in the permit.

(B) Upon the granting of the permit, the members of the group, including the adult supervisors, may camp at the time, location, and under the conditions specified in the permit. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.22, 1974)

8.24.270 Changing clothes.
A person shall not change clothes or disrobe in a park except in that portion of a comfort station or other facility, if any, which is designated for such purpose. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.23, 1974)

8.24.280 Washing dishes.
A person shall not place in any park waters any edible matter, dish, or utensil or wash or cleanse in any park waters any such edible matter, dish or utensil or commit any nuisance in or near such waters or pollute any park waters. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.24, 1974)

8.24.290 Posted property.
A person shall not operate any motor vehicle on or over any firebreak or any fire protection roads which are posted against public use or operate any motor vehicle on or over any riding or hiking trail, including a riding and hiking trail established under Article 6 of Chapter 1 of Division 5 of the Public Resources Code of the state. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 3.25, 1974)

8.24.291 Indoor City recreation or activity centers.
In addition to all City ordinances, state and federal laws, and any other applicable laws, rules, and regulations, the following applies specifically to the park facilities known as the Hammack Activity

Center, Palmdale Oasis Park Recreation Center, and any other indoor City recreation or activity center: all persons using any indoor City recreation or activity center must obtain and present upon request a photograph identification card issued by the City and comply with all posted rules at the facility. The Director shall promulgate rules and regulations applicable to the use of the individual indoor City recreation or activity center including, but not limited to, the issuance of photograph identification cards, hours of operation, admission requirements, use of the facility, and waivers of liability, and shall cause such rules and regulations to be posted at the facility. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006)

8.24.292 Palmdale Amphitheater.
In addition to all City ordinances, state and federal laws, and any other applicable laws, rules, and regulations, the following apply specifically to the park known as the Palmdale Amphitheater:

(A) A person shall not enter, be, or remain in the Palmdale Amphitheater except during a scheduled event or with the permission of the Director.

(B) A person shall not throw, toss, or hurl any object in the Palmdale Amphitheater.

(C) A person shall not bring into the Palmdale Amphitheater any food, beverage, ice chest or cooler, unless prior approval is obtained from the Director.

(D) A person shall not smoke in the Palmdale Amphitheater, except in those areas designated as smoking areas.

(E) A person shall not dispose of any cigarette, cigar or tobacco, or any part of a cigarette or cigar, in any place in the Palmdale Amphitheater, including garbage cans and other receptacles maintained for the disposal of rubbish, except in receptacles designated for the disposal of tobacco products. (Ord. 1433 § 3, 2012; Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006)

8.24.293 DryTown Water Park.
In addition to all City ordinances, state and federal laws, and any other applicable laws, rules, and regulations, the following apply specifically to the park known as the DryTown Water Park:

(A) All persons must comply with all posted rules and regulations relating to use of the water park and the individual park attractions. The Director shall promulgate rules and regulations applicable to the use of the park and its individual attractions including, but not limited to, hours of operation, admission requirements, use of the facility and its attractions, and waivers of liability, and shall cause such rules and regulations to be posted at DryTown Water Park.

(B) A person shall not bring into DryTown Water Park any food, beverage, ice chest or cooler, unless prior approval is obtained from the Director.

(C) A person shall not bring into DryTown Water Park any disposable swim diapers. Diapered guests at DryTown Water Park must wear reusable plastic swim pants in all pools and attractions.

(D) Children under the age of 12 are not permitted at DryTown Water Park unless accompanied by a person age 18 or older.

(E) A person shall not run or slide on any paved surface at DryTown Water Park.

(F) A person shall not smoke in DryTown Water Park.

(G) A person shall not dispose of any cigarette, cigar or tobacco, or any part of a cigarette or cigar, in any place in DryTown Water Park, including garbage cans and other receptacles maintained for the disposal of rubbish. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006)

8.24.294 Best of the West Softball Complex.
In addition to all City ordinances, state and federal laws, and any other applicable laws, rules, and regulations, the following apply specifically to the park known as the Best of the West Softball Complex:

(A) A person shall not enter, be, or remain in the Best of the West Softball Complex except during an authorized league game or practice, a scheduled tournament or event, or with the permission of the Director.

(B) A person shall not smoke in the Best of the West Softball Complex.

(C) A person shall not dispose of any cigarette, cigar or tobacco, or any part of a cigarette or cigar, in any place in the Best of the West Softball Complex, including garbage cans and other receptacles maintained for the disposal of rubbish. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006)

8.24.300 Personal liability.
A person exercising any of the privileges authorized by this chapter does so at his own risk without liability on the part of the City, their officers, employees and agents for death or injury to persons or damage to property resulting therefrom. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 2.7, 1974)

8.24.310 Enforcement.
The Director shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 2.5, 1974)

8.24.320 Penalty for violation.
Any person who, within the incorporated territory of the City, violates any provisions of this chapter, the conditions of any permit issued pursuant thereto, or any rule or regulation relating to parks, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon conviction thereof, he shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $5.00 nor more than $200.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not less than five days nor more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1285 § 1, 2006; Ord. 241 § 2.6, 1974)

Chapter 8.25
AMBULANCE SERVICE
Sections:

8.25.010    Ambulance service authorized.

8.25.020    Contracting for services.

8.25.030    Terms.

8.25.010 Ambulance service authorized.
Pursuant to Section 38794 of the Government Code of the state, the City is authorized to contract for the furnishing of ambulance services to residents of the City. (Ord. 495, 1983)

8.25.020 Contracting for services.
The City Council shall, from time to time, enter into contracts either with the County or with private persons, firms or corporations, for the furnishing of ambulance services to the residents of the City as public convenience may require. (Ord. 495, 1983)

8.25.030 Terms.
Such contracts for ambulance services shall contain such terms and provisions as the City Council may from time to time approve in writing. (Ord. 495, 1983)

Chapter 8.28
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION HOURS OF OPERATION AND NOISE CONTROL
Sections:

8.28.010    Definitions.

8.28.030    Construction noise prohibited in residential zones.

8.28.040    Exceptions.

8.28.050    Appeals.

8.28.060    Exemptions – Generally.

8.28.070    Exemptions for public utilities.

8.28.080    Repealed.

8.28.090    Violations – Penalties.

8.28.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

(A) “Person” means an individual, partnership, firm or corporation.

(B) “Section” means a section of this chapter.

(C) Reference to Ordinance or Statute. Whenever any reference is made to this chapter, or any other ordinance, or to any statute, such reference shall apply to all amendments and additions thereto, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 584 § 1, 1986)

8.28.030 Construction noise prohibited in residential zones.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall perform any construction or repair work on any Sunday, or any other day after 8:00 p.m. or before 6:30 a.m., in any residential zone or within 500 feet of any residence, hotel, motel or recreational vehicle park. For the purposes of this section, construction and repair work includes work of any kind upon any building or structure, earth excavating, filling, or moving, and delivery, preparation or operation of construction equipment, materials or supplies where any of the foregoing entails the use of an air compressor, jack hammer, power-driven drill, riveting machine, excavator, semi-truck, diesel power truck, tractor, cement truck, or earth moving equipment, hand hammer, or other machine, tool, device or equipment which makes loud noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness sleeping or residing in the area. (Ord. 1335 § 1, 2007; Ord. 584 § 1, 1986)

8.28.040 Exceptions.
The provisions of PMC 8.28.030 do not apply to any person who performs the construction, repair, excavation or earth moving work involved pursuant to the express written permission of the City Engineer to perform such work at times prohibited in PMC 8.28.030. Upon receipt of an application in writing therefor, stating the reasons for the request and the facts upon which such reasons are based, the City Engineer may grant such permission if he finds that:

(A) The work proposed to be done is affected with public interest; or

(B) Hardship, injustice or unreasonable delay would result from the interruption thereof during the hours and days specified in PMC 8.28.030; or

(C) The building or structure involved is devoted or intended to be devoted to a use immediately incident to public defense. (Ord. 584 § 1, 1986)

8.28.050 Appeals.
Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the City made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal therefrom to the administrative hearing officer appointed pursuant to Chapter 1.20 PMC, within 15 days of the date of the decision, by filing with the City Clerk a written notice of appeal, briefly stating in the notice the grounds relied upon for appeal. If the appeal is made within the time prescribed, the City Clerk shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the administrative hearing officer, to be held within 45 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal, giving the appellant not less than five days’ notice in writing of the time and place of hearing. The findings and determinations of the administrative hearing officer at the hearing shall be final and conclusive, and within three days after the findings and determinations are made, the City Clerk shall give notice thereof to the appellant.

In the event no appeal is taken by the permittee, the decision of the City Engineer shall become final and conclusive on the expiration of the time fixed in this section for appeal. (Ord. 1322 § 3, 2007; Ord. 584 § 1, 1986)

8.28.060 Exemptions – Generally.
The provisions of PMC 8.28.030 do not apply to the construction, repair, or excavation during prohibited hours as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the City are closed, or where such necessity requires immediate action prior to the time at which it would be possible to obtain a permit pursuant to PMC 8.28.040, if the person doing such construction, repair or excavation obtains a permit therefor within one day after the office of the City Engineer is first opened subsequent to the making of such construction, repair or excavation. (Ord. 584 § 1, 1986)

8.28.070 Exemptions for public utilities.
The provisions of PMC 8.28.030 do not apply to the construction, repair, or excavation by a public utility which is subject to the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property and where such necessity makes it necessary to construct, repair, or excavate during the prohibited hours. (Ord. 584 § 1, 1986)

8.28.080 Exemptions in nonresidential zones.
Repealed by Ord. 1335. (Ord. 584 § 1, 1986)

8.28.090 Violations – Penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Every such person is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punished as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 584 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 8.32
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND BICYCLES
Sections:

8.32.010    Definitions.

8.32.020    Prohibited activities.

8.32.040    Applicability.

8.32.045    Skate parks.

8.32.050    Violations.

8.32.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(A) “Bicycle” means and includes any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains, or gears and which has wheels at least 12 inches in diameter and a frame size of at least 14 inches.

(B) “Roller skates” means any device or shoe which has wheels attached to it by any means whatsoever and which is intended to be propelled by pushing, pulling, or by the forces of gravity and to which there is not affixed any mechanism for steering.

(C) “Skateboard” means any board or flat object which has wheels attached to it by any means whatsoever and which is intended to be propelled by pushing, pulling, or by the forces of gravity and to which there is not affixed any device or mechanism for steering.

(D) “Skate park” means any facility designed and maintained for the purpose of recreational skateboard or roller skate use, and includes a skateboard park as set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 115800. (Ord. 1319 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1164 § 1, 2000; Ord. 693 § 1, 1987)

8.32.020 Prohibited activities.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to skate, use, ride or otherwise operate any skateboard or roller skates within, upon or over any public transportation parking lot, building or facility.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to skate, use, ride or otherwise operate any skateboard, roller skates, or bicycle upon or over private property posted by the property owner, tenant or manager, with clearly legible and visible signs prohibiting such activity. (Ord. 1319 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1305 § 1, 2007; Ord. 693 § 1, 1987)

8.32.040 Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any person merely walking a bicycle or carrying a skateboard or roller skates in the areas designated herein, except that any person within the confines of a skate park shall wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads at all times. The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to any Peace Officer who, in the performance of official duties, operates a bicycle upon or over any parking lot, private roadway, street, sidewalk or walkway of any shopping center, or skate park within the City. (Ord. 1164 § 3, 2000; Ord. 997 § 1, 1992; Ord. 693 § 1, 1987)

8.32.045 Skate parks.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to skate, use, ride or otherwise operate any skateboard at any skate park located on property owned by the City, unless that person is:

(1) Wearing a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads; and

(2) Twelve years of age or older, unless accompanied by a responsible adult. “Responsible adult” has the same meaning as in PMC 9.25.010.

(B) The only devices allowed in a skate park are skateboards. Any other devices, including but not limited to bicycles, scooters, roller skates, and motorized vehicles, are unlawful to use in a skate park.

(C) It is unlawful for any person to bring into a skate park any item, equipment, ramp or other material that can be used to perform tricks or stunts.

(D) Signs shall be posted at all skate parks affording reasonable notice that:

(1) Any person failing to wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads while using the skate park will be subject to citation under the provisions of this code; and

(2) Any person violating any of the provisions of this section is subject to citation under the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1403 § 1, 2010; Ord. 1378 § 3, 2009; Ord. 1164 § 4, 2000; Ord. 1128 § 1, 1998; Ord. U-1128 § 1, 1998)

8.32.050 Violations.
Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision, regulation, or requirement of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 1403 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1164 § 5, 2000; Ord. 1128 § 2, 1998; Ord. U-1128 § 2, 1998; Ord. 693 § 1, 1987)

Chapter 8.34
REGULATION OF SMOKING AT PUBLIC PLACES AND PLACES OF EMPLOYMENT
Sections:

8.34.010    Title.

8.34.020    Findings and purpose.

8.34.030    Definitions.

8.34.040    City-owned, leased or operated facilities.

8.34.050    Regulation of smoking in enclosed public places.

8.34.060    Regulation of smoking in places of employment.

8.34.070    Places where smoking is not regulated.

8.34.080    Separation of nonsmoking and smoking areas.

8.34.090    Request for modification or exemption.

8.34.100    Sign posting requirements.

8.34.110    Notice of complaint.

8.34.120    Violations and penalties.

8.34.130    Prohibition of retaliation.

8.34.140    Applicability of other laws.

8.34.150    Severability.

8.34.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “the ordinance regulating smoking.” (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.020 Findings and purpose.
The City Council makes the following findings and statement of purpose with respect to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter:

(A) Scientific studies conducted by the Surgeon General of the United States and the United States Environmental Protection Agency have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand and sidestream smoke is a significant health hazard to children and teenagers, elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease and individuals with impaired respiratory function.

(B) Health hazards induced by exposure to secondhand and side-stream smoke include lung and other forms of cancer, respiratory infection, decreased respiratory function, broncho-constriction and broncho-spasm, and heart disease.

(C) All persons, including employees, have the right to a smoke-free environment if they so desire.

(D) The City Council finds and determines that the City is authorized under its police power to implement and enforce this chapter in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its residents and visitors by prohibiting smoking in certain public places and places of employment; to guarantee the rights of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air; and to recognize that the need to breathe tobacco smoke-free air has priority over the desire to smoke. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.030 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter certain words and phrases shall be defined as follows:

“Bar” means an establishment which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term “bar” shall not include any restaurant dining area.

“City” means the City of Palmdale.

“Employee” means any person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business in the City, whether as an owner, a member of the family, or as a partner, agent, manager, solicitor, apprentice, trainee or any other category of person employed or working in such business.

“Employer” means any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation or nonprofit entity, who engages the services of one or more individuals.

“Enclosed area” means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of door or passage ways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid.

“Nonprofit entity” means any corporation, unincorporated association or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operation of which are committed to the promotion of the objectives or purposes of the organization and not for private financial gain.

“Place of employment” means an enclosed area under the control of an employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, conference rooms, restrooms and employee cafeterias.

“Public place” means any area to which the public is generally invited or permitted.

“Restaurant” means any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school cafeteria, including any associated outdoor eating area, and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities, except that the term “restaurant” shall not include a cocktail lounge or bar as defined in this section.

“Smoking” means the inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, weed, plant or other combustible substances in any manner or in any form. Smoking includes the use of an electronic cigarette or any other electronic and/or battery operated device used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substance.

“Tobacco store” means a retail establishment, the primary use of which is the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other items is merely incidental.

“Waiting lines or areas” means any indoor line or area in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money or other consideration. (Ord. 1456 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.040 City-owned, leased or operated facilities.
(A) All enclosed facilities which are owned, leased or operated by the City, including vehicles, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter.

(B) Smoking shall be prohibited at all outdoor facilities, including parks, which are owned, leased or operated by the City.

(C) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (B) of this section, smoking shall be prohibited, except in those areas designated as smoking areas, at the following facilities:

(1) Palmdale Amphitheater;

(2) Palmdale Transportation Center; and

(3) Larry Chimbole Cultural Center.

(D) The City Manager, or his or her designee, is authorized to establish, and change, the designated smoking area(s) for each facility identified in subsection (C) of this section. The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall conspicuously post, or cause to be posted, at every designated smoking area, signs identifying that area as a location where smoking is permitted. (Ord. 1433 § 1, 2012; Ord. 1291 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.050 Regulation of smoking in enclosed public places.
(A) Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places located within the City during the time such places are open for use by the general public, including but not limited to the following:

(1) Modes of public transportation such as buses and taxicabs. This shall also include ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transportation depots; provided, however, that this prohibition does not prevent:

(a) The establishment of two separate waiting areas for smokers and nonsmokers; or

(b) The establishment of a maximum of 25 percent of a single waiting area as a smoking area;

(2) Public restrooms;

(3) Service or waiting line areas;

(4) Retail stores, except areas not open or accessible to the general public;

(5) All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities, including, but not limited to, offices, banks, hotels and motels;

(6) Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semi-private rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctor’s offices and dentist’s offices, except that such health facilities shall also be subject to the provisions of PMC 8.34.060 regulating smoking in places of employment;

(7) Any enclosed building, hall or theater used for entertainment, including theaters, auditoriums and sports arenas. This does not include any lobby or other area which is not open to the general public or when smoking is part of a theatrical stage production;

(8) Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets, except those areas not open to the general public and those areas of such establishments set aside for the serving of food and beverages which are regulated by other sections of this chapter;

(9) Public schools and other public facilities under the control of another public agency, which are available to and customarily used by the general public, to the extent that said facilities are subject to the jurisdiction of the City;

(10) Any restaurant; provided, that any owner, operator or manager of a restaurant regulated by this chapter may, by signs, designate no more than 50 percent of the total seating area capacity as a smoking area;

(11) Forty percent of hotel/motel rooms rented to guests. Each nonsmoking room shall be clearly posted with a sign designating the room as nonsmoking;

(12) Public elevators, enclosed stairwells, hallways and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, retirement facilities and nursing homes;

(13) Lobbies, hallways and other common areas in multiple-unit commercial facilities;

(14) Enclosed recreational areas, such as gymnasiums, roller skating rinks, indoor swimming pools and health spas;

(15) Polling places.

(B) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this chapter may declare the entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.060 Regulation of smoking in places of employment.
(A) All employers shall adopt a written smoking policy and make it available to all current and prospective employees within 90 days of the effective date of this chapter. This policy shall include the treatment of private offices occupied exclusively by smokers, and shall require the posting of appropriately sized “no smoking” signs where applicable. It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smoke free areas for nonsmokers within facilities to the extent reasonably possible, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing such areas. The total area designated for nonsmokers and smokers shall be determined by each employer in accordance with one of the following methods:

(1) The employer shall conduct an annual poll of all employees to determine the percentage of smokers and nonsmokers. The employer shall then establish smoking and nonsmoking areas within lunchrooms, breakrooms, cafeterias and employee lounges in proportion to these percentages; or

(2) An employer may establish nonsmoking areas of not less than 50 percent of the seating capacity and floor areas in lunchrooms, breakrooms, cafeterias and employee lounges.

(B) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, every employer shall have the right to designate the entire work place as a nonsmoking establishment. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.070 Places where smoking is not regulated.
(A) Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter:

(1) Private residences, except when used as a child care or health care facility;

(2) Bars or cocktail lounges, bowling alleys, billiard halls and bingo parlors;

(3) Restaurants, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms while such rooms are being used for private functions;

(4) Private enclosed offices or workplaces occupied exclusively by smokers and not accessible to the public, even though such an office or workplace may be visited by nonsmoking co-workers; provided, that nonsmokers are not required to enter these work places as a function of their employment. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise prohibited by other applicable laws.

(B) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.080 Separation of nonsmoking and smoking areas.
(A) Where feasible, all nonsmoking areas shall be physically separated from permitted smoking areas by structural means. Owners or operators of currently existing uses shall not be required to make any structural modifications to separate such nonsmoking and smoking areas; however, such areas shall be physically separated to the extent reasonably possible.

(B) Where designated smoking and nonsmoking areas can not be structurally separated, the installation of smoke extractors or other similar air filtering systems may be required where deemed necessary by the code enforcement division to reduce the level of smoke in nonsmoking areas to an acceptable level.

(C) The interior design of new construction shall accommodate smoking and nonsmoking areas where required by this chapter. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.090 Request for modification or exemption.
(A) Any owner, operator or manager of an establishment or other workplace subject to the provisions of this chapter may request a modification or an exemption from said requirements due to financial hardship, based upon the cost of complying with the provisions of this chapter.

(B) Said request shall be submitted in writing to the City’s Planning Department and shall be subject to a public hearing before the City’s Hearing Officer.

(C) Approval of a modification or exemption request may be granted only upon a finding made by the reviewing authority upon evidence presented by the applicant prior to or at the public hearing that it would be a financial hardship for the applicant to comply with the requirements of this chapter.

(D) Appeals from the Hearing Officer’s decision may be filed pursuant to the provisions of Article 105 of Chapter 10 of the Palmdale zoning ordinance.

(E) The applicant shall pay all applicable fees associated with the review of any such request as established by resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.100 Sign posting requirements.
(A) Every owner, operator or person having control of a building or workplace where smoking is regulated by this chapter shall conspicuously post or cause to be posted in every such building or workplace “smoking” or “no smoking” signs, as applicable, with individual letters of not less than three inches in height, or with the international no smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it).

(B) Every owner, manager or operator of a movie theater subject to this chapter shall conspicuously post or cause to be posted signs in the lobby stating that smoking is prohibited within the theater or auditorium, and such information shall be shown on the movie screen for at least five seconds prior to the showing of each feature motion picture.

(C) Every owner, operator or manager of a restaurant shall post signs at each public entrance or reception area which designate smoking and nonsmoking areas, and which clearly direct patrons to the appropriate area of the restaurant. The restaurant owner, operator or manager shall establish a policy requiring that all patrons be asked their seating preference. Any restaurant where smoking is entirely prohibited shall post a sign indicating that fact at each public entrance or reception area. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.110 Notice of complaint.
(A) Any person desiring to lodge a complaint relating to any violation of the provisions of this chapter may do so with the Department of Planning, code enforcement division.

(B) Any owner, manager, operator or employee of any establishment regulated by this chapter may inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.120 Violations and penalties.
(A) It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with any of its provisions.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by any provision of this chapter.

(C) Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in PMC Title 1. (Ord. 1433 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1291 § 3, 2006; Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.130 Prohibition of retaliation.
It is unlawful for an employer or other person to discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights to a smoke-free environment afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.140 Applicability of other laws.
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted or prohibited by other applicable laws. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

8.34.150 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1024 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 8.36
REGULATION OF PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
Sections:

8.36.010    Title.

8.36.020    Findings and purpose.

8.36.030    Authority.

8.36.040    Applicability.

8.36.050    Definitions.

8.36.060    Conditions constituting a nuisance.

8.36.061    Substandard property.

8.36.062    Landscape maintenance.

8.36.070    Requirement to abate public nuisances.

8.36.080    Illegal dumping.

8.36.090    Responsibility for property maintenance.

8.36.100    Inspection.

8.36.101    Determination by Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official.

8.36.102    Informal notice.

8.36.103    Formal notice of substandard property.

8.36.104    Combining notices.

8.36.105    Service of notice.

8.36.106    Other interested parties.

8.36.107    Declaration of substandard building or property.

8.36.108    Posting of signs.

8.36.110    Summary abatement of immediate dangers.

8.36.120    Abatement of nuisance violation.

8.36.130    Applicability of other laws.

8.36.140    Severability.

8.36.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “the ordinance regulating property maintenance.” (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.020 Findings and purpose.
The City Council finds that the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter will serve the following purposes:

(A) To enhance and promote the maintenance of real property, both improved and unimproved, and by so doing, improve the livability, appearance and social and economic conditions of the community;

(B) To attempt to ensure that real properties, whether improved or unimproved, do not reach such a state of deterioration or disrepair as to cause the depreciation of the value of surrounding property or be materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements;

(C) To promote compliance with the goals, policies and implementation measures of the Palmdale general plan, specifically by establishing minimum standards and procedures to permit the abatement of blighted areas within the City. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.030 Authority.
The City Council finds and determines that the City is authorized in accordance with its police power to implement and enforce this chapter in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare of its residents by requiring the maintenance of improved and unimproved property within the City. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.040 Applicability.
The provisions contained in this chapter shall apply to all improved and unimproved commercial, residential, industrial and open space land located within the City. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.050 Definitions.
(A) “Hazard” means any condition or circumstance which poses a potential or actual risk to human life or to the public health, safety or welfare.

(B) “Nuisance” means anything which is injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety or welfare, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, or defaces public or privately owned real property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any public street or highway.

(C) “Property owner” and “owner” means the owner or owners of record of real property as shown on the latest assessment roll of Los Angeles County, or as otherwise identified by a title report on the property. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.060 Conditions constituting a nuisance.
It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge of any property in the City to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon and to be of such a nature as to be injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or to have a tendency to degrade the appearance and property values of surrounding property:

(A) Property Conditions Constituting a Nuisance.

(1) Overgrown, diseased, dead or decayed trees, weeds or other vegetation within portions of the City that are partially or fully developed, which:

(a) Constitute a fire hazard or a condition considered dangerous to the public health, safety and general welfare due to a variety of factors, including, but not limited to, obstruction of vehicular line of sight, impairment of vehicular traffic or the ability to clearly observe safety signs and signals, or which

(b) May result in the harborage of vermin, or pest or disease infestation, or which

(c) Constitute an unsightly appearance that has the potential to degrade or negatively impact the appearance of surrounding properties;

(2) The accumulation of lumber, junk, trash, debris or salvage materials so as to be visible at ground level from a public street, alley or from adjoining property, except that nothing herein shall preclude the placement of firewood when stacked in accordance with applicable health and fire codes for use on the premises;

(3) The accumulation of animal feces or animal-related wastes;

(4) Outdoor storage, so as to be visible at ground level from a public street or from adjoining property for a period exceeding 30 days, or as a part of a continuing practice, of any of the following items:

(a) Broken or discarded furniture, appliances, boxes and containers, play equipment, toys and similar household articles,

(b) Abandoned, inoperative, wrecked or dismantled autos, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, camper boats or other recreational vehicles,

(c) Discarded, wrecked or inoperable machinery and tools,

(d) Salvage materials, scrap metal or other building and construction materials including, but not limited to, dirt, sand, gravel, lumber, concrete, tile, rocks, bricks and other similar materials;

(5) Unmaintained garbage or trash cans, dumpsters or receptacles that are visible from public rights-of-way or which cause offensive odors or constitute a source of wind-blown trash or debris to adjacent properties;

(6) Conditions which, due to their accessibility to the public, may be hazardous or dangerous, including but not limited to:

(a) Unused or broken appliances such as refrigerators, freezers, and similar storage chests,

(b) Excavations, wells, shafts, pits and unsecured cellars or basements,

(c) Machinery which is inadequately secured or protected,

(d) Accumulations of lumber, refuse and waste matter, or discarded materials, including, but not limited to, building and construction materials,

(e) Pools, spas, fountains, ponds and tanks which are not maintained in a safe and sanitary manner;

(7) Unmaintained or broken irrigation systems;

(8) Defaced, illegal, unmaintained or unsafe signage;

(9) Unmaintained grease traps; dirt-filled, oil-filled or debris-filled loading areas, parking lots and trash enclosures;

(10) Illegal parking of vehicles:

(a) Parking, storing, or keeping of any motor vehicle within that area of a residential lot customarily considered to be the front yard. The front yard area does not include the driveway. For purposes of this subsection, the driveway shall be limited to: (1) one paved area leading directly from the public right-of-way to an attached garage or carport (whether one-car, two-car, or more), which paved area shall be limited in width to the width of the attached garage(s) or carport(s); (2) where the only garage or carport is a detached rear yard garage or carport, to the width of a single lane driveway, which shall not exceed 12 feet in total width, leading directly in a straight line from the public right-of-way to the rear portion of the lot; (3) one single-lane paved area not exceeding 12 feet in width leading directly in a straight line from the public right-of-way to a side yard parking area as permitted by subsection (A)(10)(c) of this section on the same side of the lot as the principle attached front yard garage or carport; and (4) one circular driveway on a lot with a minimum frontage of 80 feet with no other driveway leading to an approved garage, carport, rear yard or side yard parking area, subject to the approval of the City Traffic Engineer. Any such circular driveway shall not exceed 20 feet in width between the interior and exterior arcs, and shall be abutted by a maintained landscaping area on both interior and exterior arcs. Parking any vehicle on any other portion of the front yard, whether paved or unpaved, including in an area leading to an approved additional paved parking area in a rear or side yard, is prohibited.

(b) Parking, storing or keeping of any recreational vehicle, trailer, boat, or camper within that area of a lot customarily considered to be the front yard. The front yard area does not include the driveway. For purposes of this subsection only, the driveway shall be limited to: (1) one paved area leading directly from the public right-of-way to an attached garage or carport (whether one-car, two-car, or more), which paved area shall be limited in width to the width of the attached garage(s) or carport(s); (2) where the only garage or carport is a detached rear yard garage or carport, to the width of a single lane driveway which shall not exceed 12 feet in width, leading directly in a straight line from the public right-of-way to the rear portion of the lot; and (3) one single-lane paved area not exceeding 12 feet in width leading directly in a straight line from the public right-of-way to a side yard parking area as permitted by subsection (A)(10)(c) of this section on the same side of the lot as the principle attached front yard garage or carport. Parking any recreational vehicle, trailer, boat, or camper on any other portion of the front yard, whether paved or unpaved, including in an area leading to an approved additional paved parking area in a rear or side yard, is prohibited.

(c) Parking, storing or keeping of any motor vehicle within that area of a residential lot customarily considered to be the side yard except when parked on a rock or paved surface. The side yard area does not include a side yard driveway to an approved side yard or rear yard garage or carport.

(d) Parking, storing or keeping of any recreational vehicle, trailer, boat or camper within that area of a lot customarily considered to be the side yard except when parked on a rock or paved surface. The side yard area does not include a side yard driveway leading to an approved side yard or rear yard garage or carport.

(11) Unmounted campers or camper shells stored in the front yard, side yard or driveway areas.

(B) Structural Conditions. Structures or buildings, both permanent and temporary, or other improvements, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, slabs and utility extensions, which exhibit any of the following conditions are deemed to be nuisances:

(1) Are structurally unsafe, either entirely or in part, or which constitute a fire or other hazard;

(2) Have faulty weather protection as determined by the Building Official;

(3) Have crumbling, cracked, missing, broken or loose exterior stucco or other siding, roofs, foundations or floors (including lack of paint or other protective finish), broken or missing windows or doors;

(4) Have dry rot, warping or are infested with termites, insects or vermin, or have paint which is cracked, peeled or blistered rendering the building in such a state of disrepair as to be unsightly;

(5) Are abandoned, partially destroyed or left in a state of partial construction and where the appearance or other conditions of any such building or structure substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood;

(6) Are abandoned and have windows containing broken glass, or no glass at all where the window is of a type which normally contains glass, thereby creating hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief. Plywood or other similar material (of at least one-half-inch thickness) shall be used to cover such window space. When such covering is required for an extended period of time, the material shall be painted in a color or colors consistent with the remainder of the structure;

(7) Are unoccupied and have been left unlocked or otherwise open and unsecured from intrusion by persons, animals or the elements;

(8) Have exterior walls, fences, driveways, sidewalks or landscape elements which do not require a building permit and which are in a hazardous condition, or hinder free access to public sidewalks, or are in such a state of disrepair as to be unsightly. (Ord. 1261 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.061 Substandard property.
Any one or more of the following conditions shall constitute substandard property:

(A) Substandard Buildings.

(1) As declared by the Building Official under the housing, abatement of dangerous buildings, or building code,

(2) As declared by the Senior Code Enforcement or Building Official as determined by this chapter;

(B) Unpainted buildings causing dry rot, warping and termite infestation;

(C) Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief;

(D) Overgrown vegetation causing detriment to neighboring properties or property values;

(E) Dead trees, weeds and debris that:

(1) Constitute an unsightly appearance,

(2) Are dangerous to public safety and welfare, or

(3) Are detrimental to nearby property or property values;

(F) Trailers, campers, boats and other mobile equipment stored for unreasonable periods in yard areas contiguous to streets or highways and causing depreciation of nearby property values;

(G) Inoperable or abandoned motor vehicles stored for unreasonable periods on the premises and causing depreciation of nearby property values;

(H) Attractive nuisances dangerous to children in the form of:

(1) Abandoned and broken equipment, or

(2) Neglected machinery;

(I) Broken or discarded furniture and household equipment in yard areas for unreasonable periods of time;

(J) Clothesline in front yard areas;

(K) Garbage cans stored in front or side yards and visible from the public street except when placed in places of collection at the times permitted;

(L) Packing boxes and other debris stored in yards and visible from public streets for unreasonable periods;

(M) Neglect of premises:

(1) To spite neighbors, or

(2) To influence zone changes, granting of exceptions or special-use permits, or

(3) To cause detrimental effect upon nearby property or property values;

(N) Maintenance of premises in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code Section 3480;

(O) Property, including, but not limited to, building exteriors which are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly, or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes appreciable depreciation of the property values of surrounding property or is materially detrimental to proximal properties and improvements. This includes, but is not limited to, the keeping or disposing of or the scattering over the property or premises of any of the following:

(1) Lumber, junk, trash or debris,

(2) Abandoned, discarded or unused objects of equipment such as automobiles, furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans or containers,

(3) Stagnant water or excavations,

(4) Any device, decoration, design, fence, structure, clothesline or vegetation which is unsightly by reason of its condition or its inappropriate location;

(P) Maintenance of premises so out of harmony or conformance with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties;

(Q) Property maintained in violation of the rights of others so as to establish a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments, and social and economic maladjustments to such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts from such particular area are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered therein;

(R) Grading which does not meet the minimum standards of the City or any other County or state law regulating grading. (Ord. 1154 § 9, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 9, 1999)

8.36.062 Landscape maintenance.
Landscaping shall be maintained (watering, fertilizing, weeding, mowing, pruning, etc.) by the landowner (unless otherwise noted in a rental agreement and/or contract between the landlord and tenant) in accordance with the following: Sites shall be kept clean and maintained at all times. Weeds and trash (wind blown or otherwise) shall not be allowed to accumulate on the site. Vegetation shall receive sufficient water and other required customary care to maintain health and vigor to the maximum extent possible. Pruning and mowing shall be used to maintain plant health and vigor while enhancing its form and structure. Lawn/grass turf blades shall be maintained to not exceed eight inches from grade in height. All dead or obviously unhealthy plant material shall be replaced with new material which is comparable to original installation. (Ord. 1177 § 2, 2001)

8.36.070 Requirement to abate public nuisances.
(A) Any property, building or other improvements found to be maintained in violation of any one or more provisions of PMC 8.36.060 is declared to constitute a public nuisance and shall be abated by rehabilitation, repair, removal or demolition pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter.

(B) Any property, building or other improvement found to be maintained in such condition as to constitute a public nuisance as defined anywhere in this code, the statutes of the state of California or in the common law, is declared to constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement under the procedures set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.080 Illegal dumping.
(A) Unlawful Dumping in Public Places. No person shall dispose of or dump waste matter of any kind or composition upon any public property, street or alley of the City including trash dumpsters, cans and receptacles, except where public property is provided and set apart by the City for such use.

(B) Unlawful Dumping on Private Property. No person shall dispose of or dump any waste matter in or upon any private property including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or in or upon any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or by license, or upon any private property without the consent of the property owner.

(C) Lawful Stockpiling or Storage. This section does not restrict a property owner in the use of his or her own private property for the legal storage or stockpiling of materials (in conformance with any applicable state, County or City permit or code), unless the placing, depositing or dumping of the materials on the property creates a public health and safety hazard, a public nuisance, or a fire hazard, as determined by the Los Angeles County Health Department, the Los Angeles County Fire Department or the City’s Senior Code Enforcement Officer or such officer’s designee. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.090 Responsibility for property maintenance.
(A) Every owner of real property within the City is required to maintain such property in a manner so as to not violate the provisions of this chapter, and such owner remains liable for violations thereof regardless of any contract or agreement with any third party regarding such property.

(B) Every occupant, lessee, tenant or holder of any interest in real property, other than the owner thereof, who has assumed responsibility for the maintenance of such property under the terms of a written lease, rental agreement, or other contractual arrangement shall maintain the property in a manner so as not to violate the provisions of this chapter, to the extent of that legal responsibility. At the request of the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or such officer’s designee, the person claiming a limitation on his or her responsibility for maintenance of such property shall produce for inspection the document establishing such limitation. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.100 Inspection.
(A) Authorized Representatives. The Senior Code Enforcement Officer, the Building Official or their respective designees are authorized to make inspections and take such actions as may be required by this chapter to abate public nuisances.

(B) Inspection of Premises. Whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that a condition, activity, or use of property exists which constitutes a public nuisance or hazard, the Senior Code Enforcement Officer, the Building Official or their respective designees may request to enter the premises at a reasonable time for the purpose of inspection. If the premises are occupied, entry shall be requested and appropriate identification shall be presented. If the premises are unoccupied, a reasonable effort, as deemed appropriate by the Senior Code Enforcement Officer, the Building Official or their respective designees, shall be made to locate the property owner and to obtain the right of inspection in accordance with state law. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.101 Determination by Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official.
Whenever the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official determines by inspection that any existing building or portion thereof is substandard or any lot or other premises is substandard, or both, as defined in this chapter, such building or premises, or both, are declared a public nuisance, and the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official shall order the abatement of the nuisance by demolition, repair or rehabilitation of the substandard (condition) at the option of the party concerned, by repair, demolition or demolishment. (Ord. 1154 § 1, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 1, 1999)

8.36.102 Informal notice.
When the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or the Building Official has determined an existing building, portion thereof, lot or premises is substandard, as defined in this chapter, in addition to any notices hereafter required by this chapter, the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official may give to the occupants of the substandard property, and to any other person whom he or she deems should be so notified, information concerning the provisions of this chapter, any violation thereof, how the person notified may comply and any other information deemed expedient. The Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official may post such information on the substandard property or on the substandard building. (Ord. 1154 § 2, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 2, 1999)

8.36.103 Formal notice of substandard property.
(A) If, in the opinion of the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official, a property is found to be substandard, as defined in this chapter, the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official shall give to the party concerned written notice stating the conditions which make the property substandard.

(B) The notice may require the owner or person in charge of the premises to remove within 30 days, or within another time limit which the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official may stipulate, the conditions which cause the property to be substandard if, in order to comply with such notice, it is necessary to remove any vehicle or any part thereof, such notice shall include a description of such vehicle and the correct identification number and license number, if available at the site. (Ord. 1154 § 3, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 3, 1999)

8.36.104 Combining notices.
A notice of substandard property and of a substandard building on such property may be combined into one notice. (Ord. 1154 § 4, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 4, 1999)

8.36.105 Service of notice.
(A) Proper service of a notice provided for in PMC 8.36.102, 8.36.103 and 8.36.104 shall be by personal service or by registered or certified mail upon every party concerned, by posting a copy of the notice on the substandard building, if any, and upon the substandard property, if any. It shall be deemed a reasonable effort has been made to serve such notice when registered or certified letters have been mailed to the address of the interested party as shown on the official record. When an address is not so listed or contact cannot be made at the listed address, the service shall be by posting a copy of the notice on the substandard building, if any, or on the substandard property.

(B) The designated period within which the owner or person in charge is required to comply with such notice shall begin on the date the owner or person in charge receives such notice by personal service or registered or certified mail. If such notice is by posting, the designated period shall begin 10 days following the date of posting. (Ord. 1154 § 5, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 5, 1999)

8.36.106 Other interested parties.
If the notice of substandard building or property requires the repair or demolition of any building and if the demolition or other work necessary to remove the substandard conditions set forth in such notice is not completed within the time specified in such notice and the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official intends to directly proceed to demolish the substandard building or portions thereof, or cause such other work to be done to the extent necessary to eliminate the hazard or other substandard conditions which have been found to exist and, by a document recorded in the office of the Department of Registrar-Recorder prior to the recordation of the declaration of substandard building or property, whether such document describes the property or not, it appears that a person other than a party concerned has any right, title, lien or interest in the property or any portion thereof, and such person has not previously been notified of the substandard building or property conditions or previously been served a copy of the notice of substandard building or property and the address of such person is known to the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official or can be ascertained by the exercise of due diligence, the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official shall serve a copy of the notice of substandard building or property on such person as provided in this chapter. Such person may request a hearing as outlined in PMC 8.36.120. (Ord. 1154 § 6, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 6, 1999)

8.36.107 Declaration of substandard building or property.
The Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official may file with the Department of Registrar-Recorder a declaration that a substandard building or substandard property or both have been inspected and found to be such, as defined in this chapter, and that all parties concerned have been or will be so notified. The costs incurred by the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official in the investigation of such properties and the processing of the declaration and notification of concerned parties shall be due prior to release of such notice. After the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official finds that the public nuisance had been abated and either that such abatement has been accomplished at no cost to the City, or such costs have been placed upon the tax rolls as a special assessment pursuant to Section 25845 of the Government Code, or that the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official’s jurisdiction has been prompted by government acquisition of the property, the Official shall record in the Department of Registrar-Recorder a document terminating the above declaration. (Ord. 1154 § 7, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 7, 1999)

8.36.108 Posting of signs.
The Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official shall cause to be posted at such substandard building or property a notice of substandard building or property and/or a sign to read:

SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY: DO NOT ENTER OR DAMAGE, BY ORDER OF THE CODE ENFORCEMENT DIVISION OR DIVISION OF BUILDING AND SAFETY OF THE CITY OF PALMDALE. Palmdale Municipal Code 8.36, Regulation of Property Maintenance.

Such sign may contain such additional information and warnings that the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official considers expedient. Such notice or sign shall remain posted until the required repairs, demolition, removal, barricading or property cleanup is completed. Such notice or sign shall not be removed without permission of the Senior Code Enforcement Officer or Building Official. No person shall enter except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the substandard building except as specifically approved. (Ord. 1408 § 12, 2010; Ord. 1154 § 8, 1999; Ord. U-1154 § 8, 1999)

8.36.110 Summary abatement of immediate dangers.
Whenever any conditions on or use of property causes or constitutes or reasonably appears to cause or constitute an imminent or immediate danger to the health or safety of the public or a significant portion thereof, the Director of Planning may order, without notice or judicial action, the immediate abatement of the public nuisance. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.120 Abatement of nuisance violation.
The City shall require the abatement of nuisance violations pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 8.10 PMC. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.130 Applicability of other laws.
(A) This chapter does not exclusively regulate the conditions and use of property within the City. This chapter shall supplement other provisions of this code and other statutes, ordinances or regulations now existing or subsequently enacted by the City, the state or any other entity or agency having jurisdiction.

(B) The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter are not exclusive and are in addition to any other provisions set forth in this code or by state law for the abatement of public nuisances. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

8.36.140 Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The City Council declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, phrases, or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 1028 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 8.38
VACANT AND ABANDONED PROPERTY REGISTRATION
Sections:

8.38.010    Purpose – Scope.

8.38.020    Definitions.

8.38.030    Registration.

8.38.040    Inspection and registration of previously abandoned properties.

8.38.050    Maintenance requirements.

8.38.060    Security requirements.

8.38.070    Additional authority.

8.38.080    Enforcement.

8.38.090    Violation – Penalty.

8.38.010 Purpose – Scope.
It is the purpose and intent of the Palmdale City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to establish an abandoned or vacant property registration program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods and commercial areas from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance and security of abandoned and vacated properties. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

8.38.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:

“Abandoned” means a property that is vacant and is:

(1) Under a current notice of default;

(2) Under a current notice of trustee’s sale;

(3) Pending a tax assessor’s lien sale;

(4) Any property that has been the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; and

(5) Any property transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

“Accessible property” means a property that is accessible through a compromised/breached window, gate, fence, wall, etc.

“Accessible structure” means a structure/building that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to the interior space by unauthorized persons.

“Beneficiary” means a lender or holder of a note secured by a deed of trust.

“Beneficiary/trustee” means both the beneficiary and the trustee. When any act is required of the beneficiary/trustee by this chapter, both are responsible for performing such act and may be charged with a violation of this code for failure to act. However, it is sufficient if it is accomplished by either one. If information is required to be provided, then both must provide such information.

“Deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale” means a recorded document that transfers ownership of a property from the trustor to the holder of a deed of trust upon consent of the beneficiary of the deed of trust.

“Deed of trust” means an instrument by which title to real estate is transferred to a third party trustee as security for a real estate loan and often used in California instead of a mortgage. This definition applies to any and all subsequent deeds of trust, i.e., second trust deed, third trust deed, etc.

“Distressed” means a property that is under a current notice of default and/or notice of trustee’s sale and/or pending tax assessor’s lien sale or has been foreclosed upon by the trustee or has been conveyed to the beneficiary/trustee via a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

“Evidence of vacancy” means any condition that on its own or combined with other conditions present would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant and not occupied by authorized persons. Such conditions include, but are not limited to, overgrown and/or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or mail, past due utility notices and/or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk and/or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds and/or shutters, the absence of furnishings and/or personal items consistent with residential habitation, and statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, government employees that the property is vacant.

“Local” means within 40-road/driving miles distance of the subject property.

“Notice of default” means a recorded notice that a default has occurred under a deed of trust and that the beneficiary intends to proceed with a trustee’s sale.

“Out of area” means in excess of 40-road/driving miles distance of the subject property.

“Owner of record” means the person having recorded title to the property at any given point in time the record is provided by the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office.

“Property” means any unimproved or improved real property, or portion thereof, situated in the City and includes the buildings or structures located on the property regardless of condition.

“Responsible person” means any person, partnership, association, corporation, or fiduciary having legal or equitable title to or any interest in any real property and includes trustees and beneficiaries of a deed of trust on the property and any other lien holder on the property.

“Securing” means such measures as may be directed by the Director of Planning/designee that assist in rendering the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the repairing of fences and walls, chaining/padlocking of gates, the repair or boarding of door, window and/or other openings. Boarding shall be completed to a minimum of the current HUD securing standards at the time the boarding is completed or required.

“Trustee” means the person, firm or corporation holding a deed of trust on a property.

“Trustor” means a borrower under a deed of trust, who deeds property to a trustee as security for the payment of a debt.

“Vacant” means a building/structure that is not occupied by authorized persons. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

8.38.030 Registration.
Any beneficiary/trustee, who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the City of Palmdale, shall perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust, upon default by the trustor, prior to recording a notice of default with the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the Planning Director on forms provided by the City.

(A) If the property is occupied but remains in default it shall be inspected by the beneficiary/trustee, or an agent/designee of the beneficiary/trustee, monthly until (1) the trustor or another party remedies the default; or (2) the foreclosure is completed and ownership is transferred to a new owner who is not the former beneficiary or trustee; or (3) it is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy at which time it is deemed abandoned, and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within 10 days of that inspection, register the property with the Planning Director on forms provided by the City.

(B) The beneficiary/trustee shall also register any property which becomes vacant after a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure and any property which becomes vacant after being transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.

(C) Such registration shall contain the following information for both the beneficiary and the trustee: name (corporation or individual); the street/office address (not a P.O. box) and if different, the mailing address; a direct contact name and phone number for the person handling the deed of trust and/or foreclosure; and, in the case of a corporation or out-of-area beneficiary or trustee, the local property manager responsible for the security and maintenance of the property.

(D) The annual registration fee established by City Council resolution, shall accompany the registration form. The fee and registration shall be valid for the calendar year, or remaining portion of the calendar year, in which the registration was initially required. Subsequent registrations and fees are due January 1st of each year and must be received no later than January 31st of the year due.

(E) Persons required to register properties pursuant to this chapter shall keep such properties registered and all required information updated and comply with all the security and maintenance requirements of this chapter for the entire time such properties remain vacant. When such properties become occupied or title is transferred, the beneficiary/trustee or prior responsible person shall notify the Planning Director in writing.

(F) Any person, firm or corporation required to register a property pursuant to this chapter must report any change of information contained in the registration within 10 days of the change. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

8.38.040 Inspection and registration of previously abandoned properties.
Any beneficiary/trustee who holds a deed of trust on a property located within the City of Palmdale, which property is, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter: (1) under a current notice of default; (2) under a current notice of trustee’s sale; (3) pending a tax assessor’s lien sale; (4) that has been subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was retained by the beneficiary of a deed of trust involved in the foreclosure; and (5) which was transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale, shall, on or before June 30, 2008, perform an inspection of the property that is the security for the deed of trust. If the property is found to be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, it is, by this chapter, deemed abandoned and the beneficiary/trustee shall, within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the Planning Director on forms provided by the City. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

8.38.050 Maintenance requirements.
Responsible persons, including beneficiaries/trustees, shall maintain properties subject to inspection and/or registration pursuant to this chapter, as required by Chapter 8.36 PMC and any other applicable provisions of federal, state or local law, and shall keep such properties free of weeds, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including but not limited to furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, or printed material and shall take any other action necessary to prevent giving the appearance that the property is abandoned, including but not limited to the following:

(A) The property shall be kept free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior of the structure.

(B) Visible front and side yards shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with City requirements and neighborhood standards.

(C) Permitted landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/sod designed specifically for residential installation.

(D) Permitted landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed granite, plastic sheeting, indoor-outdoor carpet or any similar material.

(E) Required maintenance includes but is not limited to regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of required landscape and removal of all trimmings.

(F) Pools and spas shall be kept in working order so the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris or drained and kept dry. In either case properties with pools and/or spas must comply with the minimum security fencing requirements of the state of California. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

8.38.060 Security requirements.
Responsible persons, including beneficiaries/trustees, shall secure properties subject to inspection and/or registration pursuant to this chapter, in a manner to prevent access by unauthorized persons, including but not limited to the following: the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and or structure(s). In the case of broken windows securing means the re-glazing or boarding of the window. Responsible persons shall do the following:

(A) If the responsible person is a corporation and/or out-of-area beneficiary/trustee/owner, a local property manager shall be hired to perform weekly inspections to verify that the requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable laws, are being met.

(B) The property shall be posted with the name and 24-hour contact phone number of the local property manager. The posting shall be no less than 18 inches by 24 inches and shall be of a font that is legible from a distance of 45 feet and shall contain, along with the name and 24-hour contact number, the words “THIS PROPERTY MANAGED BY” and “TO REPORT PROBLEMS OR CONCERNS CALL.” The posting shall be placed on the interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/structure facing the street to the front of the property so it is visible from the street or, if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to support the posting in a location that is visible from the street to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior posting must be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials.

(C) The responsible person or local property manager shall inspect the property on a weekly basis to determine if the property is in compliance with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

8.38.070 Additional authority.
In addition to the enforcement remedies established in Chapters 1.16, 1.20, 8.10 and 8.36 PMC, the Director of Planning/designee shall have the authority to require the responsible person of any property affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures including but not limited to securing any/all door, window or other openings, installing additional security lighting, increasing on-site inspection frequency, employment of an on-site security guard, disconnecting utilities and removing the meter boxes, or other measures as may be reasonably required to arrest the decline of the property and prevent unauthorized entry. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

8.38.080 Enforcement.
Violations of this chapter may be enforced in any combination as allowed in Chapters 1.16, 1.20, 8.10 and 8.36 PMC. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

8.38.090 Violation – Penalty.
Violations of this chapter shall be treated as a strict liability offense regardless of intent. Any person, firm and/or corporation that violates any portion of this section shall be subject to prosecution and/or administrative enforcement as provided in PMC Title 1 and subject to the penalties set forth therein. It shall constitute a new and separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which a violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision or requirement of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by any person, and such person shall be punished accordingly. (Ord. 1345 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.40
COMPREHENSIVE RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT INSPECTION PROGRAM
Sections:

8.40.005    Purpose.

8.40.010    Scope.

8.40.015    Definitions.

8.40.020    Registration required.

8.40.030    Inspections.

8.40.035    Certificate of compliance.

8.40.040    Re-registration and certificate of compliance renewal.

8.40.045    Re-inspection process to renew a certificate of compliance.

8.40.050    Complaints and violations.

8.40.055    Expired certificate of compliance.

8.40.060    Change of ownership.

8.40.070    Fee schedule.

8.40.080    Enforcement and penalties.

8.40.005 Purpose.
The City Council of the City of Palmdale finds and declares that there exist in the City of Palmdale substandard and unsanitary residential buildings and dwelling units the physical conditions and characteristics of which violate state housing and technical codes and render them unfit or unsafe for human occupancy and habitation, and which are detrimental to or jeopardize the health, safety, and welfare of their occupants and of the public.

The City Council further finds and declares that the existence of such substandard buildings and dwelling units threatens the physical, social, and economic stability of sound residential buildings and areas, and of their supporting neighborhood facilities and institutions; necessitates disproportionate expenditures of public funds for remedial action; impairs the efficient and economical exercise of governmental powers and functions; and destroys the amenity of residential areas and neighborhoods and of the community as a whole.

For these reasons, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Palmdale:

(A) That it is in the public interest of the people of Palmdale to protect and promote the existence of sound and wholesome residential buildings, dwelling units, and neighborhoods by the adoption and enforcement of such standards, regulations, and procedures as will remedy the existence or prevent the development or creation of dangerous, substandard, or unsanitary and deficient residential buildings and dwelling units; and

(B) That the adoption of this chapter protects and promotes the health, safety, and welfare of the people of Palmdale. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.010 Scope.
The Comprehensive Residential Rental Unit (CRRU) inspection program shall apply to all properties within the City of Palmdale with residential rental units; except that hotels and motels subject to the transient occupancy tax pursuant to Chapter 3.24 PMC shall be exempt. All properties subject to this chapter shall be inspected by the Building Official or his designee for compliance with the City of Palmdale housing and property maintenance standards. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.015 Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

“Building Official” means the City Building Official, or his designee, who shall possess all statutorily mandated certifications to enforce state building and construction codes.

“Certificate of compliance” means a certificate issued by the Building Official for residential rental unit properties, certifying compliance with this chapter and the housing and property maintenance standards of the City of Palmdale.

“Frequency upgrade” means modifying the inspection frequency to extend the length of time between re-registration and renewal of certificate of compliance of a residential rental unit.

“Housing and property maintenance standards” means the health, safety, and technical construction codes as amended, adopted and incorporated by reference in Chapters 8.04 and 8.08 PMC and in the property maintenance standards set forth in Chapter 8.36 PMC.

“Inspection frequency” means the length of time between inspections for renewal of certification of residential rental units.

“Maintenance request log” means the log required to be maintained by the owner or manager of a residential rental unit, which shall record all tenant requests for repairs, the time estimated at the time of the request for repairs to be completed, and the completion date of the repairs.

“Major violation” shall mean any one or more of the following violations:

(A) Heating system not fully operational at any time between October and May of the following year.

(B) Hazardous code violations, including any one or more of the following:

(1) Exposed electrical wiring;

(2) Collapsed ceiling or walls caused by water leakage;

(3) Sewage leakage into walls, floors or onto the ground;

(4) Structural damage resulting in the building being determined by the Building Official to be unsafe;

(5) Fire alarm system not fully operational;

(6) Firewalls damaged or not maintained.

“Noncompliance with notice and order” means that the owner, his authorized agent, or other responsible party does not make required repairs as provided in notice and order from the Building Official.

“Other violations” means any violation other then those defined as a major violation.

“Partners Against Crime (PAC) certified property” shall mean a property containing one or more residential rental units certified to meet the requirements of the City’s PAC program.

“Property management posting” means a sign required to be posted and maintained at all times which shall include the address and location to obtain repair requests and a current 24-hour emergency phone number. The sign shall be posted close to the main entrance in an area accessible and visible to the general public, or as may otherwise be approved in writing by the Building Official.

“Repair request form” means a two-part form the owner of a property must provide to all tenants. The form shall indicate the address the form is to be delivered to for repair requests and an area for the manager or owner to sign the receipt of the repair request. The owner shall provide a copy of the request to the tenant.

“Residential rental unit” means a rented or leased single-family residential building or a rented or leased residential dwelling unit within a single-family or multiresidential building. (Ord. 1408 § 7, 2010; Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.020 Registration required.
All owners of residential rental units shall register each such unit with the Building Official and comply with all the requirements of this chapter within 60 days of acquiring ownership, or within 60 days of a property being converted to a residential rental unit or being converted to include a residential rental unit. A fee shall not be required to register new construction, which shall not require re-registration for five years unless its certificate of compliance is terminated or otherwise expires. (Ord. 1307 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.030 Inspections.
All rental properties shall be inspected for compliance with City of Palmdale housing and property maintenance standards. The owner shall provide access for inspection within 10 working days of the Building Official’s request. The Building Official in his discretion may require inspections by other City departments and/or Los Angeles County enforcement agencies, including, but not limited to, the County Health Department and Fire Department. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.035 Certificate of compliance.
(A) Owners of all residential rental units shall have obtained and maintain for them a valid and current certificate of compliance. All residential rental units that do not have a certificate of compliance, and their owners, shall be in violation of this chapter unless all registration requirements have been met by the owner and site inspections have not been completed through no fault or lack of action by the owner.

(B) A certificate of compliance shall be issued for all residential rental units upon completion of the following:

(1) The residential rental unit property has been inspected and approved by the Building Official.

(2) Any existing code violations have been corrected and/or repaired with proper permits and inspections.

(3) The repair request form and maintenance request log is complete and approved by the Building Official. On properties with an on-site manager’s unit or a management office, the maintenance request log shall be maintained at that location. On properties with no on-site manager’s unit or management office, it shall be maintained at a location designated by the Building Official. The maintenance request log shall at all times be available for review when requested by the Building Official.

(4) The residential rental unit property is posted as follows:

(a) One to four units: a property management posting sign as defined in PMC 8.40.015 shall be posted in a prominent outdoor location and in a manner approved by the Building Official.

(b) Five or more units: the on-site manager unit or management office, if any, shall be identified in a manner approved by the Building Official. A property management posting sign as defined shall be posted in a prominent outdoor location and in a manner approved by the Building Official.

(5) All residential rental unit registration and inspection fees are paid in full.

(6) A valid City business license has been issued for a property with four or more residential rental units.

(7) A current complete registration application is on file with the Building Official.

(C) Issuance of a certificate of compliance shall not constitute a guarantee or warranty of the habitability or complete compliance with the City housing and property maintenance standards, and the occupant of any residential rental unit shall not rely on the certificate of compliance as such a guarantee or warranty. The certificate of compliance shall contain a notice to this effect. The City shall not assume any liability to any person by reason of the inspections required by this chapter or the issuance of a certificate of compliance. Certificates of compliance shall expire on the expiration date shown on the certificate and shall be renewed prior to such date. The Building Official shall determine the expiration dates of certificates of compliance and inspection frequency based on the nature of violations found during the residential rental unit inspections, the following registration and inspection frequency schedule, in conjunction with his review of past compliance violations within the preceding 12 months.

Registration and Inspection Frequency Schedule

Single-family or detached

•    

New construction – Certificate of occupancy issued within the preceding six months:

No registration fee

Five years

•    

No violations:

Five years

•    

Violations, but no major violations, found within preceding year; all violation corrections completed within 30 days after notice by Building Official.

Three years

•    

Major violations found, or other violations found but all violation corrections not completed within 30 days after notice by Building Official:

One year

Multifamily – Two units and above

•    

New construction – Certificate of occupancy issued within the preceding six months:

No registration fees

Five years for PAC certified complexes, three years for non-PAC certified complexes

•    

PAC certified property, with no major violations found; all violation corrections completed within 30 days after notice by Building Official; maintenance logs current:

Five years

•    

Not more than one major violation found; all violation corrections completed within 30 days after notice by Building Official; maintenance logs current:

Three years

•    

Major violations found, or other violations found but all violation corrections not completed within 30 days after notice by Building Official:

One year

(Ord. 1307 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.040 Re-registration and certificate of compliance renewal.
The owner of a residential rental unit shall apply and pay all required fees not less than 30 days prior to the scheduled expiration of the certificate of compliance. The owner of a residential rental unit property shall re-register and meet all requirements and pay all fees as for a new certificate. Upon re-registration, inspection and the issuance of a new certificate of compliance, the Building Official in the exercise of his discretion may grant a frequency upgrade to extend the inspection frequency one level; however, if all of the following actions are taken and certified to, upon his approval and in the exercise of his discretion, the Building Official may grant a frequency upgrade to extend the inspection frequency two levels:

(A) The property is a Partners Against Crime (PAC) certified property;

(B) All heating and air conditioning systems have been inspected, repaired and serviced by a licensed mechanical contractor, who shall submit a signed letter certifying to that effect;

(C) All residential rental units shall have code compliant smoke detectors installed in all bedrooms and hallways to the bedrooms;

(D) Ground fault circuit interrupter (GFCI) receptacles have been inspected, repaired and/or installed within six feet of all sinks and tubs/showers within all the units. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.045 Re-inspection process to renew a certificate of compliance.
The owner shall make available all residential rental units for inspection within 10 working days of the Building Official’s request. The Building Official in his discretion may require inspections by other City departments and/or Los Angeles County enforcement agencies, including, but not limited to, the County Health Department and Fire Department. According to the inspection frequency level of the property, the Building Official may, but is not required to, randomly select the following percentage of units for inspection:

(A) Five-year inspection frequency: inspection of 10 to 20 percent of the units on the property for the initial inspection. If recurring or major violations are found during the initial inspection, then additional units will be inspected. Any major violation found will result in inspection of 100 percent of all units.

(B) Three-year inspection frequency: inspection of 30 to 40 percent of the units on the property for the initial inspection. If recurring or major violations are found during the initial inspection, then additional units will be inspected. Any major violation found will result in 100 percent inspection of all units.

(C) One-year inspection frequency: inspection of 50 to 60 percent of all units on the property for the initial inspection. If recurring or major violations are found during the initial inspection, then additional units will be inspected. Any major violation found will result in 100 percent inspection of all units. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.050 Complaints and violations.
Upon receipt of a complaint of violations of the housing and property maintenance standards, the Building Official shall inspect the pertinent unit(s) and/or area(s) of the property. All violations shall be corrected and reinspected within the time specified on the notice and order of the Building Official in order to maintain a certificate of compliance for a property. Noncompliance with a notice and order of the Building Official shall automatically terminate the certificate of compliance and render it expired and invalid. All requirements of PMC 8.40.035 and 8.40.040 shall be maintained during the entire time period of a certificate of compliance by the owner. Noncompliance with these requirements shall automatically terminate the certificate of compliance and render it expired and invalid. If a property does not maintain its PAC certification during a its five-year certificate period, then the certificate will be automatically reduced to a maximum one-year certificate period. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.055 Expired certificate of compliance.
(A) This chapter is not intended to and shall not be construed to limit in any way the remedies available to the City to prosecute or abate public nuisances or violations of the City’s housing and property maintenance standards. Upon expiration of a certificate of compliance the City may proceed with any remedy permitted by law or equity to abate the violations or prosecute the owner and/or responsible party.

(B) Upon termination or expiration of a certificate of compliance, the Building Official shall not re-issue a new certificate of compliance until all of the following conditions are met:

(1) All violations must be repaired and inspected;

(2) All costs and fees due for enforcement actions shall be paid to the City;

(3) New registration and fees shall be filed and paid;

(4) Re-inspection shall be completed for all residential rental units on the property.

(C) Certificates of compliance issued after being terminated or expired for any reason shall automatically be scheduled for one-year inspection frequency. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.060 Change of ownership.
When ownership of a residential rental unit property changes either the new owner or old owner shall notify the Building Official within 60 days; if the Building Official is not so notified, the certificate of compliance shall automatically expire. All required property posting shall be updated. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.070 Fee schedule.
The City Council shall establish the residential rental unit registration fees by resolution. The registration fee shall be deemed to cover the cost of the Building Official’s first inspection and one follow-up inspection per residential rental unit. Fees for any and all additional inspections shall be as set forth in the regular fee schedule of the Building and Safety Department. (Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

8.40.080 Enforcement and penalties.
(A) Violations of this chapter shall be punishable as provided in PMC Title 1.

(B) Each day that an owner fails to register or allows a residential rental unit which she or he owns to continue unregistered or fails to obtain a certificate of compliance is a separate and distinct offense.

(C) In addition to or in the alternative to the penal sanctions set forth in subsection (A) of this section, any person violating this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each day the violation is committed or permitted to continue, which penalty shall be assessed and recovered in a civil action brought in the name of the City of Palmdale by the City Attorney in any court of competent jurisdiction. The City shall also be entitled to the costs of enforcing this chapter, pursuant to court order.

(D) Any person, the owner or the owner’s authorized agent, or other responsible party who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, or refuses to pay any fee or costs imposed under this chapter shall be subject to the placement of a lien, plus any penalties and accrued interest, against the real property, or any other procedures set forth in this code or in state law to recover costs incurred for the abatement of nuisances by cities. (Ord. 1307 § 3, 2007; Ord. 1273 § 2, 2006)

Chapter 8.44
MAINTENANCE OF STREET TREES
Sections:

8.44.010    Title.

8.44.020    Findings and purpose.

8.44.030    Definitions.

8.44.040    Owner’s duty to maintain street trees.

8.44.050    Civil liability.

8.44.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as “the Palmdale street tree maintenance ordinance.” (Ord. 1299 § 7, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 7, 2006; Ord. 1259 § 1, 2005)

8.44.020 Findings and purpose.
State law requires each property owner to maintain street trees located in a parkway abutting the owner’s property. The City Council finds that the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter will serve the following purposes:

(A) Supplement the statutory responsibilities imposed on property owners with regard to the maintenance of street trees.

(B) Clarify property owners’ minimum obligations with regard to the maintenance of street trees.

(C) Ensure that the City does not incur civil liability as a result of a property owner’s failure to maintain street trees or for damage or injury resulting from or caused by a street tree. (Ord. 1299 § 7, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 7, 2006; Ord. 1259 § 1, 2005)

8.44.030 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the terms listed below shall have the meaning assigned them:

“Dangerous condition” means that a street tree is damaged, infested, diseased, decaying, at risk of falling, or poses a hazard to persons, private property, or public property.

“Parkway” means the area of a public street that lies between the curb and the adjacent property line, sidewalk, or physical boundary definition such as fences or walls, which area is used for landscaping and/or passive recreation purposes.

“Property owner” and “owner” means the owner or owners of record of real property as shown on the latest assessment roll of Los Angeles County, or as otherwise identified by a title report on the property.

“Street tree” means a tree in a parkway on publicly owned or privately owned land or within a public easement area of a private front or side yard.

“Tree debris” means leaves, seedpods, fruit, sap, branches, excrement from tree-dwelling organisms, and other deposits from trees. (Ord. 1299 § 7, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 7, 2006; Ord. 1259 § 1, 2005)

8.44.040 Owner’s duty to maintain street trees.
It is unlawful for any property owner to do any of the following:

(A) Allow a street tree on a parkway abutting the owner’s property or within a public easement area of a private front or side yard to be in a dangerous condition.

(B) Allow the roots of a street tree to lift or otherwise damage a public sidewalk, curb, street, or other pavement of a public right-of-way.

(C) Allow the roots or any part of a street tree to damage any septic tank, public sewer, water main, electrical, gas, or telecommunications utility facility.

(D) Allow a street tree or tree debris from a street tree on a parkway abutting the owner’s property or within a public easement area of a private front or side yard to pose a danger to persons, property, or vehicles in an adjacent public right-of-way or on adjacent property. (Ord. 1299 § 7, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 7, 2006; Ord. 1259 § 1, 2005)

8.44.050 Civil liability.
(A) A property owner shall be liable for any personal injury or property damage caused by a street tree on a parkway abutting the owner’s property or within a public easement area of a private front or side yard or by tree debris from such a street tree, including but not limited to:

(1) Damage to any septic tank, public sewer, water main, electrical, gas, cable, or telecommunications utility facility;

(2) Damage to any public sidewalk, curb, street, or other pavement of a public right-of-way;

(3) Damage to any adjacent private personal or real property;

(4) Damage to any vehicle on an adjacent street or public right-of-way;

(5) Injury to any person on the property owner’s own property or on adjacent private property;

(6) Injury to any pedestrian or other person on or traveling on an adjacent parkway, sidewalk, street or other public right-of-way.

(B) In the event that a claim, demand, action, or suit is brought against the City for personal injury or property damage related to such a street tree or tree debris, the City shall be entitled to full indemnity from the property owner for the amount of damages paid and the expenses (including without limitation attorney’s fees) incurred by the City. (Ord. 1299 § 7, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 7, 2006; Ord. 1259 § 1, 2005)

Title 9
PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE
Chapters:

9.04    Offenses By or Against Public Officers and Government

9.08    Offenses Against the Person

9.10    Repealed

9.12    Offenses Against Public Decency

9.13    Criminal Street Gang Enforcement and Prevention

9.14    Illegal Motor Vehicle Speed Contests and Exhibitions of Speed

9.16    Offenses Against Public Peace

9.18    Disturbing, Excessive, Loud, or Offensive Noise

9.20    Offenses Against Property

9.24    Loitering for Drug Activities

9.25    Truancy

9.28    Offenses By or Against Minors

9.30    Graffiti Prevention and Abatement

9.32    Weapons

9.33    Evictions for Unlawful Drug Activity

9.36    Violation – Penalty

9.40    Burglar Alarm Systems

9.44    Trespass on Private Property

9.45    Trespass on Public Property

9.46    Unpermitted Camping, Lodging, and Sleeping on Public Streets, Publicly Owned Property, and in Public Parks and Other Prohibited Public Places

9.47    Seizure and Forfeiture of Nuisance Vehicles

9.50    Filming Policy

Chapter 9.04
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT
Sections:

9.04.010    False reports.

9.04.020    False impersonation.

9.04.030    Interception of official radio communications.

9.04.010 False reports.
No person shall inform or report to a Peace Officer that a crime has been committed, whether a felony or a misdemeanor, unless he, in good faith, believes that the crime has been committed. (Ord. 10 § 16, 1962)

9.04.020 False impersonation.
No person shall falsely impersonate or cause or permit to be falsely impersonated the Sheriff, District Attorney or City Prosecutor, or member of the State Highway Patrol, or a deputy or representative of, or connected with either. No person shall wear the uniform of the Sheriff, State Highway Patrol, or deputies thereof, or any part of such uniform or any uniform, part of which is similar to the uniform of the Sheriff or State Highway Patrol or deputies thereof, unless the person is a member of such organization. (Ord. 10 § 17, 1962)

9.04.030 Interception of official radio communications.
No person shall equip a vehicle with a radio capable of receiving Police, Sheriff, State Highway Patrol, Forester and Fire Warden calls. (Ord. 10 § 22, 1962)

Chapter 9.08
OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON
Sections:

9.08.010    Registration under false name.

9.08.010 Registration under false name.
It is unlawful for any person to register at any roominghouse, lodginghouse, hotel, inn or other place in the City under the name of any other person or of a fictitious name, or any name other than the true and correct name of the person so registering, or so giving or signing or causing his or her name to be signed. (Ord. 10 § 10, 1962)

Chapter 9.10
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY AND PRESENCE RESTRICTIONS
(Repealed by Ord. 1442)

Chapter 9.12
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY
Sections:

Article I. Places of Amusement or Entertainment

9.12.010    Closing hours.

Article II. Liquor

9.12.020    Drinking in public.

9.12.030    Drinking in vehicle.

9.12.040    Drinking on public highway.

9.12.050    Presence in vehicle where drinking is taking place.

Article III. Obscene Materials

9.12.060    Prohibited conduct.

Article IV. Capping and Impersonation

9.12.070    Lookout for illegal activity.

9.12.080    Repealed.

Article V. Lewdness and Disorderly Houses

9.12.090    Keeping disorderly house.

Article VI. Indecent Exposure

9.12.100    Authority.

9.12.110    Prohibited acts.

9.12.120    Exceptions.

9.12.130    Penalty for violation.

Article VII. Topless Waitresses and Performers

9.12.140    Authority.

9.12.150    Prohibited acts.

9.12.160    Permitting or assisting.

9.12.170    Exceptions.

9.12.180    Penalty for violation.

Article I. Places of Amusement or Entertainment

9.12.010 Closing hours.
No person shall carry on or assist in carrying on any amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited, or in which the public may participate, at any time between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 10 § 24, 1962)

Article II. Liquor

9.12.020 Drinking in public.
No person shall drink any malt, spirituous or vinous liquor containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume upon any public street, alleyway, sidewalk or parkway, or in any public building, public lavatory, auto park, or lobby or entranceway to any building within the City. (Ord. 10 § 32, 1962)

9.12.030 Drinking in vehicle.
No person shall enter or remain in a vehicle while any other occupant is consuming any alcoholic beverage while the vehicle is on a public street, alleyway or public highway. (Ord. 10 § 37, 1962)

9.12.040 Drinking on public highway.
Every person who goes upon or remains upon any part of a public highway while he is consuming any alcoholic beverage is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 10 § 39, 1962)

9.12.050 Presence in vehicle where drinking is taking place.
Every person who enters or remains in any vehicle while the vehicle is on any part of any public highway when the person or any other occupant of the vehicle is consuming any alcoholic beverage is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 10 § 40, 1962)

Article III. Obscene Materials

9.12.060 Prohibited conduct.
No person shall write, compose, stereotype, print, publish, sell, distribute, keep for sale, or exhibit any obscene writing, paper or book; or design, copy, draw, engrave, paint, or otherwise prepare any obscene picture or print; or mold, cut, cast, or otherwise make any obscene figure. (Ord. 470 § 29, 1982; Ord. 10 § 11, 1962)

Article IV. Capping and Impersonation

9.12.070 Lookout for illegal activity.
No person shall act as a lookout for a gambling game, house of prostitution or other illegal act. (Ord. 10 § 19, 1962)

9.12.080 Man dressing as woman.
Repealed by Ord. 1457. (Ord. 10 § 20, 1962)

Article V. Lewdness and Disorderly Houses

9.12.090 Keeping disorderly house.
No person shall keep a riotous or disorderly house, or permit any riotous or disorderly conduct in his house, yard, or premises connected with his house, or be guilty of any riotous or disorderly conduct in any house, yard or premises, whereby the peace, quiet or decency of the neighborhood of the house or of any person may be disturbed. (Ord. 10 § 31, 1962)

Article VI. Indecent Exposure

9.12.100 Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this article which also are used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the respective words used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 185 § 1, 1971)

9.12.110 Prohibited acts.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:

(A) Exposes his or her private parts or buttocks or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer; or

(B) Permits, procures or assists any person to so expose himself or herself, or to employ any such device. (Ord. 185 § 3, 1971)

9.12.120 Exceptions.
This article does not apply to:

(A) A theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances;

(B) Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. (Ord. 185 § 4, 1971)

9.12.130 Penalty for violation.
A violation of this article is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 185 § 6, 1971)

Article VII. Topless Waitresses and Performers

9.12.140 Authority.
This article is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this article which also are used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the respective words used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 186 § 1, 1971)

9.12.150 Prohibited acts.
Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration, or exhibition, in any public place, place open to the public, or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer:

(A) Exposes any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that both nipples and all portions of both breasts which have a different pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts are below such straight line; or

(B) Employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast; or

(C) Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed. (Ord. 186 § 3, 1971)

9.12.160 Permitting or assisting.
Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels, or assists any person to violate any provision of this article. (Ord. 186 § 4, 1971)

9.12.170 Exceptions.
This article does not apply to:

(A) A theater, concert hall, or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances;

(B) Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. (Ord. 186 § 5, 1971)

9.12.180 Penalty for violation.
A violation of this article is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 186 § 7, 1971)

Chapter 9.13
CRIMINAL STREET GANG ENFORCEMENT AND PREVENTION
Sections:

9.13.010    Definitions.

9.13.020    Buildings or places used by criminal street gangs – Nuisance.

9.13.030    Prohibited acts.

9.13.040    Enforcement and penalties.

9.13.050    Powers of Law Enforcement Officers not limited.

9.13.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(A) “Criminal street gang” means any ongoing organization, association, or group of three or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one of its primary activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated in subsections (B)(1) through (25) of this section, having a common name or common identifying sign or symbol, and whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity.

(B) “Pattern of criminal gang activity” means the commission of, attempted commission of, conspiracy to commit, or solicitation of, sustained juvenile petition for, or conviction of two or more of the following offenses, provided at least one of these offenses occurred after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and the last of those offenses occurred within three years after a prior offense, and the offenses were committed on separate occasions, or by two or more persons:

(1) Assault with a deadly weapon or by means of force likely to produce great bodily injury, as defined in Penal Code Section 245.

(2) Robbery, as defined in Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 211) of Title 8 of Part 1 of the Penal Code.

(3) Unlawful homicide or manslaughter, as defined in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 187) of Title 8 of Part 1 of the Penal Code.

(4) The sale, possession for sale, transportation, manufacture, offer for sale, or offer to manufacture controlled substances as defined in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, and 11058 of the Health and Safety Code.

(5) Shooting at an inhabited dwelling or occupied motor vehicle, as defined in Penal Code Section 246.

(6) Discharging or permitting the discharge of a firearm from a motor vehicle, as defined in subdivisions (a) and (b) of Penal Code Section 12034.

(7) Arson, as defined in Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 450) of Title 13 of the Penal Code.

(8) The intimidation of witnesses and victims, as defined in Penal Code Section 136.1.

(9) Grand theft, as defined in subdivision (a) or (c) of Penal Code Section 487.

(10) Grand theft of any firearm, vehicle, trailer, or vessel.

(11) Burglary, as defined in Penal Code Section 459.

(12) Rape, as defined in Penal Code Section 261.

(13) Looting, as defined in Penal Code Section 463.

(14) Money laundering, as defined in Penal Code Section 186.10.

(15) Kidnapping, as defined in Penal Code Section 207.

(16) Mayhem, as defined in Penal Code Section 203.

(17) Aggravated mayhem, as defined in Penal Code Section 205.

(18) Torture, as defined in Penal Code Section 206.

(19) Felony extortion, as defined in Penal Code Sections 518 and 520.

(20) Felony vandalism, as defined in Penal Code Section 594(b)(1).

(21) Carjacking, as defined in Penal Code Section 215.

(22) The sale, delivery, or transfer of a firearm, as defined in Penal Code Section 12072.

(23) Possession of a pistol, revolver, or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person in violation of paragraph (1) of subdivision (a) of Penal Code Section 12101.

(24) Threats to commit crimes resulting in death or great bodily injury, as defined in Penal Code Section 422.

(25) Theft and unlawful taking or driving of a vehicle, as defined in Section 10851 of the Vehicle Code.

(C) “Public place” means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of business to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any “public place” also includes the front yard area, driveway, and walkway of any private residence, business, or apartment house visible from any common area or public right-of-way. (Ord. 1257 § 2, 2005)

9.13.020 Buildings or places used by criminal street gangs – Nuisance.
Every building or place used by members of a criminal street gang for the purpose of the commission of the offenses listed in PMC 9.13.010(B) or any offense involving dangerous or deadly weapons, burglary, or rape, and every building or place wherein or upon which that criminal conduct by gang members takes place is a nuisance which may be punished as set forth in PMC 9.13.040(A) as well as enjoined, abated, and prevented, and for which damages may be recovered, whether it is a public or private nuisance, as set forth in PMC 9.13.040(B). (Ord. 1257 § 2, 2005)

9.13.030 Prohibited acts.
(A) Loitering by Criminal Street Gangs. It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a criminal street gang or who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a criminal street gang to loiter or idle in a public place under any of the following circumstances:

(1) So as to intimidate nonmembers of the gang from entering, remaining in, or using the public place or adjacent area;

(2) So as to participate in, aid and abet, or conceal commerce in illegal drugs or other unlawful activity.

(B) Parental Control. It is unlawful for any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by said parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, to knowingly permit or by insufficient control allow a minor to violate the provisions of this chapter.

(C) Property Owners, Lessees or Their Agents. It is unlawful for any owner, or lessee, or their agent of any building or place to maintain a nuisance, whether public or private, by knowingly permitting or by insufficient control of the building or place to allow any person, including a minor, to violate the provisions of this chapter.

(D) In order to sustain a conviction or judgment it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove that a person devotes all, or a substantial part of, his or her time or efforts to the criminal street gang, nor is it necessary to prove that the person is a member of the criminal street gang. Active participation in the criminal street gang is all that is required. (Ord. 1257 § 2, 2005)

9.13.040 Enforcement and penalties.
(A) Criminal Penalty. Violations of this chapter may be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 PMC.

(B) Civil Abatement. The City Attorney, or his designee attorney, or the District Attorney, may bring an action for damages, to enjoin, or both, in the name of the people of the state of California or of the City of Palmdale, to abate and prevent the nuisance and perpetually to enjoin the person or persons committing the nuisance or maintaining the nuisance, and the owner, lessee, or agent of the building or place in or upon which the nuisance exists from directly or indirectly maintaining or permitting the nuisance. Suit may not be filed until 30-day written notice of the unlawful use or criminal conduct has been provided to the owner, lessee, or their agent. In a civil action for damages brought pursuant to this subsection, the City Attorney, his designee attorney, or District Attorney may use, but is not limited to the use of, the testimony of experts to establish damages suffered by the community or neighborhood injured by the nuisance.

(C) Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the City Attorney nor any other aggrieved person from seeking any other remedy provided by law. (Ord. 1257 § 2, 2005)

9.13.050 Powers of Law Enforcement Officers not limited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed in any way to limit the power or right of a Law Enforcement Officer to make any investigation, detention, or arrest as such Law Enforcement Officer would be permitted to make in the absence of this chapter. (Ord. 1257 § 2, 2005)

Chapter 9.14
ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTESTS AND EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED
Sections:

9.14.010    Prohibition.

9.14.020    Definitions.

9.14.030    Penalty for violation.

9.14.010 Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:

(A) Be knowingly present as a spectator at any illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed conducted on a public street or highway; or

(B) Be knowingly present as a spectator where preparations are being made for any such event. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 2004)

9.14.020 Definitions.
The following definitions govern the construction of this chapter:

A person is “present” at the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed if that person is within 150 feet of the location of the event, or within 150 feet of the street or highway where preparations are being made for the event.

“Illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

“Preparations” for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed include, but are not limited to, situations where: (1) a group of motor vehicles or persons has arrived at a predetermined location for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) one or more persons has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words or physical barrier for the purpose of conducting the event; (4) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (5) one or more drivers is racing his engine or spinning his tires in preparation for the event; or (6) an individual is stationed near one or more vehicles as a race starter.

“Spectator” means any person who is present at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or witnessing the event as it progresses. A “spectator” includes any person at the location of the event without regard to whether the person arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other means. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 2004)

9.14.030 Penalty for violation.
Violations of this chapter may be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 1227 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 9.16
OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Sections:

9.16.010    Interference with the use of property open to the public.

9.16.020    Interference with public transportation.

9.16.030    Trespass on public property.

9.16.040    Throwing missiles.

9.16.010 Interference with the use of property open to the public.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to loiter or to stand or sit in or at the entrance of any church, hall, theater or place of public assemblage so as in any manner to obstruct such entrance.

(B) No person shall loiter in or about any public building, park or recreation facility including any transportation facility in a manner and under circumstances manifesting the purpose to engage in acts of misconduct including, but not limited to, exhibitionism, solicitation, malicious mischief, or acts of indecent exposure. (Ord. 1316 § 1, 2007; Ord. 10 § 4, 1962)

9.16.020 Interference with public transportation.
(A) Annoyance. No person shall, with the intent of causing public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk thereof, within or near any public transportation vehicle, building or facility:

(1) Engage in fighting, or violent, tumultuous, or threatening behavior;

(2) Make excessive and unnecessary noise;

(3) Use abusive, obscene, profane, or vulgar language, or make obscene gestures;

(4) Obstruct the free unimpeded movement of passengers or public transportation vehicles; or

(5) Interfere with the duties of any maintenance or facility operations personnel, transportation vehicle operator, fare collector or inspector, or public safety officer, security guard or official.

(B) Failure to Obey Reasonable Requests. No person shall fail to obey a reasonable request or lawful directive of a transportation vehicle operator, public safety officer, or other person in charge or control of a public transportation vehicle or public transportation facility.

(C) Graffiti. No person shall cause graffiti, signs or stickers to be inscribed, applied, or affixed on any public transportation vehicle or facility.

(D) Restroom Facilities. No person shall deface, destroy, litter in, or otherwise misuse the restroom facilities located at any public transportation building or facility. (Ord. 1316 § 1, 2007; Ord. 10 §§ 5, 6, 1962)

9.16.030 Trespass on public property.
(A) No unauthorized person shall enter or remain unlawfully in or upon a public property, public transportation vehicle or public transportation facility or portion thereof when the premises or any portion thereof is not open to the public.

(B) No person may enter or use any public park, public transportation vehicle, public transportation facility, or other City property with intent to cause annoyance or injury to any person, to cause damage to any property, to commit any crime, or with reckless disregard as to whether his or her presence will cause fear for the safety of another. (Ord. 1316 § 1, 2007)

9.16.040 Throwing missiles.
It is unlawful for any person to throw upon, along, or across any public highway, road, street, alley, or sidewalk any missile, projectile, or rock capable of causing personal injury or damage to personal property at or towards any person, or any vehicle. (Ord. 1316 § 1, 2007; Ord. 10 § 26, 1962. Formerly 9.16.030.)

Chapter 9.18
DISTURBING, EXCESSIVE, LOUD, OR OFFENSIVE NOISE
Sections:

9.18.010    Noise.

9.18.020    Acts constituting disturbing, excessive, loud, offensive noise.

9.18.030    Loud parties.

9.18.040    Reimbursement for law enforcement costs.

9.18.050    Enforcement and penalties for all provisions of this chapter.

Prior legislation: Ords. 1208 and 1308.

9.18.010 Noise.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully make or continue, or cause or permit to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area.

(B) The characteristics and conditions, which may be considered in determining whether such noise violates the provisions of this section, shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1) The volume of the noise;

(2) The intensity of the noise;

(3) Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

(4) Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

(5) The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any;

(6) The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities;

(7) The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

(8) The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

(9) The time of the day or night the noise occurs;

(10) The duration of the noise;

(11) Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant;

(12) Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Ord. 1332 § 1, 2007)

9.18.020 Acts constituting disturbing, excessive, loud, offensive noise.
The following activities, among others, are declared to cause disturbing, excessive, loud, or offensive noises in violation of this chapter and causing or permitting such activities is unlawful; provided, however, that inclusion in this section shall not be construed as limiting the type of activities which may be found to cause disturbing, excessive, loud, or offensive noises:

(A) Horns, Signaling Devices, Etc. The unnecessary or unreasonable use or operation of horns, signaling devices, or other similar devices, on automobiles, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles or any other vehicles.

(B) Radios, Television Sets, Phonographs, Loud Speaking Amplifiers, and Similar Devices.

(1) Uses Restricted. The use or operation of any sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, loud speakers, and sound amplifier or other similar machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, or comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in any area of the City is prohibited. This provision shall not apply to any participant in a licensed parade, to law enforcement or emergency personnel in the performance of their duties, or to any person duly authorized, licensed, or permitted by the City to engage in such conduct in a public park, public facility, or other public place.

(2) Prima Facie Violations of this Subsection. Any of the following shall constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this subsection; provided, however, that inclusion herein shall not be construed as limiting the activities which may be found to violate this section:

(a) The operation of any such sound production or reproduction device, radio receiving set, musical instrument, drum, phonograph, television set, machine, loud speaker and sound amplifier, or similar machine or device between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located.

(b) The operation of any sound amplifier which is part of, or connected to, any radio, stereo receiver, compact disc player, digital video disc player, computer, cassette tape player, or other similar device when operated in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet and when operated in such a manner as to cause a person to be aware of vibration accompanying the sound at a distance of 50 feet from the source.

(3) Impoundment. Any person who is authorized to enforce any provision of this chapter and who encounters evidence of a prima facie violation of this section is empowered to confiscate and impound as evidence any or all of the components amplifying or transmitting the sound.

(C) Hospitals, Schools, Libraries, Rest Homes, Long-Term Medical or Mental Care Facilities. To make noise adjacent to a hospital, school, library, rest home, or long-term medical or mental care facility, which noise unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions or which disturbs or unduly annoys occupants of such institutions.

(D) Jake Brakes. The use of jake brakes, using compression release engine brakes and any method of using engine compression to slow a vehicle is prohibited in the City of Palmdale and unlawful. (Ord. 1458 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1332 § 1, 2007)

9.18.030 Loud parties.
(A) Loud Parties Defined. A “loud party” is a gathering of two or more people on private property which is determined by law enforcement personnel at the scene to be disruptive to the public peace, health, safety, or welfare due to the magnitude of the crowd, noise, disturbances, unruly behavior of those attending the party or gathering, excessive traffic or traffic congestion, illegally parked vehicles blocking other traffic or fire access or destruction of property.

(B) Loud Parties Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any responsible person to organize, cause, or permit a loud party.

(1) For the purposes of this subsection, “responsible person” means the person who owns the property where the party, gathering or event takes place; the person in charge of the premises; and/or the person who organized the event. If the responsible person is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor are also responsible persons whether or not they are present at the party. All responsible persons, as defined herein, are deemed to have caused or permitted the loud party and are responsible for and may be charged with a violation of this chapter; provided, however, a property owner who is not present at the party or gathering may not be charged with a violation of this chapter unless the absentee owner had knowledge that the party or gathering was occurring, was planned to occur or reasonably should have known the party or gathering would occur. This exception does not apply to a parent or guardian of a responsible person who is a minor.

(2) Prima Facie Violations of this Subsection. The following shall constitute evidence of a prima facie violation of this subsection; provided, however, that inclusion herein shall not be construed as limiting the activities which may be found to violate this subsection: A party, event or gathering where:

(a) Noise emanating from or attributable to that party, event or gathering is audible from a distance of 50 feet from the source of that noise; or

(b) Persons present at the party or gathering are acting in a wild, unruly, uncontrollable manner disruptive to neighbors; or

(c) The number of persons present violates the fire code, presenting a fire hazard; or

(d) Vehicles of those attending the party or gathering are illegally parked or parked in a manner to cause traffic congestion or to block traffic or fire access; or

(e) Persons present at the party or gathering have caused or are causing destruction to property of others.

(C) Loud Parties Declared a Public Nuisance. Loud parties as defined in this section are hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated as set forth herein or as otherwise provided by law.

(D) Authority of Law Enforcement Personnel. Law enforcement personnel are authorized to take all actions and to give all directions and orders that may be necessary to abate the nuisance, violation or condition, including the arrest of, or issuance of citations to, the responsible person or persons, and any others who are in violation of this chapter or any other state statute or local ordinance.

(E) Cease and Desist Order. No person shall fail or refuse to obey or fail to comply with orders of law enforcement personnel to discontinue the loud party, to disperse or vacate the location of the loud party, and to turn off radios, television sets, phonographs, loud speaking amplifiers, and similar devices. Refusal to comply with such an order is a separate and additional offense from that of causing or permitting a loud party.

(F) Loud Party Participation Prohibited. All persons attending a party or social gathering declared to be a public nuisance by law enforcement personnel shall immediately disperse upon the order of law enforcement personnel, and all persons not domiciled at the site of such party or social gathering shall immediately leave the premises. No person shall fail or refuse to obey and abide by such an order. (Ord. 1458 § 2, 2014; Ord. 1332 § 1, 2007)

9.18.040 Reimbursement for law enforcement costs.
If after issuance of a written reimbursement notice as required by this section, law enforcement personnel are required to respond to the property to address another violation of this chapter within a 30-day period after issuance of said notice, then the responsible person or persons, as defined in this chapter, shall be jointly and severally liable for all actual costs and expenses incurred by the City during second or subsequent responses.

(A) Written Reimbursement Notice. Law enforcement personnel responding to a loud party shall issue a written reimbursement notice to the responsible person that if within a 30-day period after the initial response law enforcement personnel are again required to respond to the property to address a violation of this chapter, then the responsible person shall be liable to reimburse the City for all costs and expenses incurred by law enforcement personnel during second or subsequent responses for violations of this chapter.

(B) Reimbursement of Costs and Expenses. All responsible persons for a party or gathering, which requires a second or subsequent response, as described herein above are jointly and severally liable for the following costs and expenses incurred by the City:

(1) The actual costs incurred by the City for the services of the law enforcement personnel for each response after the initial response;

(2) Damage to public property incurred in the course of any second or subsequent response by law enforcement personnel; and

(3) Injuries to any law enforcement personnel involved in a second or subsequent response.

(C) Collection. The expense of a reimbursable response hereunder shall be charged against the person liable for the expense under this chapter. The charge constitutes a debt of that person to the City, and is collectible by the City in the same manner as in the case of an obligation under a contract, expressed or implied.

(D) Other Penalties Not Precluded. Nothing contained in this subsection is intended to preclude the filing of any administrative or criminal charges or the imposition of criminal fines or administrative penalties, or the summary, civil or administrative abatement of any public nuisance under state or local law, including other sections of this chapter, against any person or persons who may be subject to the reimbursement provisions of this section. (Ord. 1332 § 1, 2007)

9.18.050 Enforcement and penalties for all provisions of this chapter.
(A) This chapter may be enforced by Peace Officers and by the City of Palmdale employees specified in PMC Title 1.

(B) Violations of this chapter may be punished as set forth in PMC Title 1.

(C) As an additional remedy for violations of this chapter, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, or machinery in violation of any provision of this chapter, which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitiveness, or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated through summary abatement, administrative abatement, or abatement by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1332 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 9.20
OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Sections:

9.20.010    Flowing mud or water on highway.

9.20.020    Damaging property.

9.20.040    Gate crashing.

9.20.050    Unsightly property.

9.20.010 Flowing mud or water on highway.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to deposit, drain, wash, allow to run or divert into or upon any public road, highway, street or alley, drainage ditch, storm drain, or flood control channel owned by or controlled by any public agency within the City any water, mud, sand, oil or petroleum. (Ord. 10 § 13, 1962)

9.20.020 Damaging property.
No person shall wilfully or maliciously break or destroy any window, window sash, door, blind or pane of glass of any occupied or unoccupied house or outhouse in the City or enter any unoccupied house or outhouse and commit any nuisance therein or break, destroy or injure anything therein or any part of the house or outhouse, or any fence, or improvement whatever, or aid, abet or assist anyone to commit such nuisance or injure the property. (Ord. 10 § 14, 1962)

9.20.040 Gate crashing.
No person, with intent gratuitously to avail himself of the entertainment or recreation furnished or the privileges conferred therein, shall enter any theater, stadium, athletic club, ball park, golf course, golf club, tennis club, beach club, bathing beach, or other place of amusement, entertainment or recreation, for admission to which an admission fee or membership fee is charged, without first paying the admission fee or membership fee. Any person who is a bona fide guest of a member of any club may enter the club in accordance with the rules thereof. Any person may enter any place which is within the purview of this section with the consent of the owner or manager thereof. This section shall not be deemed to apply to the entry into any such place by a Law Enforcement Officer acting within the scope and course of his official duties. (Ord. 10 § 18, 1962)

9.20.050 Unsightly property.
(A) Every person, firm or corporation who owns or has charge or management of any real property in the City who permits any part of the property to become so unsightly as to substantially detract from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood, or who fails or omits to clean up or correct the unsightly or untidy conditions, is guilty of a misdemeanor.

(B) Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation of this section occurs or continues shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and upon conviction therefor shall be punishable as provided in this subsection. (Ord. 138 §§ 1, 3, 1968)

Chapter 9.24
LOITERING FOR DRUG ACTIVITIES
Sections:

9.24.010    Acts prohibited.

9.24.020    Circumstances.

9.24.030    Enforcement.

9.24.010 Acts prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to loiter in, on or near any thoroughfare or place open to the public or near any public or private place in the manner and under circumstances manifesting the intent to engage in drug-related activity, defined as offenses in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 998 § 1, 1993)

9.24.020 Circumstances.
Among the circumstances that may be considered in determining whether such intent is manifested are that the person:

(A) Is a known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller. For purposes of this chapter, a “known unlawful drug user, possessor or seller” is a person who has, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, been convicted in any court within this state of any violation involving the use, possession or sale of any of the substances referred to in Chapters 6 and 6.5 of Division 10 of the California Health and Safety Code, or such person has been convicted of any violation of any of the provisions of said sections or substantially similar laws of any political subdivision of this state or of any other state; or a person who displays physical characteristics of drug intoxication or usage; or a person who possesses drug paraphernalia as described in Chapter 9.28 PMC;

(B) Is currently subject to an order prohibiting his or her presence in a high drug-activity geographic area;

(C) Behaves in such a manner as to raise a reasonable suspicion that he or she is about to engage in or is then engaged in an unlawful drug-related activity, including by way of example only, acting as a “lookout”;

(D) Is physically identified by the officer as a member of a “gang” or association which has as its purpose illegal drug activity;

(E) Transfers small objects or packages for currency in a furtive fashion;

(F) Takes flight upon the appearance of a Police Officer;

(G) Tries to conceal himself or herself or any object which reasonably could be involved in an unlawful drug-related activity;

(H) Is in an area that is known for unlawful drug use and trafficking;

(I) Is on or in premises that have been reported to law enforcement as a place suspected of unlawful drug activity;

(J) Is in or within six feet of any vehicle registered to a known unlawful drug user, possessor, or seller, or a person for whom there is an outstanding warrant for a crime involving drug-related activity. (Ord. 998 § 1, 1993)

9.24.030 Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be pursuant to the policy statement dated December 7, 1992, issued by the Sheriff’s Department, as approved by the City Council and Council Resolution No. 93-3 adopted on January 14, 1993. A copy of said resolution shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. 998 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 9.25
TRUANCY
Sections:

9.25.010    Definitions.

9.25.020    Acts prohibited.

9.25.030    Penalty for violation.

9.25.040    Arrest powers not limited.

9.25.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

“Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

“Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

“Guardian” means:

(1) A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or

(2) A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

“Minor” means any person under 18 years of age.

“Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person.

“Public place” means any place, other than a school or continuation school, to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and shops.

“Responsible adult” means a person at least 18 years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

“School hours” means the period between 7:30 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. on days when school is in session.

“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 1171 § 1, 2000)

9.25.020 Acts prohibited.
(A) It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Palmdale during school hours.

(B) It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Palmdale during school hours.

(C) It is a defense to prosecution under this section when the minor is:

(1) Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult; or

(2) Involved in an emergency or is on an emergency errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop; or

(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; or

(4) Going or coming directly to or from his or her place of gainful employment without any detour or stop; or

(5) Going or coming directly to or from a medical appointment without any detour or stop; or

(6) Has permission to leave school campus for lunch or school-related activity and has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit; or

(7) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or

(8) Emancipated pursuant to law and not otherwise subject to compulsory education.

(D) Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a Police Officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during school hours. The Officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the Officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under subsection (C) of this section, is present or applicable.

(E) Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1171 § 1, 2000)

9.25.030 Penalty for violation.
A violation of PMC 9.25.020 shall be punished pursuant to Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 1171 § 1, 2000)

9.25.040 Arrest powers not limited.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as in any way affecting or limiting the power or right of Law Enforcement Officers to make such investigations, detentions, or arrests as the Law Enforcement Officers would be permitted to make had this chapter not been enacted. (Ord. 1171 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 9.28
OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS
Sections:

Article I. Curfew

9.28.010    Definitions for curfew provisions.

9.28.011    Curfew restrictions.

9.28.012    Penalty for violation.

9.28.013    Arrest powers not limited.

Article II. Sale and Display of Narcotic and Other Paraphernalia

9.28.050    Allowing minors on premises.

9.28.060    Minor entrance on premises.

9.28.070    Separate room and signposting.

9.28.080    Violation – Nuisance.

9.28.090    Violation – Penalty.

Article III. Display of Sexually Explicit Material

9.28.100    Display of matter harmful to minors.

9.28.120    Penalty for violation.

Article I. Curfew

9.28.010 Definitions for curfew provisions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

“Curfew hours” means the period from 10:00 p.m. any evening of the week until 6:00 a.m. of the following day.

“Emergency” means an unforeseen combination of circumstances of the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

“Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

“Guardian” means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor, or (2) a public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

“Minor” means any person under 18 years of age.

“Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person.

“Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

“Responsible adult” means a person at least 18 years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. U-1159 § 1, 1999)

9.28.011 Curfew restrictions.
(A) It is unlawful for any minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City of Palmdale during curfew hours.

(B) It is unlawful for any parent or guardian or a minor knowingly to permit, or by insufficient control to allow, the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the City during curfew hours.

(C) It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the minor was:

(1) Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult;

(2) On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop;

(3) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

(4) Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

(5) Involved in an emergency;

(6) On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;

(7) Attending an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Palmdale, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the City of Palmdale, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor;

(8) Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or

(9) Emancipated pursuant to law.

(D) Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a Police Officer shall ask the apparent offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The Officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the Officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under subsection (C) of this section, is present or applicable.

(E) Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. U-1159 § 1, 1999)

9.28.012 Penalty for violation.
A violation of PMC 9.28.011 shall be punished pursuant to Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. U-1159 § 1, 1999)

9.28.013 Arrest powers not limited.
Nothing in this article shall be construed as in any way affecting or limiting the power or right of Law Enforcement Officers to make such investigations, detentions or arrests as the Law Enforcement Officers would be permitted to make had this article not been enacted. (Ord. U-1159 § 1, 1999)

Article II. Sale and Display of Narcotic and Other Paraphernalia

9.28.050 Allowing minors on premises.
No owner, manager, proprietor or other person in charge of any place of business selling or displaying for the purpose of sale any device, contrivance, instrument or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting, or consuming marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance, as defined in the Health and Safety Code of the state (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs) as well as roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed for the smoking of the foregoing, shall allow or permit any person under the age of 18 years to be, remain in, enter or visit such room unless the minor person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or by his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 370 § 1(a), 1980)

9.28.060 Minor entrance on premises.
A person under the age of 18 years shall not be, remain in, or visit any room in any place used for the sale, or displaying for sale, devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs) including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless the person is accompanied by one of his or her parents, or his or her legal guardian. (Ord. 370 § 1(B), 1980)

9.28.070 Separate room and signposting.
A person shall not maintain in any place of business to which the public is invited the display for sale, or the offering to sell, of devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance (other than prescription drugs and devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs) including roach clips, and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, unless within a separate room or enclosure to which minors not accompanied by a parent or legal guardian are excluded. Each entrance to such a room shall be signposted in reasonably visible and legible words to the effect that narcotic paraphernalia are being offered for sale in such a room, and minors, unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian, are excluded. (Ord. 370 § 1(C), 1980)

9.28.080 Violation – Nuisance.
The distribution or possession for the purpose of sale, exhibition, or display in any place of business from which minors are not excluded as set forth in this article, and where devices, contrivances, instruments or paraphernalia for smoking or injecting marijuana, hashish, PCP, or any controlled substance (other than prescription drugs or devices to ingest or inject prescription drugs) including roach clips and cigarette papers and rollers designed and used for smoking the foregoing, is declared to be a public nuisance, and may be abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 731 of the Code of Civil Procedure of the state. This remedy is in addition to any other remedy provided by law, including the penalty provisions applicable for violation of the terms and provisions of this article. (Ord. 370 § 1(D), 1980)

9.28.090 Violation – Penalty.
Every person who violates any of the provisions of this article is guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 370 § 2, 1980)

Article III. Display of Sexually Explicit Material

9.28.100 Display of matter harmful to minors.
(A) For the purpose of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

(1) “Matter harmful to minors” means matter taken as a whole, the predominant appeal of which to the average person, applying contemporary statewide standards, is to prurient interest, meaning a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion, and is patently offensive to the prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors, and lacks the significant literary, artistic, political, educational, or scientific value for minors.

(2) “Matter” means any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written material, or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation, or any statue or figure, or any recording, transcription, or mechanical, chemical, or electrical reproduction, or any other articles, equipment, machines, or materials.

(B) No person shall knowingly display in any place open to the general public, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, any matter which is harmful to minors unless such material is located in blinder racks so that the lower two-thirds of the matter is not exposed to public view.

(C) The provisions of subsection (B) of this section shall not apply to any business which is not open to persons under the age of 18 and which has a sign posted at each door intended for public entrance which shall read:

Notice: this business displays sexually explicit materials. Admission of persons under 18 years of age unless accompanied by a parent or guardian is prohibited.

The letters composing the sign shall be a minimum of three inches high. (Ord. 939 § 1, 1991)

9.28.120 Penalty for violation.
Every person who violates any provision of this article is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than $100.00. Every person who having been twice convicted of any violation of this article is upon each subsequent violation guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than 30 days, or both; provided, that both of the prior violations occurred within a two-year period of the subsequent violation. (Ord. 407 § 3, 1980)

Chapter 9.30
GRAFFITI PREVENTION AND ABATEMENT
Sections:

9.30.010    Purpose and intent.

9.30.020    Definitions.

9.30.030    Regulation of sales and purchases of aerosol paint containers and etching solution.

9.30.040    Regulation of the possession of graffiti implements.

9.30.050    Graffiti prohibited.

9.30.060    Graffiti reward.

9.30.070    Liability for damages and reimbursement of reward payments.

9.30.075    Determination and recovery of costs by probation officer.

9.30.080    Graffiti removal from private property by owner.

9.30.090    Graffiti removal from private property by the City.

9.30.100    Penalties.

9.30.010 Purpose and intent.
The City Council finds and declares as follows:

(A) Graffiti on public or private property is a condition of blight that not only depreciates the value of property which has been the target of such vandalism, but also depreciates the value of the adjacent and surrounding properties so as to create a negative impact upon the entire community.

(B) Graffiti has also been found to be associated with criminal activity and delinquency. It is also a means of identification and intimidation utilized by gangs and its presence may further gang-related activities. The power of graffiti to create fear within the community and blight upon the landscape, devaluing property and detracting from a sense of community enjoyed by the residents of the City of Palmdale, goes beyond the cost of clean-up or removal. Not only is graffiti a criminal act of vandalism, but it is also a social crime upon the quality of life and freedom from intimidation that citizens desire in their neighborhoods.

(C) Acts of graffiti are most-often committed by persons under the age of 18 years using aerosol containers of spray paint and/or etching solution. Minors frequently steal these implements of graffiti from retail stores, and, as such, retail stores that display and/or sell these implements should be prohibited from selling them to minors and should be required to take reasonable steps to prevent their theft.

(D) California Government Code Section 38771 authorizes the City to declare what constitutes a nuisance. Section 53069.3 further authorizes the City, under certain circumstances, to provide for the removal of graffiti and other inscribed materials from private as well as public property. The Council finds and determines that graffiti is obnoxious and a public nuisance and unless the City causes it to be removed from public and private property, it tends to remain. Other properties then become the target of graffiti with the result that the entire neighborhood is affected and becomes a less desirable place in which to be.

(E) It is the purpose and intent of the City Council of Palmdale, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement, including the application of graffiti on public and private property, walls, vehicles, and other structures. Such acts are destructive of the rights and values of private property owners as well as the entire community. It is the further intent of the City Council, through the adoption of this chapter, to provide to all of those who disregard the property rights of others, that the City’s Code Enforcement and Public Safety Divisions, the Sheriff’s Department, the District Attorney’s Office, and the City Attorney/Prosecutor’s Office will strictly enforce the law and vigorously prosecute those persons engaging in the defacement of public or private properties. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used shall be defined as provided in this section:

(A) “Adhesive label” shall mean any so-called “bumper sticker,” sheet of paper, fabric, or plastic, or other substance with an adhesive backing.

(B) “Aerosol paint container” shall mean any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint, undercoating, spray insulation, or other substance capable of defacing property.

(C) “Etching solution” shall mean any product or compound manufactured for the purpose of permanently altering a glass surface.

(D) “Felt-tip marker” shall mean any indelible marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-eighth of an inch and which contains an ink or other pigmented liquid.

(E) “Graffiti” shall mean any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, or painted on or otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material to the extent that the same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof.

(F) “Graffiti implement” shall mean an aerosol paint container, a felt-tip marker, gum label, paint stick, etching tool or solution capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete, wood, or other surface, adhesive label, or any other device capable of being used to leave a visible mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width upon any surface of any material.

(G) “Paint stick” shall mean a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure, and, upon application, leaving a mark at least one-eighth of an inch in width.

(H) “Structures” shall mean any structure as defined in the City’s building code, and shall include, but not be limited to, buildings, walls, fences, poles, signs, and cargo/shipping containers.

(I) “Vehicle” shall mean a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved exclusively by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.030 Regulation of sales and purchases of aerosol paint containers and etching solution.
(A) It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, except a parent or legal guardian, to sell or give or in any way furnish to another person, who is in fact under the age of 18 years, any aerosol paint container or etching solution without first obtaining bona fide evidence of majority and identity. As used herein, the phrase “bona fide evidence of majority and identity” means any document evidencing the age and identity of any individual which has been issued by a federal, state or local governmental entity, including, but not limited to, the acceptable forms of photographic identification outlined in PMC 1.04.100.

(B) It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to purchase an aerosol paint container or etching solution.

(C) Every retailer or other business establishment selling or offering for sale in the City aerosol paint containers and/or etching solution shall store and maintain all such aerosol paint containers and etching solution in a place that is locked and secure, or which is otherwise made inaccessible to the public except upon request.

(D) Every retailer or other business establishment selling or offering for sale in this City aerosol paint containers and/or etching solution shall post in a conspicuous place a sign in letters at least three-eighths of an inch high stating: “Any person who maliciously defaces real or personal property is guilty of vandalism which is punishable by a fine, imprisonment or both.”

(E) It is unlawful to sell, trade, give, exchange, or display for sale at any swap meet, flea market, open-air market, or yard sale any aerosol paint container or etching solution. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1317 § 9, 2007; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.040 Regulation of the possession of graffiti implements.
(A) It is unlawful for any person to carry on his or her person and in plain view to the public an aerosol paint container, or a container which contains paint or dye, or any writing instrument having a porous point, tip, or nib in excess of one-eighth of one inch in width at its widest point, or a glass etching tool/solution or similar device while in any posted public facility, park, playground, swimming pool or recreational area, other than a highway, street, alley or way, unless he or she has first received valid authorization from the governmental entity which has jurisdiction over the public area. As used herein, the term “posted” means a sign placed in a reasonable location or locations stating that it is a violation of this code to possess the above-referenced instruments and devices in such public facility, park, playground, swimming pool, or recreational area without valid authorization.

(B) It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person under the age of 18 years to have in his or her possession any instrument described hereinbelow while upon private property without the prior written consent of the owner of such property, or upon a public highway, street, alleyway, park, playground, swimming pool, public building or any area open to the public:

(1) Any aerosol paint container or other spray can containing anything other than a solution which can be removed by water after it dries;

(2) Any spray can tips, other than those affixed to a spray can not meeting the description of subsection (B)(1) of this section;

(3) Any felt-tip marker containing anything other than a solution which can be removed with water after it dries;

(4) Any container holding anything other than solution that can be removed with water after it dries and which can be used to apply that solution. This includes acrylic paint tubes, oil paint tubes, shoe dyes, and bottles and cans of such solutions; and

(5) Objects capable of etching glass or ceramic surfaces, including, but not limited to, bits, grinding stones, glass cutters, scribes, broken spark plug ceramic, chisels, and any solution capable of etching these surfaces when applied, including acids and etching baths.

(C) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person under the age of 18 years attending or traveling to or from school, at which time the minor is enrolled, if the minor is participating in a class at said school which has a written requirement of the class for the possession of the implements or instruments described in this section. The burden of proof in any prosecution for a violation of this section shall be upon the minor student to establish enrollment in a class that requires the possession of the implements or instruments described in this section. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1135 § 1, 1998; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.050 Graffiti prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to apply graffiti to any building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle located within the City. It shall also be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to apply or affix any adhesive label to any building, structure, tree, shrub, curb, or vehicle not owned or lawfully possessed by such person, or without advance authorization by the owner thereof. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.060 Graffiti reward.
(A) Pursuant to California Government Code Section 53069.5, the City does hereby offer a reward in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council for information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation committed within the State of California Penal Code Sections 594 or 594.3 (by the use of graffiti), 640, 640.5, 640.6, or PMC 9.30.030, 9.30.040, 9.30.050, or this section. In the event of multiple contributors of information regarding a single event or suspect, the reward amount shall be divided by the City in the manner it shall deem appropriate. For the purposes of this section, diversion of the offending violator to a community service program, or a plea bargain to a lesser offense, shall constitute a conviction.

(B) Claims for rewards under this section shall be filed, in writing, with the City Clerk. Each claim should:

(1) Specifically identify the date, location, and kind of property damaged or destroyed;

(2) Identify by name the person who was convicted; and

(3) Identify the court and the date upon which the conviction occurred.

(C) The City Council shall review each claim for reward submitted pursuant to this chapter and either accept, accept in part, or deny the claim. No claim for a reward shall be accepted by the City Council unless the City investigates and verifies the accuracy of the claim and determines that the requirements of this section have been satisfied. The investigation must determine that the claimant’s information was relevant and directly responsible for the arrest and conviction of the suspect.

(D) The offer of reward is made to members of the public generally. However, no law enforcement officer, municipal officer, employee of the City, or person(s) apprehended shall be eligible for such reward.

(E) Any person committing graffiti vandalism, and if said person is an unemancipated minor, then the parent or lawful guardian of said minor, shall be civilly liable for any reward paid pursuant to this section. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.070 Liability for damages and reimbursement of reward payments.
(A) Pursuant to Section 1714.1(b) of the California Civil Code, any act of willful misconduct of a minor which results in the defacement of property of another with paint, graffiti implement, or any similar substance or device shall be imputed to the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor for all purposes of civil damages, including court costs and attorney’s fees, to the prevailing party, and the parent or guardian having custody and control shall be jointly and severally liable with the minor for any damages resulting from the willful misconduct. The liability of each parent or guardian shall not exceed $37,100, or any future amount set by the California Judicial Council in accordance with Section 1714.1(c) of the California Civil Code, for each such act of the minor.

(B) Any person violating the provisions of PMC 9.30.050 shall pay to the City the amount of any reward paid pursuant to PMC 9.30.060, and, if such person is an unemancipated minor, such minor’s parent or guardian shall be liable therefor and shall pay the amount of any such reward to the City. Failure to pay any amount demanded by the City pursuant to this subsection within 30 days after written demand therefor shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this subsection. (Ord. 1416 § 1, 2011; Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1135 § 2, 1998; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.075 Determination and recovery of costs by probation officer.
(A) The Los Angeles County probation officer is hereby authorized to recoup on behalf of the City and to promptly transfer to the City, the City’s graffiti abatement costs through juvenile court proceedings pursuant to the Graffiti Removal and Damage Recovery Program (California Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 742.10 et seq.) and the provisions of this chapter.

(B) For purposes of this section only, “graffiti abatement costs” means:

(1) The average law enforcement costs incurred in identifying and apprehending a person convicted of Section 594, 594.3, 594.4, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code or a minor subsequently found to be a person described in Section 602 by reason of the commission of an act prohibited by Section 594, 594.3, 594.4, 640.5, 640.6, or 640.7 of the Penal Code; and

(2) The average costs incurred in removing graffiti or other inscribed material; and

(3) The average costs incurred in repairing and replacing property of a type frequently defaced with graffiti or other inscribed material.

(C) The City Council shall make findings and establish graffiti abatement costs, consistent with California Welfare and Institutions Code Section 742.14, by Council resolution. The findings and graffiti abatement costs shall be reviewed and updated by the City Council at least once every three years. Immediately after the adoption of each council resolution establishing and updating graffiti abatement costs, the City Clerk shall cause a certified copy of the Council resolution to be forwarded to the clerk of the Los Angeles County juvenile court and the Los Angeles County probation officer. (Ord. 1462 § 1, 2014)

9.30.080 Graffiti removal from private property by owner.
It is unlawful for the owner of any privately owned real property to permit graffiti or other unauthorized inscriptions to remain on any building, structure or other facility so as to be capable of being viewed by persons utilizing any public right-of-way in the City, such as a highway, street, road, parkway or alley; provided, that the City Manager, or his designee, has given written notice to the owner to remove the graffiti within a period of three calendar days and such time period has elapsed without remedial action. For the purpose of this section, “remedial action” shall mean painting, washing, sandblasting, chemically treating, or otherwise obscuring the graffiti such as to blend the affected area with the surrounding structure or property. (Ord. 1469 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.090 Graffiti removal from private property by the City.
Upon a determination by the City Manager, or his designee, that graffiti or other unauthorized inscriptions are on any privately owned building, structure or other facility and are in view of persons utilizing any public right-of-way, whether a highway, street, road, parkway or alley, the City shall be authorized to undertake the removal of such graffiti. Prior to the removal of such graffiti, the City shall obtain the written consent of the owner, including an appropriate release form and right of entry form authorizing such graffiti removal. The City shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of a more extensive area than that where the graffiti is located. The authority of the City under this section shall be in addition to all other remedies available under the provisions of this code, including those related to the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007; Ord. U-1003 § 1, 1993)

9.30.100 Penalties.
(A) Criminal Penalties. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor offense and subject to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.12 PMC.

(B) Additional Penalties. Whenever deemed appropriate, it is the City’s intent to petition a sentencing court to impose the following additional penalties or conditions of any grant or probation, diversion, deferred entry of judgment, or other court supervision (including upon a determination that a minor is to be a ward of the court as a result of committing an act of vandalism or graffiti) upon conviction:

(1) Suspension or delay in issuance of driver’s license (pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 13202.6); and

(2) Community service and/or graffiti removal service (pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 640.6 and 1203 et seq., Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 728 and 729.8, and Vehicle Code Section 42001.7).

(C) Lien Against Property. It is the intent of the City to make the expense of abatement of any nuisance, resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material, a lien against the property of a parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, and a personal obligation against the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor (pursuant to California Government Code Section 38772, California Penal Code Section 1202.4 and other state law). “Expense of abatement” includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney’s fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the City in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person.

(D) Special Assessment. As an alternative to the lien against property provided in subsection (C) of this section, the City may, pursuant to Section 38773.6 of the California Government Code, make the expense of abatement of any nuisance, resulting from the defacement by a minor of the property of another by graffiti or any other inscribed material, a special assessment against a parcel of land owned by the minor or other person or by the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, in accordance with the procedures specified in California Government Code Section 38773.5. “Expense of abatement” includes, but is not limited to, court costs, attorney’s fees, costs of removal of the graffiti or other inscribed material, costs of repair and replacement of defaced property, and the law enforcement costs incurred by the City in identifying and apprehending the minor or other person.

(E) Cumulative Remedies. The remedies provided in this chapter are in addition to other remedies and penalties available under provisions of other applicable City ordinances, the laws of the State of California, or the laws of the United States. (Ord. 1416 § 2, 2011; Ord. 1326 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 9.32
WEAPONS
Sections:

9.32.010    Shooting arrows or missiles.

9.32.020    Air guns and pellet guns.

9.32.030    Discharging firearms.

9.32.040    Exception.

9.32.050    Target shooting.

9.32.060    Penalty for violation.

9.32.010 Shooting arrows or missiles.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall within the incorporated limits of the City shoot any arrow or similar missile and no person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit any arrow or similar missile to be shot at any place within 200 yards of any public highway, private street used by the general public, recreational area, park, riding and hiking trail, dwelling house, camp or place of human habitation, except when the arrow is shot from and at all times remains on or over, and lands upon, private property or portion thereof, when permission has been granted by the property owner. (Ord. 93 § 1, 1966)

9.32.020 Air guns and pellet guns.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful in the City for any person to fire, discharge, shoot or operate, or to assist or participate in the firing, discharging, shooting, or for any person under 18 years of age without direct adult supervision to have in his or her possession, care, custody, or control, any spring gun, air gun, sling, slingshot or device designed or intended to discharge, or capable of discharging, any dangerous missile, including but not limited to pellets or BBs. (Ord. 93 § 2, 1966)

9.32.030 Discharging firearms.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall shoot, fire or discharge and no person, firm or corporation shall cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged within the incorporated boundaries of the City, any rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or firearm of any kind. (Ord. 93 § 3, 1966)

9.32.040 Exception.
This chapter, except as otherwise provided, does not prohibit the discharge of any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or firearm of any kind or the shooting of any arrow or other missile when necessary so to do to protect life or property or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal. (Ord. 93 § 4, 1966)

9.32.050 Target shooting.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to prohibit the establishment or maintenance of any pistol, rifle, shotgun or target range, nor to prohibit the discharge of such weapons at any target thereon, by any person using the range. (Ord. 93 § 5, 1966)

9.32.060 Penalty for violation.
Every person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 93 § 6, 1966)

Chapter 9.33
EVICTIONS FOR UNLAWFUL DRUG ACTIVITY
Sections:

9.33.010    Purpose and intent.

9.33.020    Definitions.

9.33.030    Prohibition.

9.33.040    Unlawful detainer action required.

9.33.050    Notification from the City.

9.33.060    Landlord’s compliance following notification.

9.33.070    Action to abate a nuisance.

9.33.080    Construction.

9.33.090    Violations.

9.33.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter is enacted in view of the following facts and circumstances:

(A) California Health and Safety Code Section 11570 provides that it is a nuisance for a building or place to be used for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, manufacturing or giving away any controlled substance.

(B) California Health and Safety Code Section 11366 provides that it is a criminal act for any person to open or maintain any place for the purpose of unlawfully selling, giving away or using any controlled substance.

(C) California Health and Safety Code Section 11366.5 provides that it is a criminal act for any person who has under his or her management or control any building, room, space or enclosure, either as an owner, lessee, agent, employee or mortgagee, to knowingly: rent, lease or make available for use, with or without compensation, the building, room, space, or enclosure for the purpose of unlawfully manufacturing, storing or distributing any controlled substance for sale or distribution.

(D) California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1161(4) provides that any tenant or subtenant of real property who maintains, commits or permits the maintenance or commission of a nuisance upon the demised premises, or uses such premises for an unlawful purpose, thereby terminates the lease, and the landlord shall, upon service of three days’ notice to quit upon the person or persons in possession, be entitled to restitution of possession of such demised premises.

(E) California Health and Safety Code Section 11571 authorizes the City Attorney of the City, whenever there is reason to believe that a building or place is being used for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, manufacturing, or giving away any controlled substance, to maintain an action to abate and prevent such nuisance and perpetually to enjoin the person conducting or maintaining it, and the owner, lessee, or agent of the building or place, in or upon which the nuisance exists, from directly or indirectly maintaining or permitting the nuisance.

(F) The City Council desires to enact local legislation complementary to and in furtherance of the above-recited state law in order to accomplish the following:

(1) To encourage every person who has under his or her management or control any rental unit, as defined herein, either as an owner, lessor, agent, employee or mortgagee, to initiate appropriate action to eliminate the use of any such rental unit for unlawful drug-dealing activities or purposes;

(2) To encourage and assist owners, lessors, agents, employees or mortgagees of rental units in their efforts to eliminate the use of such rental units for unlawful drug-dealing activities or purposes through reliance upon the unlawful detainer procedures set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1159 et seq.;

(3) To authorize and enable the City Attorney to take action against owners, lessors, agents, employees or mortgagees of rental units who refuse to take appropriate action to eliminate the use of their rental units for unlawful drug-dealing activities or purposes. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

9.33.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms and phrases shall be defined as follows:

(A) “Controlled substance” means any drug, substance or immediate precursor thereof, as identified in the Uniform Controlled Substance Act, California Health and Safety Code Section 11054 et seq.

(B) “Drug-related nuisance” means the possession, maintenance or use of a rental unit for the purpose of unlawfully selling, serving, storing, keeping, manufacturing, using or giving away any controlled substance.

(C) “Landlord” means and includes any individual or entity, or an agent or other representative thereof, who is an owner, lessor or sublessor of a rental unit, and who receives or is entitled to receive payment for the use of any rental unit.

(D) “Rental unit” means any dwelling unit, including any single-family residence, apartment, duplex, triplex and condominium in the City, including the land and the buildings appurtenant thereto, and including common areas, garage facilities, alleyways, stairwells and elevators. This term shall also include a mobile home where rent is paid for the use of such mobile home, or for the land on which it is located. This term shall further include a recreational vehicle, as defined in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 799.24, if located in a mobile home park and if rent is paid for the use of the recreational vehicle or for the land on which it is located.

(E) “Tenant” means a tenant, subtenant, lessee, sublessee, or any other person who is entitled to use or occupy a rental unit.

(F) “Unlawful drug-dealing activities or purposes” means the unlawful use or possession of a controlled substance, or the unlawful manufacture, storage or distribution of any controlled substance for sale or distribution, in a rental unit, or in other units within a rental complex, or on the common area grounds of the rental complex, or within 50 yards of the complex containing the rental unit. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

9.33.030 Prohibition.
No landlord shall knowingly cause or permit any rental unit to be used or maintained for any unlawful drug-dealing activities or purposes, nor shall any landlord knowingly cause or permit any drug-related nuisance to be maintained within or adjacent to a rental unit. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

9.33.040 Unlawful detainer action required.
Unless otherwise excepted under the provisions of this chapter, every landlord shall give notice as required by law and bring an action within 30 days after the occurrence of any of the following:

(A) The landlord’s reasonable determination that a tenant is using a rental unit, or allowing a rental unit to be used, for unlawful drug-dealing activities or purposes.

(B) The landlord’s reasonable determination that a tenant is committing or permitting to exist a “drug-related nuisance” in a rental unit or the appurtenances thereof, or in other units within a rental complex, or in the common areas of the complex containing the rental unit.

(C) Receipt of notification as provided for in PMC 9.33.050. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

9.33.050 Notification from the City.
If the Sheriff’s Department determines that a rental unit is being used for illegal drug-dealing activities or purposes, or that a rental unit constitutes a drug-related nuisance, and the City Attorney concurs in such determination, the City Attorney shall notify the landlord in writing, by personal service or certified mail, with return receipt requested, of the unlawful drug-dealing activities or purposes, or of the drug-related nuisance at said rental unit and of the landlord’s obligations under this chapter. The City Attorney shall provide to the landlord sufficient documentation to establish that the rental unit is being used or maintained for unlawful drug-dealing activities or purposes, or constitutes a drug-related nuisance. Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the release of documentation which would violate an individual’s right to privacy or any applicable provision of law that precludes the release of law enforcement records. Nothing herein shall authorize a search of any rental unit or the seizure of any property by a landlord under color of authority of the City or any employee or official thereof. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

9.33.060 Landlord’s compliance following notification.
Every landlord shall in good faith comply with its obligations under this chapter following receipt of the notification provided for in PMC 9.33.050. Such good faith compliance may be evidenced by any of the following:

(A) By the landlord obtaining the voluntary surrender of the rental unit by the tenant within 30 days after landlord’s receipt of notification;

(B) By the landlord bringing an action in unlawful detainer as requested by PMC 9.33.040;

(C) By the landlord responding in writing, to the satisfaction of the City Attorney, that an action in unlawful detainer is neither supported by the documentation provided by the City, nor by the landlord’s personal knowledge of the tenant’s activities at or adjacent to the rental unit. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

9.33.070 Action to abate a nuisance.
In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter or by applicable state statutes, the City Attorney may determine that a landlord’s violation of any provisions of PMC 9.33.030 or 9.33.040 hereof constitutes a nuisance, and may, pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11571 et seq., commence an action to abate and prevent the nuisance and perpetually to enjoin the person conducting or maintaining it, and the landlord of the rental unit, in or upon which the nuisance exists, from directly or indirectly maintaining or permitting the nuisance. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

9.33.080 Construction.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed or interpreted to create a principal-agent relationship between the City and a landlord. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

9.33.090 Violations.
Any person who knowingly or wilfully violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable as provided for in Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 994 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 9.36
VIOLATION – PENALTY
Sections:

9.36.010    Penalty for violation.

9.36.010 Penalty for violation.
Every person who violates any of the provisions of Chapter 9.04, 9.08, 9.12, 9.16 or 9.20 PMC is guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of Chapter 9.04, 9.08, 9.12, 9.16 or 9.20 PMC is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 10 § 41, 1962)

Chapter 9.40
BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
Sections:

9.40.010    Definitions.

9.40.020    Audible alarm requirements.

9.40.030    Direct-dial telephone device.

9.40.040    False alarm.

9.40.050    Report and repair.

9.40.060    Public nuisance alarm.

9.40.070    Exemptions.

9.40.080    Violations.

9.40.090    Appeal process.

9.40.100    Fees.

9.40.110    Compliance required.

9.40.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the words hereinafter defined are used as so defined unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

(A) “Alarm owner” means the person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by his agents, employees, representatives or family, any alarm system.

(B) “Alarm system” means any device, whether known as a burglary, robbery or intrusion alarm, direct-dial telephone device, audible or silent alarm, or by any other name, which is used for the detection of any unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or to signal the commission of an unlawful act. It includes those devices which emit a signal within the protected premises only, are supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, and are otherwise known as “proprietary alarm systems.” Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system are not included in this definition.

(C) “Audible alarm” means a device designed to notify persons in the immediate vicinity of the protected premises, by emission of an audible sound, of an unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act.

(D) “Direct dial service” means a device which is connected to a telephone line, which upon activation of an alarm system automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message or signal indicating a need for emergency response.

(E) “False alarm” means an alarm signal activated by causes other than the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act which the alarm system is designed to detect and/or report; and which results in a requested and/or actual response by the Sheriff. False alarms include, but are not limited to, the activation of an alarm system because of mechanical failure, preventable accident, improper operation, misuse, malfunction, improper negligence or carelessness of the alarm user. An alarm signal activated by violent conditions of nature other than extraordinary circumstances not subject to the control of the alarm owner shall not constitute a false alarm. (Ord. 1196 § 1, 2002; Ord. 804 § 1, 1989)

9.40.020 Audible alarm requirements.
The alarm owner of every audible alarm within the City shall post in a conspicuous place near the front entrance of the protected premises the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified during any hour of the day or night during which the audible alarm is operated. An audible alarm shall terminate its operation or the audible alarm shall automatically reset within 30 minutes of its being activated. (Ord. 804 § 1, 1989)

9.40.030 Direct-dial telephone device.
The use of an alarm system which is equipped with a direct-dial device and which, when activated, automatically dials any telephone number in any office of the Sheriff, is prohibited. (Ord. 804 § 1, 1989)

9.40.040 False alarm.
The knowing commission of a false alarm is prohibited. This section does not prohibit any test of an alarm system as permitted in advance by the Sheriff. (Ord. 804 § 1, 1989)

9.40.050 Report and repair.
After any false alarm, the alarm owner shall, upon request by the Sheriff, submit a written report to the Sheriff describing actions taken or to be taken to eliminate the cause of the false alarm. This shall be submitted within 10 days of the date of request by the Sheriff. (Ord. 804 § 1, 1989)

9.40.060 Public nuisance alarm.
An alarm system that generates more than three false alarms in any 12-month period, beginning January 1st, is declared to be a public nuisance and operation of the alarm system is prohibited. (Ord. 1196 § 2, 2002; Ord. 804 § 1, 1989)

9.40.070 Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 804 § 1, 1989)

9.40.080 Violations.
(A) Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter other than PMC 9.40.040 is guilty of an infraction, which is punishable as provided in PMC 1.12.010(B).

(B) Violation of PMC 9.40.040 is a misdemeanor, which is punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

(C) Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, upon the first violation of PMC 9.40.060 in a calendar year beginning January 1st, the Sheriff shall serve a written notice (in triplicate) to the alarm owner, to the City, and to the Sheriff’s Department indicating the property location, date of false alarm, and other information necessary to track false alarms. The City will retain copies and track all subsequent false alarms for that alarm user. The notice will describe the violation and specify that the causes of the violation shall be corrected within 10 days of the date of service of the written notice. (Ord. 1196 § 3, 2002; Ord. 804 § 1, 1989)

9.40.090 Appeal process.
Any person receiving monetary charges for false alarm responses may appeal. A written appeal must be submitted to the City Manager or his designee. Decisions of the City Manager or his designee are final. (Ord. 1196 § 4, 2002)

9.40.100 Fees.
A service charge in an amount established by the City Council by resolution shall be levied for each Sheriff response to an alarm determined to be false, after the first three false alarms. The City’s Code Enforcement Department shall invoice and collect these service charges in the same manner as other debts owed to the City. (Ord. 1196 § 5, 2002)

9.40.110 Compliance required.
Any alarm installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with all provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1196 § 6, 2002)

Chapter 9.44
TRESPASS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Sections:

9.44.010    Purpose and findings.

9.44.020    Definitions.

9.44.030    Trespass on private property.

9.44.040    Entry requiring express consent of owner.

9.44.050    Advice to leave private property open to the general public.

9.44.060    Peace Officer assistance.

9.44.070    Exceptions.

9.44.080    Severability.

9.44.090    Violations.

9.44.010 Purpose and findings.
The City Council finds and determines as follows:

(A) Individuals who have no legitimate business to transact on private property, such as drug sellers, loiterers and gang members, frequently congregate on or around apartment buildings, shopping centers, mini-malls and other property, and intimidate residents and customers.

(B) State statutes do not provide adequate procedures for property owners to exclude these individuals from their property or, once excluded, to prevent their continuous reentry.

(C) Guests and visitors of law-abiding tenants sometimes engage in unlawful activity on the premises of such law-abiding tenants, thereby subjecting the property owner to potential civil penalties under state and federal law.

(D) Unlawful detainer proceedings aimed at evicting tenants whose guests and visitors are engaging in unlawful activities are often not an effective remedy.

(E) The regulations set forth herein represent a fair balancing of the interests of the property owner and the tenant by excluding from the subject property a person convicted of committing a specified illegal act on such property. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

9.44.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following term shall be defined as follows:

“Private property” means any real property, including, but not limited to, buildings, structures, yards, open spaces, walkways, courtyards, driveways, carports, parking areas and vacant lots (excluding land which is used exclusively for agricultural purposes), owned by any person or legal entity, but excluding property which is owned or lawfully possessed by any governmental entity or agency. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

9.44.030 Trespass on private property.
(A) No person shall enter or be present upon any private property, or any portion thereof, which is not open to the general public, without the consent of the owner, the owner’s agent, or a person in lawful possession, where signs forbidding entry are displayed as provided in subsection (B) of this section.

(B) For purposes of subsection (A) of this section, one printed sign shall be posted in a conspicuous manner at every walkway and driveway entering any enclosed private property or portion thereof, and at a minimum of every 50 feet along the boundary of any unenclosed lot. This requirement is met if at least one printed sign is conspicuously posted on the outside of every structure on such property, so as to be readable from each walkway and driveway entering such property. The sign shall contain the following language which shall be printed in letters not less than two inches high:

THIS PROPERTY CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC
No Entry Without Permission
P.M.C. SEC. 9.44.030

(C) No person shall enter upon any private property, or any portion of private property, not open to the general public, who, within the immediately preceding six months, was given an advisory notice as follows: to leave and not return, and that if such person returns to the property within six months of the advisory notice he or she will be subject to arrest. This advisory notice must be made by the owner, the owner’s agent, a person in lawful possession, or a Peace Officer at the request of the owner, the owner’s agent or a person in lawful possession. The advisory notice shall be documented in writing by the individual making it and shall include the name of the person advised, the date, the approximate time, the address and the type of property involved. Such documentation shall be retained for a minimum period of one year. This subsection is not violated where a person so advised enters the property within the designated six-month period, and such person has been expressly authorized to do so by the owner, the owner’s agent, or a person in lawful possession. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

9.44.040 Entry requiring express consent of owner.
(A) No person shall enter or be present upon private property not open to the general public without the express consent of the owner or the owner’s agent when that person:

(1) Has been convicted of any violation of the law involving narcotics, prostitution, vandalism, weapons, disturbance of the peace, loitering, threat to commit a violent act, or the commission of a violent act, on that same private property not open to the general public, whether or not such property is posted in accordance with PMC 9.44.030(B); and

(2) Has, subsequent to the conviction, been told to leave and not return to that same property, by the owner, the owner’s agent, or a Peace Officer at the request of the owner or the owner’s agent.

(B) The request to leave must be made within six months of the date of the conviction and shall be documented in writing by the individual making the request. The documentation of the request shall include the name of the person being requested to leave, the date, the approximate time, the address, and the type of property involved.

(C) This section applies even if the person has the consent of a person in lawful possession, but does not apply to persons who have a right of lawful possession to the subject property. An individual who has the consent of the person in lawful possession may not be refused entry by the owner or the owner’s agent for a period exceeding 12 months, computed from the date of the request. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

9.44.050 Advice to leave private property open to the general public.
No person shall enter or be present upon any private property or portion of private property open to the general public who, within the immediately preceding 24 hours, was advised to leave and not return, and that if such person returns to the property within 24 hours of the advisory notice he or she will be subject to arrest. This advisory notice must be given by the owner, the owner’s agent, a person in lawful possession, or a Peace Officer at the request of the owner, the owner’s agent, or a person in lawful possession. A request to leave may be made only if such request is rationally related to the services performed or the facilities provided for the general public. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

9.44.060 Peace Officer assistance.
When a Peace Officer’s assistance in dealing with a trespass is requested, the owner, the owner’s agent, or a person in lawful possession shall make a separate request to the Peace Officer on each occasion; provided, however, that a single request for a Peace Officer’s assistance may be made to cover a limited period of time not to exceed 12 months when such request is made in writing and sets forth the specific dates of the authorization period. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

9.44.070 Exceptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in any of the following instances:

(A) When its application results in, or is coupled with, any act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act, or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person;

(B) When its application results in, or is coupled with, an act prohibited by Section 365 of the California Penal Code, or any other provision of law relating to the duties of innkeepers;

(C) When public officers or employees are acting within the course and scope of their employment or in the performance of their official duties;

(D) When persons are engaging in activities protected by the United States Constitution or the California Constitution, or when persons are engaging in acts which are expressly required or permitted by any provision of law. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

9.44.080 Severability.
If any part or provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, including the application of that part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end, the provisions of the chapter are severable. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

9.44.090 Violations.
The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor or an infraction and shall be punishable as provided for in Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 1019 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 9.45
TRESPASS ON PUBLIC PROPERTY
Sections:

9.45.010    Trespass on public school property.

9.45.020    Trespass on certain public property.

9.45.030    Exceptions.

9.45.040    Violations.

9.45.010 Trespass on public school property.
No person shall enter the grounds, buildings or any other property of a public school, or remain on such grounds, building or property, in violation of posted rules regarding the use of the property. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2009)

9.45.020 Trespass on certain public property.
(A) No person shall enter upon any of the following premises owned by the City without the express permission of the Director of Public Works, or his or her duly authorized representative, where signs forbidding entry are displayed as provided in subsection (B) of this section: maintenance yards, maintenance shops, lift stations, detention basins, and retention basins. No person shall be deemed to have such permission unless such person has evidence thereof upon his or her person or unless he or she has the express oral consent of the officer or employee present at, and in immediate charge or care of, the premises.

(B) For purposes of subsection (A) of this section, one printed sign shall be posted in a conspicuous manner at every walkway and driveway entering any enclosed premises or portion thereof, and at a minimum of every 50 feet along the boundary of any unenclosed lot. This requirement is met if at least one printed sign is conspicuously posted on the outside of every structure on such property, so as to be readable from each walkway and driveway entering such property. The sign shall contain the following language, or language substantially similar, which shall be printed in letters not less than two inches high:

THIS PROPERTY CLOSED TO THE PUBLIC

No Entry Without Permission

P.M.C. SEC. 9.45.020

(Ord. 1387 § 1, 2009)

9.45.030 Exceptions.
(A) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to law enforcement officers or to officers or employees of the City or of any governmental agency acting in the course of their public duties.

(B) The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any portion of any such structure or premises to which general public access is required in the normal use and operation thereof during normal operating hours. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2009)

9.45.040 Violations.
Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in PMC Title 1. (Ord. 1387 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 9.46
UNPERMITTED CAMPING, LODGING, AND SLEEPING ON PUBLIC STREETS, PUBLICLY OWNED PROPERTY, AND IN PUBLIC PARKS AND OTHER PROHIBITED PUBLIC PLACES
Sections:

9.46.010    Unpermitted camping, lodging and sleeping prohibited.

9.46.020    Enforcement and penalties.

9.46.030    Construction with other laws.

9.46.010 Unpermitted camping, lodging and sleeping prohibited.
(A) No person shall camp, lodge, or sleep on a public street (including in a vehicle parked on a public street), on publicly owned property, and in public parks and other prohibited public places; provided, that nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit camping in public campgrounds pursuant to a permit or license authorized under federal, state or local statute or ordinance.

(B) “Camping” means residing in or using any public street, publicly owned property, public park, or other prohibited public place for living accommodation, lodging, or sleeping purposes, as exemplified by remaining for prolonged or repeated periods of time not associated with ordinary use of the street, property, or public place, with one’s possessions or while storing one’s possessions (including but not limited to clothing; sleeping bags, bed rolls, blankets, sheets, hammocks, or other sleeping implements; luggage; backpacks; kitchen utensils; cookware; and food or beverages), cooking or consuming meals, or lodging in a parked vehicle. These activities constitute camping when it reasonably appears in light of all the circumstances that a person is using the street, property, or place as a living, lodging, or sleeping accommodation regardless of his or her intent, or the nature of any other activities in which he or she might also be engaged.

(C) “Prohibited public places” means any public place not designated as a public campground pursuant to federal, state, or local statute or ordinance and shall include the following:

(1) Public streets, sidewalks, alleyways, passageways, paseos, and rights-of-way;

(2) Publicly owned property;

(3) Public parks, except as may be permitted under PMC 8.24.260;

(4) Public parking lots, whether privately owned or publicly owned;

(5) Public landscaped areas, whether publicly owned or privately owned and maintained pursuant to a public landscape easement;

(6) Private property that is readily accessible to the general public, or is otherwise open to common or general use or view;

(7) Vacant lots;

(8) Drainage culverts and basins. (Ord. 1199 § 1, 2002)

9.46.020 Enforcement and penalties.
(A) This chapter may be enforced by Peace Officers and by the City of Palmdale employees specified in Chapter 1.16 PMC.

(B) Violations of this chapter may be punished as set forth in Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 1199 § 1, 2002)

9.46.030 Construction with other laws.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect, supersede, or otherwise prevent private causes of action for trespass, or other public civil, penal, or administrative prosecution for trespass or maintaining a nuisance under state or local law. (Ord. 1199 § 1, 2002)

Chapter 9.47
SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES
Sections:

9.47.010    Purpose and intent.

9.47.020    Definitions.

9.47.030    Abatement of nuisance vehicle by seizure and forfeiture.

9.47.040    Title to vest in the City.

9.47.050    Seizure of vehicle.

9.47.060    Forfeiture and notice of intended forfeiture of vehicle.

9.47.070    Claim opposing forfeiture and court proceedings.

9.47.080    Disposal of vehicle and distribution of proceeds.

9.47.090    Stolen vehicles.

9.47.100    Recovery of monetary loss.

9.47.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to enjoin and abate nuisance vehicles by establishing a process to allow the seizure and forfeiture of such vehicles when used in conjunction with the commission or furtherance of certain criminal offenses.

The intent of this chapter is to deter persons from committing, or attempting to commit, certain criminal offenses in Palmdale. (Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.020 Definitions.
The following terms, as used in this chapter, are defined as follows:

(A) “Bulky item” means any discarded furniture, household, commercial or industrial appliance or equipment, as well as an abandoned vehicle, item of personal property, or part thereof.

(B) “Controlled substance” means a drug, substance or immediate precursor that is listed in any schedule in California Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058.

(C) “Dangerous fireworks” means those fireworks so defined by the California Health and Safety Code, and shall not include those fireworks classified as “safe and sane” by the State Fire Marshal.

(D) “Driver” means any person who drives or is in physical control of a vehicle.

(E) “Exhibition of speed” means a willful act of showing off or displaying a dangerous or imprudent speed in a vehicle on a highway where the presence of another person is known to the driver or may reasonably be anticipated by him or her. In order to constitute an exhibition of speed under this section, there must be spectators present at the event.

(F) “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, which is used by the public for vehicular travel. It does not include a facility that is specifically designed and legally maintained for the purposes of speed contests or exhibitions of speed.

(G) “Illegal dumping” means a willful act of throwing, dropping, placing or depositing a bulky item, hazardous waste or solid waste on public or private real property that does not have governmental approval for said use.

(H) “Illegal weapons” means the devices or objects referred to in California Penal Code Section 12020, and the commission of any act regulated thereby, or in violation thereof.

(I) “Prostitution” means engaging in lewd or sexual conduct for money or other consideration.

(J) “Speed contest” means a contest where a vehicle is raced on a highway against another vehicle, a clock, or other timing device. In order to constitute a speed contest under this chapter, at least two vehicles must be assembled or spectators must be present at the event. An event where the time to cover a prescribed route of more than 20 miles is measured, but where the vehicle does not exceed the speed limit, is not a speed contest.

(K) “Theft” means the commission of an unlawful act as this term is defined in the California Penal Code and regardless of its form or degree. “Theft” shall, for purposes of this chapter, include any form or degree of burglary, larceny, robbery or receiving or concealing stolen property as these terms are defined by the California Penal Code.

(L) “Used” means the operation of a vehicle to commit or attempt the commission of the crimes defined in this chapter. This term shall include the operation of a vehicle while departing from the location where a crime was committed or attempted.

(M) “Vehicle” means any transportation device that is self-propelled by an engine, motor or other form of technology, and that requires the driver to have in his or her immediate possession a valid driver’s license for the appropriate class of vehicle being driven.

(N) “Waste” means and includes “hazardous waste” and “solid waste,” as these terms are defined in PMC 5.52.030 or by a subsequently amended or adopted provision in the Palmdale Municipal Code. (Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.030 Abatement of nuisance vehicle by seizure and forfeiture.
Any person or his or her servant, agent, or employee who owns, leases, conducts or maintains any vehicle used for any of the purposes or acts set forth in this section is responsible for creating a public nuisance. Any vehicle that is used in the commission or furtherance of the following activities is declared a nuisance and shall be enjoined and abated as provided for in this chapter.

(A) Controlled Substances. Any vehicle used to illegally acquire or attempt to illegally acquire any controlled substance.

(B) Exhibition of Speed. Any vehicle used in an exhibition of speed.

(C) Illegal Dumping. Any vehicle used for the purpose of illegal dumping or to attempt this activity.

(D) Illegal Weapons. Any vehicle used for the purpose of carrying an illegal weapon, or to commit, or attempt the commission of, any of the activities that are proscribed by California Penal Code Section 12020.

(E) Prostitution.

(1) Any vehicle used to solicit or to agree to engage in or to engage in an act of prostitution.

(2) Any vehicle used to attempt to procure another person for the purposes of prostitution.

(3) Any vehicle used to cause, induce, persuade or encourage, by promises, threats, violence, or by any device or scheme, another person to become a prostitute.

(F) Speed Contest. Any vehicle used in a speed contest.

(G) Theft. Any vehicle used to commit or attempt a theft.

(H) Fireworks. Any vehicle carrying or used to transport or store dangerous fireworks, or to transport or store any fireworks, including those classified as “safe and sane” by the State Fire Marshal, in a hazardous fire area. (Ord. 1265 § 1, 2005; Ord. U-1265 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.040 Title to vest in the City.
All rights, title and interest in any vehicle described in PMC 9.47.030 shall vest in the City upon commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.050 Seizure of vehicle.
(A) A Peace Officer may seize a vehicle subject to forfeiture under this chapter upon the issuance of an order by a court having jurisdiction of the vehicle. Seizure without court order may be made in any of the following circumstances:

(1) The seizure is incident to an arrest or search under a search warrant.

(2) There is probable cause to believe the vehicle was used in violation of this chapter.

(B) A Peace Officer seizing a vehicle under this chapter shall complete a receipt in accordance with Penal Code Section 1412 and deliver it to the person from whose possession the vehicle was seized.

(C) Within two business days of seizing the vehicle, the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department shall file a post-seizure statement of probable cause for review by a neutral magistrate. The reviewing magistrate shall limit review to the question of whether probable cause exists for the vehicle to be held under this chapter. If the reviewing magistrate finds that no probable cause exists for the vehicle to be held, the vehicle shall, within two business days of that finding, be made available to be released to the registered or legal owner as may be identified pursuant to the investigation required by subsection (D) of this section.

(D) Upon seizure of the vehicle, an immediate investigation shall be made by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department as to any potential claimant to a vehicle whose right, title, interest, or lien is of record in the Department of Motor Vehicles of this or any other state or appropriate federal agency. If the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department finds that any person, other than the registered owner, is the legal owner, and the ownership did not arise subsequent to the date and time of arrest or seizure of the vehicle or notification of the forfeiture proceedings, it shall, within four business days of the vehicle’s seizure, send a notice of seizure to the legal owner at his or her address appearing on the records of the Department of Motor Vehicles of this or any other state or any appropriate federal agency.

(E) The notice of seizure sent pursuant to the requirements of subsection (C) of this section shall set forth the time in which a claim of interest in the vehicle seized or subject to forfeiture is required to be filed.

(F) A vehicle seized pursuant to this section, where appropriate, may be held as evidence in any proceeding brought by the City Attorney or District Attorney. (Ord. 1265 § 2, 2005; Ord. U-1265 § 2, 2005; Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.060 Forfeiture and notice of intended forfeiture of vehicle.
(A) The City Attorney, or his designee attorney, may, pursuant to this section, order the forfeiture of vehicles seized under this chapter.

(B) If the City Attorney, or his designee attorney, determines that the factual circumstances warrant forfeiture of the vehicle described in PMC 9.47.030, he or she shall serve a notice of intended forfeiture upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle. The notice shall be served within 30 calendar days of the finding of probable cause by the neutral magistrate.

(C) The notice of intended forfeiture shall be served as follows:

(1) By personal delivery or certified mail, return receipt requested, upon any person who has an interest in the seized vehicle as determined pursuant to PMC 9.47.050(C).

(2) In the event that the person entitled to service refuses to accept certified return receipt mail or cannot be personally served, service may be made by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished by any one of the following methods:

(a) By leaving a copy during usual business hours at the recipient’s business with the person who is apparently in charge, and by thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient where the copy was left.

(b) By leaving a copy at the recipient’s dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household and thereafter mailing by first class mail a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left.

(c) If the person entitled to service resides out of state and will not accept certified return receipt mail, then service may be made by first class mail.

(d) If the person entitled to notice cannot be located, or service cannot be accomplished as set forth in this section, service may be made by publication in a Palmdale newspaper of general circulation. Service shall be deemed sufficient when it is accomplished pursuant to Government Code Section 6063.

(D) A notice of seizure and intended forfeiture shall include:

(1) A description of the vehicle, as well as the date and place of its seizure.

(2) The authority and reason for the seizure.

(3) The name, address and telephone number of the public agency providing the notice.

(4) The instructions and time limits for filing and serving a claim with the court pursuant to PMC 9.47.070. The notice shall contain a statement that, in order to receive a post-seizure hearing, a claimant shall request a hearing in person or in writing with the court within 10 calendar days of the date of the notice. (Ord. 1265 § 3, 2005; Ord. U-1265 § 3, 2005; Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.070 Claim opposing forfeiture and court proceedings.
(A) A person claiming an interest in the vehicle seized pursuant to PMC 9.47.050 must within 10 calendar days from the date of the notice of intended forfeiture or within 30 calendar days from the date of first publication of the notice of seizure, file with the Los Angeles County Superior Court: (North District) or the superior court of the County in which the property was seized if not in Los Angeles County, a claim opposing forfeiture, verified in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 446, stating his or her interest in the property, along with a filing fee as may be required by the court. The person filing the claim shall be responsible for filing an endorsed copy of the claim upon the City Attorney within 10 calendar days of the filing of the claim in court. If the seizure is incident to a first-time violation of this chapter, the claimant may post a bond with the City in an amount equal to the Kelly Blue Book suggested retail value, or equivalent valuation acceptable to the City, to retain against sale or disposal of the vehicle pending final adjudication of the forfeiture. Upon posting of the bond, the City shall release the vehicle to the registered or legal owner.

(B) If a verified claim is filed in accordance with this section, the forfeiture proceeding shall be set for a court hearing within 30 calendar days from the date the claim is filed.

(C) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to proceedings under this section unless otherwise inconsistent with the provisions or procedures set forth in this chapter. However, in proceedings under this section, there shall be no joinder of actions, coordination of actions, except for forfeiture proceedings, or cross-complaints, and the issues shall be limited strictly to those related to this chapter. Any trial pursuant to this chapter shall be before the court.

(D) With respect to vehicles described in PMC 9.47.030 for which forfeiture is sought and as to which forfeiture is contested, the City Attorney shall have the burden of proving by a preponderance of the evidence that the vehicle constituted a nuisance pursuant to this chapter.

(E) Upon proof that the vehicle was used in connection with any of the activities set forth in PMC 9.47.030, the court shall declare the vehicle a nuisance and order that it be forfeited, sold, and the proceeds distributed as set forth in PMC 9.47.080.

(F) If no claims are timely filed, the City Attorney shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the City. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the City Attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited property. The proceeds from the disposal of the vehicle declared forfeited by the City Attorney shall be distributed in accordance with PMC 9.47.080. The City Attorney ordering forfeiture pursuant to this section shall provide a copy of the declaration of forfeiture to any person who received notice of the forfeiture proceedings. (Ord. 1265 § 4, 2005; Ord. U-1265 § 4, 2005; Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.080 Disposal of vehicle and distribution of proceeds.
(A) In all cases where vehicles seized pursuant to this chapter are forfeited to the City, the vehicles shall be sold, or if cash is paid as settlement in lieu of forfeiture of the vehicle, the proceeds of sale or settlement shall be distributed and appropriated as follows:

(1) To pay costs associated with the towing, storage and release of any vehicle seized under this chapter.

(2) To pay costs associated with the sale of the vehicle.

(3) To the bona fide or innocent purchaser, conditional sales vendor, mortgagee or lien holder of the vehicle, if any, up to the amount of his or her interest in the property.

(B) The remaining funds shall be distributed as follows:

(1) To the City Attorney for all expenditures other than personnel costs, made or incurred by his or her office in connection with the enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, costs for equipment, investigation, supplies, litigation, as well as insurance and liability resulting from enforcement of this chapter and costs of publication of the notices set forth in PMC 9.47.060.

(2) To the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department for all expenditures other than personnel costs, made or incurred by the agency in connection with enforcement of this chapter.

(3) To the general fund.

(C) For budgeting purposes, funds obtained from enforcement of this chapter shall not be considered anticipated revenue into the general fund.

(D) If a vehicle that is forfeited pursuant to this chapter is not legally saleable due to modifications thereto prior to the seizure, the City Attorney may cause its destruction and any funds received by the City for its scrap value shall be applied in accordance with this section. (Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.090 Stolen vehicles.
A vehicle that has been reported stolen, prior to a seizure under this chapter, shall not be subject to forfeiture unless the identity of the registered owner cannot be reasonably ascertained or the registered owner fails to redeem the vehicle within 30 calendar days of the seizure. The registered owner of the vehicle may claim the vehicle upon payment of tow, storage and release charges, provided the vehicle is not subject to any holds for traffic or parking violations and the vehicle registration is current. (Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

9.47.100 Recovery of monetary loss.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude a person with an ownership or secured interest in the vehicle who suffers a monetary loss from the forfeiture of a vehicle under this chapter from recovering the amount of the actual monetary loss from a driver or responsible person. (Ord. 1247 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 9.50
FILMING POLICY
Sections:

9.50.010    Title.

9.50.020    Definitions.

9.50.030    Permits and exemptions.

9.50.040    Rules and regulations.

9.50.050    Applicants and issuance.

9.50.060    Permit fees.

9.50.070    Liability provisions.

9.50.080    Violation.

9.50.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “Palmdale film ordinance.” (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2007)

9.50.020 Definitions.
(A) “Charitable films” shall mean motion picture, television or still photography produced by a nonprofit organization, which qualifies under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code as a charitable organization. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes, or photos.

(B) “City” shall mean the City of Palmdale.

(C) “City-produced public access films” shall mean motion picture, television or still photography produced by or in association with the City of Palmdale. No person, directly or indirectly, shall receive a profit from the marketing and production of the film or from showing the films, tapes, or photos.

(D) “Family video” shall mean the filming or videotaping of motion pictures or taking of still photographs solely for private and/or family use.

(E) “Film Liaison” shall mean a City official designated by the City Manager to promote photography and film production within the City of Palmdale and to administer the provisions of this chapter.

(F) “Motion picture, television, still photography” shall mean and include all activity attendant to staging or shooting commercial motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or commercial use.

(G) “News media” shall mean the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers, stringers or camera operators.

(H) “Student films” shall mean motion picture, television or still photography produced to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational institution. The student filmmaker must supply proof that he/she is currently enrolled at an educational institution.

(I) “Studio” shall mean legally established, commercial, motion picture/television/still photography places of business where filming activities (motion or still photography) are regularly conducted inside the premises. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2007)

9.50.030 Permits and exemptions.
(A) Permit Required. No person shall use any public or private property, public right-of-way, facility or residence for the purpose of taking motion pictures or television pictures or still photography without first applying for and receiving a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(B) Exemptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

(1) News media.

(2) City-produced public access films.

(3) Family video.

(4) Studio Filming. Filming activities (motion or still photography) conducted in a studio. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2007)

9.50.040 Rules and regulations.
The Film Liaison is hereby authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations governing the form, time and location of any film activity set forth within the City. He/she shall also set forth the procedures for the issuance of permits. The rules, regulations, and procedures shall be based upon the following criteria:

(A) The health and safety of all persons;

(B) Avoidance of undue disruption of all persons within the affected area;

(C) The safety of property within the City; and

(D) Traffic congestion at particular locations within the City. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2007)

9.50.050 Applicants and issuance.
(A) Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make application on the appropriate form provided by the Film Liaison. The form must be signed and, except where otherwise provided, accompanied by all required fees, deposits, forms and insurance certificates required by this chapter before it will be processed.

(B) Issuing Authority. The Film Liaison shall be responsible for issuing permits under this chapter.

(C) Issuance. The Film Liaison shall issue, conditionally issue, or not issue a permit as provided for in this chapter after consideration of the application and such other information as may be otherwise obtained. The decision of issuance will be final unless appealed in writing within five working days of the decision by requesting a hearing of the City Manager and/or the City Manager’s designated appeal officer. The appeal shall be heard within five working days of receipt of the applicant’s written appeal.

(D) Upon the request of the applicant, the Film Liaison shall have the authority, upon a showing of good cause, to change the date for which the permit has been issued, provided established limitations are complied with in respect to time and location. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2007)

9.50.060 Permit fees.
(A) Each application shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount to be established by resolution of the City Council to reimburse the City for staff time required to evaluate the application and establish conditions of approval and to monitor the activity. The processing fee shall not apply to or affect:

(1) Charitable films; and

(2) Student films.

(B) Each application shall be accompanied by a daily property use fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council to compensate the City for the use of public property and its unavailability for ordinary and usual purposes resulting from the filming activity. The property use fee shall not apply to or affect:

(1) Charitable films;

(2) Student films; and

(3) Productions conducted wholly on private property, or the property under the jurisdiction of another agency, where no vehicles or equipment are parked or stored on City property or rights-of-way, where no traffic control measures are required and where the production activity will not in any respect interfere with the use and enjoyment of City property, public streets and neighboring property.

(C) Reimbursement for Personnel. The permittee shall reimburse the City for any personnel required for the purpose of assisting the motion picture, television or still photography production. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2007)

9.50.070 Liability provisions.
(A) Liability Insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance evidencing general liability insurance, in an amount not less than $1,000,000, will be required naming the City of Palmdale, including its agencies, officers, employees and agents, as an additional insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful deaths, and property damage and to indemnify the City for damage to City property arising out of the permittees’ or their agents’, employees’ or contractors’ activities. The certificate of insurance shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after 30 days’ written notice to the City.

(B) Vehicle Insurance. For all applicant’s vehicles that are operated in the public right-of-way under the permit, a certificate of insurance will be required for auto coverage with limits of no less than $1,000,000 and scheduled under any umbrella policy. At the request of the applicant, the City Attorney may waive the requirement to obtain insurance, and provide proof thereof, as to one, some or all of the vehicles operated under the permit. Certificates of insurance evidencing vehicle insurance are not required to be submitted with the initial permit application as provided for in PMC 9.50.050. However, a film permit shall not be valid until proof of insurance for all vehicles required to have insurance under this subsection is provided to the Film Liaison.

(C) Worker’s Compensation Insurance. An applicant shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker’s compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit.

(D) Additional Insurance. The City Attorney shall have the authority to require higher insurance limits or additional insurance if, in his or her opinion and discretion, the type of activity permitted is of such a nature as to warrant greater risk protection. Certificates of insurance evidencing additional insurance are not required to be submitted with the initial permit application as provided for in PMC 9.50.050. However, a film permit may be conditionally issued upon obtaining insurance, and providing proof thereof, as provided for in this subsection.

(E) Hold Harmless Agreement. An applicant shall execute an agreement to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and its agencies, officers, employees and agents, from any and all claims and liability of any kind whatsoever resulting from or arising out of the issuance of a film permit by the City.

(F) Security Deposit. To ensure cleanup and restoration of the site, an applicant may be required to post a security deposit in the form of a refundable security deposit or faithful performance bond (amount to be determined). Upon completion of filming and inspection of the site by the City, the security deposit or faithful performance bond may be returned to the applicant. The security deposit is not required to be submitted with the initial permit application as provided for in PMC 9.50.050. However, a film permit may be conditionally issued upon posting a security deposit as provided for in this subsection. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2007)

9.50.080 Violation.
(A) Suspension or Revocation of Permit. The Film Liaison shall have the authority, after notice and an opportunity for a hearing, to suspend or revoke any permit issued hereunder where the terms and conditions of said permit have been violated or ignored or where the public safety or welfare is endangered by the permitted activity; provided however, that whenever there is an imminent danger to the public health, safety or welfare from activities conducted by the permittee to the extent that immediate action is necessary to protect the public, as determined by the authority having jurisdiction, the Film Liaison shall have the authority to immediately suspend a permit pending a hearing.

(B) Violation of the terms of this chapter, or any permit issued thereto, shall constitute a misdemeanor and subject the offender to the penalties set forth in Chapter 1.12 PMC. (Ord. 1295 § 1, 2007)

Title 10
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapters:

10.04    Vehicles and Traffic Code

10.06    Parking Citation Processing

10.08    Electric Vehicle Parking and Charging

Chapter 10.04
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC CODE
Sections:

10.04.010    Los Angeles County Code Divisions 1 and 2 adopted as the Palmdale Vehicles and Traffic Code.

10.04.015    Authority to appoint nonsworn, civilian persons to assist in the regulation of traffic.

10.04.016    Authority to appoint nonsworn, trained civilian volunteer to enforce disabled parking violations.

10.04.020    Copies on file.

10.04.030    Amendments.

10.04.031    Section 15.08.130 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.

10.04.032    Section 15.08.040 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.

10.04.033    Section 15.08.070 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.

10.04.034    Section 15.64.010 of Chapter 15.64 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.

10.04.035    Section 15.64.200 of Chapter 15.64 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.

10.04.040    Chapter 15.101 added – Commercial vehicle parking restrictions in residential or agricultural zones.

10.04.050    Chapter 15.102 added – Prohibition of certain vehicles except on designated routes.

10.04.060    Chapter 15.103 added – Truck routes designated.

10.04.070    Chapter 15.104 added – Traffic and fire access lanes designated.

10.04.080    Chapter 15.105 added – Parking in traffic and fire access lanes.

10.04.090    Chapter 15.106 added – Transporting dogs in open vehicles.

10.04.100    Chapter 15.107 added – Regulation of speed bumps on private streets, easements and fire lanes.

10.04.110    Chapter 15.108 added – Speed limits designated.

10.04.120    Chapter 15.109 added – Regulation of vending and solicitation in public rights-of-way, on public property, and in privately owned off-street parking facilities.

10.04.130    Chapter 15.110 added – Enforcement of vehicle and traffic laws in designated mobile home parks.

10.04.140    Chapter 15.120 added – Enforcement of California Vehicle Code provisions on private roads and off-street parking facilities of the Antelope Valley Mall.

10.04.150    Chapter 15.130 added – Prohibiting the parking of recreational vehicles in residential districts for more than 72 hours.

10.04.160    Chapter 15.140 added – Electric vehicle parking.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 490, 520, 648, 758, 815 and 879.

10.04.010 Los Angeles County Code Divisions 1 and 2 adopted as the Palmdale Vehicles and Traffic Code.
Except as hereinafter provided, Divisions 1 and 2 of Title 15, “Vehicles and Traffic,” of the Los Angeles County Code, in effect on January l, 1998, and as amended up to and including Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 97-0039, is adopted by reference and shall constitute the vehicles and traffic code of the City. It may be cited as the “Palmdale vehicles and traffic code.” (Ord. 1129 § 1, 1998; Ord. U-1129 § 2, 1998; Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.015 Authority to appoint nonsworn, civilian persons to assist in the regulation of traffic.
The City Manager shall have the authority to appoint nonsworn, City employees or civilian volunteers pursuant to and in compliance with California Vehicle Code Section 21100(e) to regulate traffic whenever official traffic control devices are disabled or otherwise inoperable, at the scenes of accidents or disasters, or at such locations as may require traffic direction for orderly traffic flow. (Ord. 1130 § 2, 1998; Ord. U-1130 § 2, 1998)

10.04.016 Authority to appoint nonsworn, trained civilian volunteer to enforce disabled parking violations.
The City Manager shall have the authority to appoint nonsworn, trained volunteers to a special enforcement unit, pursuant to and in compliance with California Vehicle Code Section 22507.9 to enforce disabled parking violations under California Vehicle Code Sections 22507.8, 22511.7 and 22511.8. (Ord. 1153 § 1, 1999)

10.04.020 Copies on file.
Three copies of Division 1 and Division 2 of Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code shall be kept and maintained at all times in the office of the City Clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.030 Amendments.
The Palmdale vehicles and traffic code is amended by adding thereto the chapters set forth in PMC 10.04.031 through 10.04.150. (Ord. 1129 § 2, 1998; Ord. U-1129 § 3, 1998; Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.031 Section 15.08.130 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.
Section 15.08.130 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

Section 15.08.130 Pedestrian.

(a) A “pedestrian” is any person who is afoot or who is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle.

(b) “Pedestrian” shall include any person who is operating a self-propelled wheelchair, invalid tricycle, or motorized quadricycle and, by reason of physical disability, is otherwise unable to move about as a pedestrian, as specified in subdivision (a).

(Ord. 1129 § 3, 1998; Ord. U-1129 § 4, 1998)

10.04.032 Section 15.08.040 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.
Section 15.08.040 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code is amended to read as follows:

Section 15.08.040 Board.

“Board” shall mean the city council of the city of Palmdale.

(Ord. 1179 § 1, 2001)

10.04.033 Section 15.08.070 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.
Section 15.08.070 of Chapter 15.08 of Division 1 of Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code is amended to read as follows:

Section 15.08.070 Commissioner.

“Commissioner” shall mean the city of Palmdale traffic engineer.

(Ord. 1179 § 2, 2001)

10.04.034 Section 15.64.010 of Chapter 15.64 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.
Section 15.64.010 of Chapter 15.64 of Division 1 of Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code is amended to read as follows:

15.64.010 Signs limiting parking time authorized when.

Whenever the City Council finds by resolution that on any portion of the highway or of a private street or of any parking lot maintained or operated for the public by the City there is at any time lack of sufficient space to accommodate the operators of vehicles and that the time of parking should be limited so that everyone may have his fair turn, the City Council may direct the City Traffic Engineer to erect and maintain adequate signs along such portion of the highway, private street, or parking lot specifying the limitation on the time of parking. Such resolution of the City Council may be approved on the consent calendar portion of its agenda.

(Ord. 1179 § 3, 2001)

10.04.035 Section 15.64.200 of Chapter 15.64 of Division 1 of Title 15 Los Angeles County Code amended.
Section 15.64.200 of Chapter 15.64 of Division 1 of Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code is amended to read as follows:

15.64.200 Vehicles parked over 72 hours – Removal by Code Enforcement Officer or Sheriff.

A. The sheriff or any regularly employed and salaried city employee, who is engaged in directing traffic or enforcing parking laws and regulations shall remove to a safe place every vehicle which has been parked or left standing upon a highway for 72 or more consecutive hours.

B. As used in this section, the words “safe place” include, but are not confined to, any garage, parking lot or open space owned by, maintained by or under the jurisdiction of the county of Los Angeles or the city of Palmdale, and also every privately owned garage the owner or proprietor of which will accept such vehicle.

(Ord. 1293 § 1, 2006)

10.04.040 Chapter 15.101 added – Commercial vehicle parking restrictions in residential or agricultural zones.
Chapter 15.101 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.101

A person shall not park any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more on any highway or alley at anytime in any residential or agricultural zone as defined in Ordinance No. 140, entitled “The Zoning Ordinance.” It is not a violation of this chapter to park said vehicles in residential or agricultural zones when such vehicles are involved in:

A. Necessary loading and unloading;

B. Performing a service activity on the adjacent lot or parcel of land;

C. A lawful commercial use on the adjacent lot or parcel of land;

D. The construction of buildings or structures on the adjacent lot or parcel of land; or

E. The construction or maintenance of a street, alley, parkway or highway.

(Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.050 Chapter 15.102 added – Prohibition of certain vehicles except on designated routes.
Chapter 15.102 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.102

A. Except as provided in subparagraph B hereof, any commercial vehicle exceeding a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds is hereby prohibited from using any streets in the city other than those designated in Chapter 15.103 which have been marked by appropriate signs. All streets in the city not designated in Chapter 15.103 shall be restricted streets for the purpose of this Chapter 15.102.

B. Notwithstanding subparagraph A above, nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit any such commercial vehicle from entering upon a restricted street from an unrestricted street, by use of the shortest and most direct route, when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street, or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has previously been obtained.

(Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.060 Chapter 15.103 added – Truck routes designated.
Chapter 15.103 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.103

Commercial vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or more shall use the following streets or portions of streets within the city limits except as provided in Section 15.102.B:

A. 10th Street West from Avenue P to Avenue M.

B. Sierra Highway from the Antelope Valley Freeway to Avenue M.

C. 50th Street East from Palmdale Boulevard to Avenue M.

D. Avenue M from the Antelope Valley Freeway to 50th Street East.

E. Avenue P from 10th Street West to 50th Street East.

F. City Ranch Road, Tierra Subida, Rayburn Road, and Avenue R from the Palmdale Dump to Sierra Highway.

G. Avenue S from Antelope Valley Freeway to Sierra Highway.

H. Pearblossom Highway from Sierra Highway to Fort Tejon Road.

I. Avenue T from Fort Tejon Road to 90th Street East.

(Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.070 Chapter 15.104 added – Traffic and fire access lanes designated.
Chapter 15.104 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.104

The driveways, passageways and circulation routes within a public parking area, serving commercial or industrial uses as stipulated in Ordinance 140, the Zoning Ordinance of the city, whether publicly or privately owned, are designated as traffic and fire access lanes.

(Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.080 Chapter 15.105 added – Parking in traffic and fire access lanes.
Chapter 15.105 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.105

When appropriate signs are posted or painted thereon pursuant to California Vehicle Code, Section 22500.1, no person shall stand or park a vehicle within any traffic or fire access lane, and all provisions of the Vehicles and Traffic Code may be enforced with regard thereto.

(Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.090 Chapter 15.106 added – Transporting dogs in open vehicles.
Chapter 15.106 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.106

A. No person shall transport any dog in or on the back of any open truck or other open vehicle while traveling on any road, street, highway, lane or alley in the city.

B. Subparagraph A above shall not apply to any person who transports a dog in any open truck or other open vehicle which is partially enclosed by stakes, or other similar devices which rise at least two feet, nine inches above the tops of the sides and back of the vehicle and which are designed to prevent the dog from falling or escaping from the vehicle.

(Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.100 Chapter 15.107 added – Regulation of speed bumps on private streets, easements and fire lanes.
Chapter 15.107 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.107

A. Declaration of Policy. It is hereby declared to be the policy of the city to prohibit the installation of new speed bumps on private streets, easements or fire lanes, as such vehicle speed control devices may obstruct convenient and timely emergency vehicle access or otherwise jeopardize the public health, safety and general welfare.

B. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning herein specified:

1. “Existing Speed Bump” shall mean any speed bump or similar traffic control device now existing which limits or otherwise controls the flow or speed of vehicular traffic.

2. “Traffic Control Review Committee” or “Review Committee” shall mean a committee comprised of the following individuals or their designees: Fire Marshall, Sheriff, Director of Public Works and Director of Planning.

3. “Private Street” shall mean any street access way which is not dedicated for public use.

4. “Private Fire Lane” shall mean any street or access way which is reserved in recorded documents for fire protection access or reserved as a condition of occupancy of a structure or structures and which is not dedicated for public use.

5. “Private Easement” shall mean any easement or access way reserved for vehicular access and which is not dedicated for public use.

C. Existing Speed Bumps. Speed bumps on private streets, easements or fire lanes, existing as of the effective date of this chapter, may not be reconstructed, replaced or otherwise altered without the express written authorization of the Review Committee.

D. Removal of Existing Speed Bumps. Existing speed bumps which are determined by the Review Committee to obstruct convenient and timely emergency vehicle access or in any other manner to jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare may be declared a public nuisance and shall be removed within a period of time determined to be reasonable by the Review Committee.

E. Exceptions. The Review Committee may grant exceptions to provisions of this chapter when:

1. The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Review Committee that alternative means for limiting or controlling the flow or speed of vehicular traffic are unwarranted or infeasible; and

2. A speed bump design is proposed which, relative to height, width, composition, spacing, and such other information as may be requested, is determined by the Review Committee not to jeopardize the public health, safety and welfare.

F. Appeal to City Council. Determinations of the Review Committee shall be subject to appeal to the City Council.

(Ord. 953 § 1, 1991)

10.04.110 Chapter 15.108 added – Speed limits designated.
Chapter 15.108

A. As authorized by the California Vehicle Code (CVC), it is hereby determined upon the basis of engineering and traffic surveys that the maximum speeds (in miles per hour) on the following streets are as identified in subsection C. Speed limits established pursuant to this Chapter shall be effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon said street.

B. Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meaning here-in specified:

1. “Interim” – shall mean a time period from the signing of an engineering and traffic survey and the posting of appropriate signage to the legal statute as determined by the CVC or until this section is amended.

2. “New Street Segment” – shall mean any public road opened to the public, accepted for public maintenance, subsequent to adoption of the ordinance codified in this section.

3. “Substantially Modified” – shall mean any public road that has been modified to provide an additional lane or median, has changed in classification, or has been extended beyond its previous limits.

C.

STREET

SEGMENT AND DIRECTION

SPEED

 

From

To

 

 

 

 

 

Avenue M-8

70th St West

60th St West

50

Avenue M-8

60th St West

70th St West

50

Avenue M-8

60th St West

Sandalwood

50

Avenue N

60th St West

53rd St West

50

Avenue N

53rd St West

60th St West

50

Avenue N

53rd St West

45th St West

55

Avenue N-8

55th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd

45

Avenue N-8

Rancho Vista Blvd

55th St West

45

Avenue O

10th St West

Sierra Hwy

55

Avenue O

Sierra Hwy

10th St West

55

Avenue O-8

Rancho Vista Blvd

30th St West

50

Avenue O-8

30th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd

50

Avenue O-8

15th St West

10th St West

45

Avenue P

15th St East

City Limits (1000 ft. west of 30th St East)

60

Avenue P-4

Trade Center Dr

5th St West

40

Avenue P-4

5th St West

Trade Center Dr

40

Avenue P-8

Highland St/25th St W

20th St West

50

Avenue P-8

20th St West

Highland St/25th St W

50

Avenue P-8

20th St West

Amargosa Drive

50

Avenue P-8

Amargosa Drive

20th St West

50

Avenue P-12

Highland St/25th St W

Virginia St

35

Avenue P-12

Virginia St

Highland St/25th W

35

Avenue Q

Trade Center Dr

5th St West

45

Avenue Q

5th St West

Trade Center Dr

45

Avenue Q

5th St West

State Hwy 14

50

Avenue Q

State Hwy 14

5th St West

50

Avenue Q

State Hwy 14

3rd St East

45

Avenue Q

3rd St East

State Hwy 14

45

Avenue Q

3rd St East

6th St East

40

Avenue Q

6th St East

3rd St East

40

Avenue Q

Sierra Hwy

10th St East

40

Avenue Q

10th St East

15th St East

45

Avenue Q

15th St East

10th St East

45

Avenue Q

15th St East

20th St East

50

Avenue Q

20th St East

15th St East

50

Avenue Q

20th St East

25th St East

50

Avenue Q

25th St East

20th St East

50

Avenue Q

25th St East

30th St East

50

Avenue Q

30th St East

25th St East

50

Avenue Q

30th St East

35th St East

50

Avenue Q

35th St East

30th St East

50

Avenue Q

35th St East

40th St East

55

Avenue Q

40th St East

35th St East

55

Avenue Q-4

27th St East

30th St East

35

Avenue Q-4

30th St East

27th St East

35

Avenue Q-8

Tierra Subida

5th St West

45

Avenue Q-8

5th St West

Tierra Subida

45

Avenue Q-10

5th St West

Hillcrest Dr

40

Avenue Q-10

Hillcrest Dr

5th St West

40

Avenue Q-11

Sierra Hwy

9th St East

35

Avenue Q-11

9th St East

Sierra Hwy

35

Avenue R

Division St

5th St East

50

Avenue R

5th St East

Division St

50

Avenue R

5th St East

Sierra Hwy

45

Avenue R

Sierra Hwy

5th St East

45

Avenue R

Sierra Hwy

10th St East

45

Avenue R

10th St East

Sierra Hwy

45

Avenue R

10th St East

15th St East

45

Avenue R

15th St East

10th St East

45

Avenue R

15th St East

20th St East

50

Avenue R

20th St East

15th St East

50

Avenue R

20th St East

25th St East

50

Avenue R

25th St East

20th St East

50

Avenue R

25th St East

30th St East

50

Avenue R

30th St East

25th St East

50

Avenue R

30th St East

35th St East

50

Avenue R

35th St East

30th St East

50

Avenue R

35th St East

40th St East

55

Avenue R

40th St East

35th St East

55

Avenue R

40th St East

47th St East

55

Avenue R

47th St East

40th St East

55

Avenue R

47th St East

55th St East

55

Avenue R

55th St East

47th St East

55

Avenue R

55th St East

60th St East

55

Avenue R

60th St East

55th St East

55

Avenue R

60th St East

65th St East

50

Avenue R

65th St East

60th St East

50

Avenue R

65th St East

70th St East

55

Avenue R

70th St East

65th St East

55

Avenue R-8

Kimberly Ln

5th St East

45

Avenue R-8

5th St East

Kimberly Ln

45

Avenue R-8

12th St East

20th St East

50

Avenue R-8

20th St East

12th St East

50

Avenue R-8

20th St East

25th St East

50

Avenue R-8

25th St East

20th St East

50

Avenue R-8

27th St East

30th St East

35

Avenue R-8

30th St East

27th St East

35

Avenue R-8

30th St East

35th St East

45

Avenue R-8

35th St East

30th St East

45

Avenue R-8

35th St East

40th St East

50

Avenue R-8

40th St East

35th St East

50

Avenue R-8

40th St East

47th St East

50

Avenue R-8

47th St East

40th St East

50

Avenue R-8

47th St East

55th St East

50

Avenue R-8

55th St East

47th St East

50

Avenue R-8

55th St East

65th St East

50

Avenue R-8

65th St East

55th St East

50

Avenue R-12

30th St East

35th St East

45

Avenue R-12

35th St East

30th St East

45

Avenue S

Parkwood Dr

1,750 ft East of The Groves

55

Avenue S

1,750 ft East of The Groves

Parkwood Dr

55

Avenue S

Tovey Avenue

Tierra Subida Ave

60

Avenue S

Tierra Subida Ave

Tovey Avenue

60

Avenue S

Tierra Subida Ave

State Route 14

55

Avenue S

State Route 14

Tierra Subida Ave

55

Avenue S

State Route 14

5th St East

55

Avenue S

5th St East

State Route 14

55

Avenue S

5th St East

Sierra Hwy

55

Avenue S

Sierra Hwy

5th St East

55

Avenue S

Sierra Hwy

Casa Verde Dr

55

Avenue S

Casa Verde Dr

Sierra Hwy

55

Avenue S

Casa Verde Dr

25th St East

55

Avenue S

25th St East

Casa Verde Dr

55

Avenue S

25th St East

30th St East

50

Avenue S

30th St East

25th St East

50

Avenue S

30th St East

35th St East

50

Avenue S

35th St East

30th St East

50

Avenue S

35th St East

40th St East

50

Avenue S

40th St East

35th St East

50

Avenue S

40th St East

47th St East

55

Avenue S

47th St East

40th St East

55

Avenue S

47th St East

55th St East

55

Avenue S

55th St East

47th St East

55

Avenue S

55th St East

60th St East

50

Avenue S

60th St East

55th St East

50

Avenue S

60th St East

70th St East

55

Avenue S

70th St East

60th St East

55

Avenue S-8

37th St East

47th St East

45

Avenue S-8

47th St East

37th St East

45

Arnold Dr

25th St East

Sunny Ln

40

Arnold Dr

Sunny Ln

25th St East

40

Auto Center Dr

10th St West

5th St West

50

Auto Center Dr

5th St West

10th St West

50

Blackbird Wy

Lockheed Wy

15th St East

45

Blackbird Wy

15th St East

Lockheed Wy

45

Bolz Ranch Rd

Avenue N-8

Peonza Ln

45

Bolz Ranch Rd

Peonza Ln

Avenue N-8

45

Bolz Ranch Rd

Peonza Ln

Towncenter Dr

50

Bolz Ranch Rd

Towncenter Dr

Peonza Ln

50

Bulldog Ave/Ave P-8

Highland St/25th W

30th St West

45

Bulldog Ave/Ave P-8

30th St West

Highland St/25th W

45

Casa Verde

Avenue S

Via Verde

35

Casa Verde

Via Verde

Avenue S

35

Clock Tower Plaza Dr

Transportation Center Dr

Avenue Q

40

Clock Tower Plaza Dr

Avenue Q

Transportation Center Dr

40

Clock Tower Plaza Dr

Transportation Center Dr

Transportation Center Dr

25

Clock Tower Plaza Dr

3rd St East

Transportation Center Dr

45

Clock Tower Plaza Dr

Transportation Center Dr

3rd St East

45

Columbia Way (Avenue M)

75th St West

70th St West

50

Columbia Way (Avenue M)

70th St West

60th St West

55

Columbia Way (Avenue M)

State Hwy 14

Sierra Hwy

60

Columbia Way (Avenue M)

Sierra Hwy

10th Street East/Challenger Wy

65

Columbia Way (Avenue M)

10th Street East/Challenger Wy

50th St East

60

Columbia Way (Avenue M)

50th St East

10th Street East/Challenger Wy

60

Cricket Ln

Bolz Ranch Rd

Rancho Vista Blvd

40

Cricket Ln

Rancho Vista Blvd

Bolz Ranch Rd

40

Division St

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Avenue O

55

Division St

Avenue O

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

55

Division St

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R/Rayburn Rd

50

Division St

Avenue R/Rayburn Rd

Palmdale Blvd

50

Division St

Avenue R/Rayburn Rd

Kimberly Ln

45

Division St

Kimberly Ln

Avenue R/Rayburn Rd

45

Elizabeth Lake Rd

2500 ft West of Ranch Center Drive

2875 ft West of Highland/25th St W

65

Elizabeth Lake Rd

2875 ft West of Highland/25th St W

2500 ft West of Ranch Center Drive

65

Elizabeth Lake Rd

Highland St/25th St W

20th Street West

55

Elizabeth Lake Rd

20th St West

Highland St/25th St W

55

Elizabeth Lake Rd

20th St West

15th St West

55

Elizabeth Lake Rd

Foxholm Dr

20th St West

55

Elizabeth Lake Rd

Desert Flower

10th St West

50

Highland St/25th W

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Bulldog Ave/Avenue P-8

50

Highland St/25th W

Bulldog Ave/Avenue P-8

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

50

Highland St/25th W

Bulldog Ave/Avenue P-8

Elizabeth Lake Rd

50

Highland St/25th W

Elizabeth Lake Rd

Bulldog Ave/Avenue P-8

50

Hillcrest Dr

Avenue S

Essex Dr

40

Hillcrest Dr

Essex Dr

Avenue S

40

Lockheed Wy/8th St East

Blackbird Dr

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

50

Lockheed Wy/8th St East

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Blackbird Dr

50

Old Harold Road

Firethorn Ave

25th St East

45

Old Harold Road

25th St East

Firethorn Ave

45

Olive Dr

25th St East

30th St East

50

Olive Dr

30th St East

25th St East

50

Palmdale Blvd

10th St West/Tierra Subida

5th St West

50

Palmdale Blvd

5th St West

10th St West/Tierra Subida

50

Palmdale Blvd

5th St West

State Hwy 14

45

Palmdale Blvd

State Hwy 14

5th St West

45

Parkwood Drive

Bower Place

Avenue S

35

Parkwood Drive

Avenue S

Bower Place

35

Parkwood Drive

Avenue S

Magnolia Lane

35

Parkwood Drive

Magnolia Lane

Avenue S

35

Pearblossom Hwy

City Limits (Aqueduct)

43rd St East

60

Pearblossom Hwy

43rd St East

City Limits (Aqueduct)

60

Pearblossom Hwy

43rd St East

Ft Tejon Rd

60

Pearblossom Hwy

Ft Tejon Rd

43rd St East

60

Rancho Vista Blvd

Avenue N

Avenue N-8

55

Rancho Vista Blvd

Avenue N-8

Avenue N

55

Rancho Vista Blvd

Avenue N-8

Peonza Ln

55

Rancho Vista Blvd

Peonza Ln

Avenue N-8

55

Rancho Vista Blvd

Peonza Ln

Towncenter Dr

60

Rancho Vista Blvd

Towncenter Dr

Peonza Ln

60

Rancho Vista Blvd

Towncenter Dr

30th Street West

55

Rancho Vista Blvd

30th Street West

Towncenter Dr

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

30th Street West

20th Street West

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

20th Street West

30th Street West

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

20th Street West

15th Street West/Summerwind Drive

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

15th Street West/Summerwind Drive

20th Street West

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

15th Street West/Summerwind Drive

10th Street West

50

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

10th Street West

15th Street West/Summerwind Drive

50

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

10th Street West

Palmdale Promenade

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Palmdale Promenade

10th Street West

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Palmdale Promenade

Sierra Hwy

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Sierra Hwy

Palmdale Promenade

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Sierra Highway

8th Street East

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

8th Street East

Sierra Highway

55

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

8th Street East

15th Street East

65

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

15th Street East

8th Street East

65

Rayburn Road

Tierra Subida Ave

Division St

50

Rayburn Road

Division St

Tierra Subida Ave

50

Rockie Ln

Avenue R

Lisbon Ct

35

Rockie Ln

Lisbon Ct

Avenue R

35

Sierra Hwy

Avenue M

Avenue N

60

Sierra Hwy

Avenue N

Avenue M

60

Sierra Hwy

Avenue N

Avenue O

65

Sierra Hwy

Avenue O

Avenue N

65

Sierra Hwy

Avenue O

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

65

Sierra Hwy

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Avenue O

65

Sierra Hwy

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

6th St East

55

Sierra Hwy

6th St East

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

55

Sierra Hwy

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

55

Sierra Hwy

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

55

Sierra Hwy

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

50

Sierra Hwy

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

50

Sierra Hwy

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

55

Sierra Hwy

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

55

Sierra Hwy

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

55

Sierra Hwy

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

55

Sierra Hwy

3700 ft. so. Of Avenue S

Avenue S

55

Summerwind Dr

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Amargosa Drive

45

Summerwind Dr

Amargosa Drive

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

45

Technology Dr

10th St West

Division St

60

Technology Dr

Division St

10th St West

60

Technology Dr

Division St

Sierra Hwy

55

Technology Dr

Sierra Hwy

Division St

55

The Groves

Avenue S

Lemonwood Drive

40

The Groves

Lemonwood Drive

Avenue S

40

The Groves

Lemonwood Drive

Parkwood Drive

40

The Groves

Parkwood Drive

Lemonwood Drive

40

Tierra Subida Avenue

Palmdale Blvd

Rayburn Rd

55

Tierra Subida Avenue

Rayburn Rd

Palmdale Blvd

55

Tierra Subida Avenue

Rayburn Rd

Avenue S

55

Tierra Subida Avenue

Avenue S

Rayburn Rd

55

Towncenter Dr

Rancho Vista Blvd

30th St West

55

Towncenter Dr

30th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd

55

Trade Center Dr

Lowes Dr

Avenue P-4

35

Trade Center Dr

Avenue P-4

Lowes Dr

35

Trade Center Dr

Avenue P-4

Technology Dr

45

Trade Center Dr

Technology Dr

Avenue P-4

45

Trade Center Dr

Technology Dr

Auto Center Dr

45

Trade Center Dr

Auto Center Dr

Technology Dr

45

Trade Center Dr

Auto Center Dr

Palmdale Blvd

45

Trade Center Dr

Palmdale Blvd

Auto Center Dr

45

Transportation Center Dr

Technology Dr

Clock Tower Plaza Dr (Avenue P-12 Alignment)

35

Transportation Center Dr

Clock Tower Plaza Dr (Avenue P-12 Alignment)

Technology Dr

35

Transportation Center Dr

Clock Tower Plaza Dr (Avenue P-12 Alignment)

Clock Tower Plaza Dr (6th St East Alignment)

35

Transportation Center Dr

Clock Tower Plaza Dr (6th St East Alignment)

Clock Tower Plaza Dr (Avenue P-12 Alignment)

35

5th St West

Avenue P-4

Technology Dr

40

5th St West

Technology Dr

Avenue P-4

40

5th St West

Technology Dr

Auto Center Dr

45

5th St West

Auto Center Dr

Technology Dr

45

5th St West

Auto Center Dr

Avenue Q

45

5th St West

Avenue Q

Auto Center Dr

45

5th St West

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

45

5th St West

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

45

5th St West

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q-10

45

5th St West

Avenue Q-10

Palmdale Blvd

45

5th St West

Avenue Q-10

Tierra Subida

50

5th St West

Tierra Subida

Avenue Q-10

50

10th St West

Avenue M

Avenue N

55

10th St West

Avenue N

Avenue M

55

10th St West

Avenue N

Avenue O

60

10th St West

Avenue O

Avenue N

60

10th St West

Avenue O

Avenue O-8

50

10th St West

Avenue O-8

Avenue O

50

10th St West

Avenue O-8

State Hwy 14

50

10th St West

State Hwy 14

Avenue O-8

50

10th St West

State Hwy 14

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

45

10th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

State Hwy 14

45

10th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Technology Dr

45

10th St West

Technology Dr

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

45

10th St West

Technology Dr

Palmdale Blvd/Elizabeth Lake Road

50

10th St West

Palmdale Blvd/Elizabeth Lake Road

Technology Dr

50

15th St West

Avenue O-8

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

50

15th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Avenue O-8

50

15th St West

Date Palm Dr

Elizabeth Lake Rd

40

15th St West

Elizabeth Lake Rd

Date Palm Dr

40

20th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Avenue P-8

50

20th St West

Avenue P-8

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

50

30th St West

Avenue N-8

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

55

30th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Avenue O-12

55

30th St West

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Bulldog Ave/Avenue P-8

50

30th St West

Bulldog Ave/Avenue P-8

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

50

45th St West

Avenue N

Avenue N-8

55

55th St West

Avenue M-8

Avenue N

50

55th St West

Avenue N

Avenue M-8

50

60th St West

Avenue M

Avenue M-8

50

60th St West

Avenue M-8

Avenue N

50

60th St West

Avenue N

Avenue M-8

50

3rd St East

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Technology Dr

45

3rd St East

Technology Dr

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

45

3rd St East

Technology Dr

Avenue Q

45

3rd St East

Avenue Q

Technology Dr

45

5th St East

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

35

5th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

35

5th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

45

5th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

45

5th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

50

5th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

50

5th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

50

5th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

50

6th St East

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

40

6th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

40

6th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

45

6th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

45

6th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

30

6th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

30

8th St East

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Avenue P-8

55

8th St East

Avenue P-8

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

55

10th St East

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Avenue P-8

55

10th St East

Avenue P-8

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

55

10th St East

Avenue Q

Avenue P-8

50

10th St East

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

50

10th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

50

10th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

45

10th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

45

10th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-4

45

10th St East

Avenue R-4

Avenue R

45

10th St East

Avenue R-4

Avenue S

55

10th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-4

55

15th St East

Blackbird Drive

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

55

15th St East

Rancho Vista Blvd/Avenue P

Blackbird Drive

55

15th St East

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

45

15th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

45

15th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

45

15th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

45

20th St East

1,320 Feet North of Avenue Q

Avenue Q

50

20th St East

Avenue Q

1,320 Feet North of Avenue Q

50

20th St East

Avenue Q

Avenue Q-5

45

20th St East

Avenue Q-5

Avenue Q

45

20th St East

Avenue Q-5

Palmdale Blvd

40

20th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q-5

40

20th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

50

20th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

50

20th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

50

20th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

50

20th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

55

20th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

55

22nd St East

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

40

22nd St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

40

25th St East

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

50

25th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

50

25th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

50

25th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

50

25th St East

Avenue R

Avenue S

55

25th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R

55

25th St East

Avenue S

Spanish Broom Dr

50

25th St East

Spanish Broom Dr

Avenue S

50

25th St East

Spanish Broom Dr

Joshua Hills Dr

55

25th St East

Joshua Hills Dr

Spanish Broom Dr

55

25th St East

Joshua Hills Dr

Pearblossom Hwy

60

25th St East

Pearblossom Hwy

Joshua Hills Dr

60

30th St East

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

50

30th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

50

30th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

50

30th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

50

30th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

50

30th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

50

30th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

50

30th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

50

30th St East

Avenue S

Fairfield Ave

45

30th St East

Fairfield Ave

Avenue S

45

35th St East

Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

40

35th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue Q

40

35th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

50

35th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

50

35th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

50

35th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

50

35th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

45

35th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

45

35th St East

Avenue S

Southview Ct

50

35th St East

Southview Ct

Avenue S

50

40th St East

1,320 Feet North of Avenue Q

Palmdale Blvd

55

40th St East

Palmdale Blvd

1,320 Feet North of Avenue Q

55

40th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

50

40th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

50

40th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

50

40th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

50

40th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

45

40th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

45

40th St East

Avenue S

Avenue S-8

50

40th St East

Avenue S-8

Avenue S

50

40th St East

Avenue S-8

Pearblossom Hwy

50

40th St East

Pearblossom Hwy

Avenue S-8

50

40th St East

Pearblossom Hwy

City Limits (Aqueduct)

50

40th St East

City Limits (Aqueduct)

Pearblossom Hwy

50

47th St East

Fort Tejon Rd

Pearblossom Hwy

50

47th St East

Pearblossom Hwy

Fort Tejon Rd

50

55th St East

Avenue R

Avenue S

45

55th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R

45

60th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

55

60th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

55

60th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

45

60th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

45

60th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

45

60th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

45

65th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

50

65th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

50

65th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

50

65th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

50

70th St East

Palmdale Blvd

Avenue R

55

70th St East

Avenue R

Palmdale Blvd

55

70th St East

Avenue R

Avenue R-8

55

70th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue R

55

70th St East

Avenue R-8

Avenue S

45

70th St East

Avenue S

Avenue R-8

45

D. The Traffic/Transportation Engineer may establish, based on an engineering and traffic survey, interim maximum speed limits for new or substantially modified street segments.

(Ord. 1461 § 1, 2014; Ord. 1294 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1220 § 1, 2003; Ord. 1189 § 1, 2002; Ord. 1084 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1055 § 1, 1994)

10.04.120 Chapter 15.109 added – Regulation of vending and solicitation in public rights-of-way, on public property, and in privately owned off-street parking facilities.
Chapter 15.109 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.109

A. Definition. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:

1. “Business” means to provide, or offer to provide, any type of merchandise, or to perform or offer to perform, any type of service, in exchange for money, labor, goods, or any other form of consideration which will be received for other than a charitable purpose.

2. “Commercial vehicle” has the same meaning as defined in Section 260(a) of the California Vehicle Code.

3. “Employment” means any services, industry or labor performed, or offered to be performed, by a person in consideration for wages or other compensation, or under any contract of hire, whether written or oral, express or implied.

4. “Public right-of-way” means, without limitation, public streets, highways, sidewalks, and driveways.

5. “Solicit,” or any of its derivatives, means any request, offer, enticement, or other action which announces or informs of the availability for employment, the presence of merchandise for sale or purchase, or which constitutes an appeal for a contribution of money or other property. A solicitation is deemed complete when made, regardless of whether an employment relationship is created, a business transaction is consummated, or a contribution of money or other property is made or received.

6. “Vending” means peddling, selling, hawking, or delivering, or soliciting for sale, whether at retail or wholesale, any merchandise, including but not limited to food or beverages for human consumption, from a pack, basket or commercial vehicle.

B. Prohibition of Vending and Solicitation in the Public Right-of-Way.

1. It is unlawful for any person to stand in any portion of the public right-of-way while vending, or attempting to vend, any merchandise to any person traveling in a motor vehicle located on or within a public right-of-way, or while soliciting, or attempting to solicit, any employment, business transaction, or contributions of money or other property from any person traveling in a motor vehicle located on or within a public right-of-way.

2. It is unlawful for any person, while the occupant of any motor vehicle, to engage in vending, or to solicit or attempt to solicit any employment, business transaction, or contribution of money or other property

from a person who is on or within a public right-of-way.

C. Vending from Commercial Vehicles in Residential Zones – Restrictions.

Unless otherwise prohibited by Chapter 15.101 or 15.102, the driver of any commercial vehicle engaged in vending upon a street may vend products on a street in a residential zone only after bringing the commercial vehicle to a complete stop and parking it in a lawful manner, adjacent to the curb, and not less than fifty (50) feet from any intersection of two or more streets.

D. Vending from Commercial Vehicles in All Zones of the City – Time Limitations.

It is unlawful for any person engaged in the business of selling or distributing any food, beverages, goods, wares, or merchandise from a commercial vehicle to allow the commercial vehicle to remain at any one location on a public street for a period of time exceeding thirty (30) minutes and, regardless of the length of time that vending occurred at that location, to vend again within five hundred (500) feet of that location within a period of four (4) hours.

E. Prohibition of Solicitation in Unauthorized Locations within Privately-Owned Offstreet Parking Facilities.

1. It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit employment, business, or contributions of money or other property from any location within a privately-owned offstreet parking facility, other than a location within or served by that parking facility which is authorized for such solicitations by the property owner or the property owner’s designated representative. This prohibition does not apply to a solicitation of the owner or lawful tenants of any adjacent building or structure for employment or for a business transaction.

2. The term “privately-owned offstreet parking facility” means privately-owned property in a commercial or industrial zone which is generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking and where no fee is charged for the privilege to park.

3. The prohibitions contained in subsection 1 apply only to privately-owned offstreet parking facilities where the following occur:

a. The owner or operator of the offstreet parking facility establishes a written policy which designates a specific area for the lawful solicitation of employment, business, or contributions of money or other property, which area is in a location accessible to the public and does not interfere with the normal business operations within any adjacent commercial or industrial buildings or structures; and

b. A copy of that written policy is submitted to the City Manager to be maintained in City files; and

c. The owner or operator of the offstreet parking facility has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to

that offstreet parking facility a notice, not less than eighteen (18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches in size, with lettering not less than one (1) inch in height, which notice is in substantially the following form:

“It is a misdemeanor to engage in the solicitation of employment, business, or contributions of money or other property in any area of this parking facility which is not approved for that activity by the owner.”

(Ord. 1045 § 2, 1995)

10.04.130 Chapter 15.110 added – Enforcement of vehicle and traffic laws in designated mobile home parks.
Chapter 15.110 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.110

A. Designated Parks. For purposes of this Chapter, the term “Designated Parks” shall mean the following mobilehome parks:

1. The mobilehome park located at 40701 Rancho Vista Boulevard, in the general vicinity of Rancho Vista Boulevard and Avenue N-8, commonly known as “Boulders l” or “Boulders at the Ranch I.”

2. The mobilehome park located at 5200 Entrar Drive, in the general vicinity of Entrar Drive and Avenue N-8, commonly known as “Boulders II” or “Boulders at the Ranch II.”

3. The mobilehome park located at 1030 East Avenue S, in the general vicinity of Avenue S and 10th Street East, commonly known as “Boulders at the Lake.”

4. The mobilehome park located at 3524 East Avenue R, in the general vicinity of the southeast corner of the intersection of Avenue R and 35th Street East, commonly known as “Sagetree Village.”

5. The mobilehome park located at 3255 East Avenue R, in the general vicinity of the northwest corner of the intersection of R and 35th Street East, commonly known as Mountain View Estates.

6. The mobilehome park located at 38015 65th Street East, in the general vicinity of Avenue R and 65th Street East, commonly known as Palmdale Mobilehome Park.

Any change in the name by which a mobilehome park is commonly known subsequent to the adoption of this chapter shall not be deemed to invalidate nor impede enforcement of this chapter.

B. The provisions of the California Vehicle Code shall apply to the roads within the mobilehome parks enumerated in paragraph A, above, and may be enforced; and as authorized by Chapter 9 of Division 11 of the California Vehicle Code, Section 22500 et seq., local City of Palmdale ordinances prohibiting, restricting or regulating the parking, stopping or standing of vehicles as set forth in Divisions 1 and 2 of Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code, as adopted and amended as the Palmdale Vehicles and Traffic Code by Palmdale Municipal Code Section 10.04.010, shall apply to the roads and may be enforced as well. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the roads shall remain privately owned and maintained, and the City of Palmdale assumes no obligation to maintain them, nor to provide patrol or traffic enforcement services for the enforcement of the California Vehicle Code or Palmdale Vehicles and Traffic Code. The Los Angeles Sheriffs Department shall be authorized to enforce the California Vehicle Code and the Palmdale Vehicles and Traffic Code on those roads. City of Palmdale Traffic Enforcement Officers shall be authorized to enforce the Palmdale Vehicle and Traffic code and those provisions of the California Vehicle Code related to the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles.

C. Speed Limit. The prima facie speed limit on any road within a Designated Park shall be 15 miles per hour.

D. Posting of Signs Required. This chapter shall not apply to a mobilehome park which does not have posted at the time of citation the following signs:

1. Signs approved by the Director of Planning at the entrances to the mobilehome park of the size, shape, and color as to be readily legible during the daylight hours from a distance of 100 feet, stating that the roads within the park or community are subject to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code and the Palmdale Vehicles and Traffic Code; and

2. Traffic signs, marking, and devices upon the private roads within the Designated Park that conform to the uniform standards and specifications adopted by the California Department of Transportation pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21400, including but not limited to speed limit signs.

(Ord. 1281 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1244 § 2, 2004)

10.04.140 Chapter 15.120 added – Enforcement of California Vehicle Code provisions on private roads and off-street parking facilities of the Antelope Valley Mall.
Chapter 15.120 is added to read as follows:

15.120.010 Enforcement of the California Vehicle Code to the Private Roadways Serving the Antelope Valley Mall.

A. Findings and Intent. Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21107.6, the City Council finds and declares as follows:

1. There are privately owned and maintained roadways (“Roadways”) serving the Antelope Valley Mall which are generally held open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel to serve its commercial establishments. These Roadways are bounded generally to the north by West Avenue O-8, thence to the northeast by the Antelope Valley Freeway, State Route 14, thence to Tenth Street West on the east, thence to Rancho Vista Boulevard (Avenue P) on the south, thence to Fifteenth Street West on the west. These Roadways are further identified as Mall Ring Road, and the Antelope Valley Mall Driveways intersecting the aforementioned public streets, excluding State Route 14, and including Antelope Valley Mall Driveway West and Antelope Valley Mall Driveway East intersecting Rancho Vista Boulevard (Avenue P).

2. It is the intent of the City Council that the provisions of the California Vehicle Code shall apply to the Roadways and that said code may be enforced thereon. In so doing, the Roadways remain privately owned and maintained, and the City of Palmdale assumes no obligation to maintain them, nor to provide patrol or traffic enforcement services for the enforcement of the California Vehicle Code thereon.

3. Prior to adopting this ordinance, the City Council held a public hearing upon ten (10) days prior notice to the owners of the Roadways and of the land on which the Antelope Valley Mall is located.

B. Prohibition of Violating the California Vehicle Code on Antelope Valley Mall Roadways. The provisions of the California Vehicle Code shall apply to the Roadways serving the Antelope Valley Mall identified in paragraph 1 of subdivision A of this section. It shall be a violation of the California Vehicle Code to violate any provisions on any Roadway serving the Antelope Valley Mall.

C. Defense to Prosecution under this Section. Notwithstanding subdivision B of this section, the ordinance codified in this section shall not apply to any Roadway on which the owner or operator has caused to be erected a notice of such size, shape, and color as to be readily legible during daylight hours from a distance of 100 feet, to the effect that the Roadway is privately owned and maintained and that it is not subject to public traffic regulations or control. It shall be a defense to any prosecution under subdivision B of this section that a Roadway has been so posted.

D. No Obligation to Maintain or Enforce. The Antelope Valley Mall Roadways remain privately owned and maintained. The City of Palmdale assumes no obligation to maintain them, nor to provide patrol or traffic enforcement services for the enforcement of the California Vehicle Code thereon.

15.120.020 Enforcement of Certain Provisions of the California Vehicle Code to Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots.

A. Findings and Intent. Pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21107.8, the City Council finds and declares as follows:

1. There are privately owned and maintained offstreet parking facilities serving the Antelope Valley Mall (“Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots”) that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular parking. The Antelope Valley Mall is bounded generally to the north by West Avenue O-8, thence to the northeast by the Antelope Valley Freeway, State Route 14, thence to Tenth Street West on the east, thence to Rancho Vista Boulevard (Avenue P) on the south, thence to Fifteenth Street West on the west.

2. It is the intent of the City Council that Sections 22350, 23103, and 23109 and the provisions of Division 16.5 (commencing with Section 38000) of the California Vehicle Code shall not apply to the Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots unless its owner or operator has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to the Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots a notice not less than 17 by 22 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height to the effect that the Antelope Valley Mall is subject to public traffic regulations and control. In adopting the ordinance codified in this section, the Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots remain privately owned and maintained and the City of Palmdale assumes no obligation to maintain them, nor to provide patrol or traffic enforcement for the enforcement of the California Vehicle Code thereon.

3. Prior to adopting the ordinance codified in this section, the City Council held a public hearing upon ten (10) days’ prior written notice to the owners of the land on which the Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots are located and to the operator of the Antelope Valley Mall.

B. Prohibition Against Violating Certain Provisions of the California Vehicle Code in Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots. Sections 22350, 23103, and 23109 and the provisions of Division 16.5 (commencing with Section 38000) of the California Vehicle Code shall apply to the Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots identified in paragraph 1 of subdivision A of this section. It shall be a violation of those provisions to violate them in any Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lot. This section shall not apply to an Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lot unless the owner or operator has caused to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to that parking lot a notice not less than 17 inches by 22 inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, to the effect that the parking lot is subject to traffic regulations and control.

C. No Obligation to Maintain or Enforce. The Antelope Valley Mall Parking Lots remain privately owned and maintained. The City of Palmdale assumes no obligation to maintain them, nor to provide patrol or traffic enforcement services for the enforcement of the California Vehicle Code thereon.

(Ord. 1245 § 2, 2004)

10.04.150 Chapter 15.130 added – Prohibiting the parking of recreational vehicles in residential districts for more than 72 hours.
Chapter 15.130 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.130

A. No person shall park or leave standing within any residential zone any recreational vehicle, trailer, boat, or camper for a period of 72 or more consecutive hours upon any highway, street, alley, or publicly owned property.

B. For the purpose of this chapter, a recreational vehicle, trailer, boat, or camper shall be deemed to have been left standing when it has not been moved more than 1 block or 300 feet, whichever is greater, from its original stopped position. When parked or left standing on a highway, street, or alley, distance in feet shall be measured from the either lot line or boundary of the lot abutting its original stopped position.

(Ord. 1282 § 1, 2006)

10.04.160 Chapter 15.140 added – Electric vehicle parking.
Chapter 15.140 is added to read as follows:

Chapter 15.140 Electric Vehicle Parking

15.140.010 Definitions: For the purposes of this chapter:

A. “Charging” means the time during which the Electric Car is connected to the Electric Vehicle Charging Station and electrical power is being transferred for the purpose of recharging the Electric Vehicle’s onboard batteries.

B. “Electric Vehicle” shall mean a vehicle powered entirely by electricity stored in an onboard battery or a hybrid electric vehicle that is primarily powered by electricity stored in an onboard battery. Electric Vehicle does not include hybrid vehicles that are primarily powered by gasoline or those vehicles incapable of having their onboard batteries charged at an Electric Vehicle Charging Station.

C. “Electric Vehicle Charging Station” shall mean a parking space or stall equipped with a charger designed to transfer electricity to an Electric Vehicle’s onboard battery.

15.140.020 Electric Vehicle Parking Regulations. No person shall park or cause to be parked or allow to remain standing any vehicle at an Electric Vehicle Charging Station located on any street or in any parking facility, unless the vehicle is an Electric Vehicle, is Charging, and has not exceeded any applicable parking time limit posted at the Electric Vehicle Charging Station.

(Ord. 1476 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 10.06
PARKING CITATION PROCESSING
Sections:

10.06.010    Title.

10.06.020    Definitions.

10.06.030    Authority to contract with outside agencies.

10.06.040    Authority to conduct administrative review process – Hearing Officer – Procedures.

10.06.050    Process by which parking citations must be issued.

10.06.060    Parking penalties.

10.06.070    Parking penalties received by date fixed – No contest – Request to contest.

10.06.080    Parking penalties not received by date fixed.

10.06.090    Notice of delinquent parking violation – Contents.

10.06.100    Copy of citation upon request by registered owner.

10.06.110    Affidavit of nonliability – Leased or rented vehicle.

10.06.120    Affidavit of nonliability – Sale.

10.06.130    Contesting parking citation – Procedure.

10.06.140    Collection of unpaid parking penalties.

10.06.150    Obligation of processing agency once parking penalty paid.

10.06.160    Deposit of parking penalties with the City.

10.06.170    Filing of annual reports.

10.06.010 Title.
This chapter shall be known as the “parking citation processing ordinance” of the City. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.020 Definitions.
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions provided in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.

“Administrative policy” means a policy which establishes procedures for the implementation of this chapter and is approved by the City Manager.

“City” shall at all times refer to the City of Palmdale.

“Contestant” means any “operator” or “registered owner,” as defined in this section, who contests a parking citation.

“Department” means the Department of Motor Vehicles.

“Hearing Examiner” means any individual selected by the issuing agency’s governing body or chief executive officer to adjudicate parking citation contests.

“Issuing agency” means the City or its authorized agent that issues parking citations or any other agency authorized by law to issue parking citations.

“Issuing officer” means any officer who is authorized by law to issue parking citations.

“Operator” means any individual driving or in possession of a vehicle at the time a citation is issued or the registered owner of the vehicle.

“Parking citation” means a notice that is personally given or mailed to the operator, or attached to the operator’s vehicle, informing the operator of a parking, equipment or other vehicle violation and the operator’s obligation to pay the parking penalty for the violation or to contest the citation.

“Parking penalty” includes, but is not limited to, the parking penalty for the particular violation, as well as late payment penalties, administrative fees, assessments, costs of collection as provided by law, and other related fees.

“Processing agency” means the City or an authorized agent of the City that processes parking citations and issues notices of delinquent parking violations on behalf of the City.

“Registered owner” means the individual or entity whose name is recorded with the Department of Motor Vehicles as having ownership of a particular vehicle.

“Vehicle” means any self-propelled vehicle operated or suitable for operation on a highway.

“Violation” means any parking, equipment or other vehicle violation as established pursuant to state law or local ordinance.

“Working day” means any business day during which the administrative office of the processing agency is open to the general public for business. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.030 Authority to contract with outside agencies.
(A) The City may issue and process parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations, or it may enter into a contract with a private parking citation processing agency or with another city, county or other public issuing or processing agency so to do.

(B) Any contract entered into pursuant to this section shall provide for monthly distribution of amounts collected between the parties, except amounts payable to the County pursuant to Chapter 12 (commencing with Section 76000) of Title 8 of the California Government Code, or any successor statutes thereto, and amounts payable to the Department pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 4763, or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.040 Authority to conduct administrative review process – Hearing Officer – Procedures.
The processing agency may review appeals or other objections to a parking citation pursuant to the procedures set forth in this section.

(A) For a period of 21 days from the issuance of a parking citation, or 10 days from the mailing of a notice of delinquent parking citation, an operator may request an initial review by the processing agency. The request for an initial review may be made in writing, by telephone or in person.

(B) The initial review by the processing agency shall consist of those procedures outlined in PMC 10.06.130(A)(1).

(C) If the operator is dissatisfied with the results of the initial review, the operator may contest the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation through an administrative hearing review process as outlined in PMC 10.06.130(B)(1).

(1) In order to contest the parking citation, the operator must deposit with the processing agency the full amount of the parking penalty on or before the fifteenth day following the mailing to that operator of the results of the processing agency’s initial review. At the same time the operator must provide a written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation on a form provided by the processing agency. If the operator is unable to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty, the operator must provide verifiable and substantial proof of an inability to deposit the parking penalty. Upon presentation of such proof, the processing agency shall proceed with the contest procedure despite the operator’s failure to deposit the full amount of the parking penalty. If it is ultimately determined that the operator is not liable for the parking violation, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded.

(2) The contestant may contest the parking citation either by written declaration, on forms provided by the processing agency, or by personal appearance before a Hearing Examiner.

(D) Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, if the vehicle has been immobilized or impounded for unpaid parking citations, the processing agency shall permit the registered owner of the vehicle to contest the parking citations upon which the seizure was based, without requiring a deposit of the parking penalty; provided, that the vehicle remains under the control of the immobilizing or impounding agency.

(E) The processing agency shall provide, through the administrative policy, procedures for contesting parking citations and notices of delinquent parking violations. The administrative policy shall be approved by the City Manager, notice of its approval shall be posted or published, and a copy thereof shall be available to the public in the office of the City Clerk. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.050 Process by which parking citations must be issued.
Parking citations shall be issued in accordance with the following procedures:

(A) If a vehicle is unattended at the time that the parking citation is issued for a parking violation, the issuing officer shall securely attach to the vehicle the parking citation setting forth the violation, including reference to the section of the California Vehicle Code, the City’s Municipal Code, or other parking regulation violated; the approximate time of the violation; the location of the violation, and the date by which the operator is to deposit the parking penalty or contest the parking citation pursuant to PMC 10.06.130. The citation shall state the amount of the parking penalty and the address of the agent authorized to receive deposit of the parking penalty.

The parking citation shall also set forth the vehicle license number and registration expiration date, if such date is visible; the last four digits of the vehicle identification number, if that number is visible through the windshield; the color of the vehicle; and, if possible, the make of the vehicle.

(B) The parking citation, or copy thereof, shall be considered a record kept in the ordinary course of business of the issuing agency and the processing agency, and shall be prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein.

(C) Once the parking citation is prepared and attached to the vehicle pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, the issuing officer shall file notice of the parking violation with the processing agency.

(D) If, during issuance of the parking citation, without regard to whether the vehicle was initially attended or unattended, the vehicle is driver away prior to attaching the parking citation to the vehicle, the issuing officer shall file the notice with the processing agency. The processing agency shall mail, within 15 days of issuance of the parking citation, a copy of the parking citation to the registered owner.

(E) If, after a copy of the parking citation is attached to the vehicle or personally given to the operator, the issuing agency or the issuing officer determines that the issuing officer was in error in issuing the parking citation, the issuing officer or the issuing agency may recommend, in writing, that the parking citation be canceled. The recommendation shall state the reason or reasons for cancellation and shall be filed with the processing agency.

Under no circumstances shall a personal relationship with any public official, officer, issuing officer or law enforcement agency be grounds for cancellation.

(F) If a processing agency makes a finding that there are grounds for cancellation as set forth in the administrative policy, or pursuant to any other basis provided by law, then the finding or findings shall be filed with the processing agency, and the parking citation shall be canceled pursuant to PMC 10.06.130(A)(1). (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.060 Parking penalties.
(A) Parking penalties shall be established by ordinance or resolution of the City Council.

(B) All parking penalties received by the processing agency shall accrue to the benefit of the City. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.070 Parking penalties received by date fixed – No contest – Request to contest.
(A) If the payment of the parking penalty is received by the processing agency and there is no contest by the date fixed on the parking citation, all proceedings as to that parking citation shall terminate.

(B) If the operator contests the parking citation, the processing agency shall proceed in accordance with PMC 10.06.130. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.080 Parking penalties not received by date fixed.
(A) If payment of the parking penalty is not received by the processing agency by the date fixed on the parking citation, the processing agency shall deliver to the registered owner a notice of delinquent parking violation pursuant to PMC 10.06.090.

(B) Delivery of a notice of delinquent parking violation may be made by personal service or by first class mail addressed to the registered owner of the vehicle as shown on the records of the Department. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.090 Notice of delinquent parking violation – Contents.
(A) A notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain the information required to be included in a parking citation pursuant to PMC 10.06.050. The notice of delinquent parking violation shall also contain a notice to the registered owner that, unless the registered owner pays the parking penalty or contests the citation within 10 days after mailing the notice of delinquent parking violation or completes and files an affidavit of nonliability that complies with PMC 10.06.110 or 10.06.120, the vehicle registration will not be renewed until the parking penalties have been paid. In addition, the notice of delinquent parking violation shall contain, or be accompanied by, an affidavit of nonliability and information of what constitutes nonliability, information as to the effect of executing an affidavit, and instructions for returning the affidavit to the issuing agency.

(B) If the parking penalty is paid within 10 days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation, no late penalty or similar fee shall be charged to the operator. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.100 Copy of citation upon request by registered owner.
(A) Within 15 days of request, made by mail or in person, the processing agency shall mail or otherwise provide to the registered owner, or the registered owner’s agent, who has received a notice of delinquent parking violation, a copy of the original parking citation. The issuing agency may charge a fee sufficient to cover the actual cost of copying and/or locating the original parking citation, not to exceed $2.00. Until the issuing or processing agency complies with a request to provide a copy of the parking citation, the processing agency may not proceed to immobilize the vehicle in question merely because the registered owner has received five or more outstanding parking violations over a period of five or more days.

(B) If the description of the vehicle on the parking citation does not substantially match the corresponding information on the registration card for that vehicle, the processing agency shall, on written request of the operator, cancel the notice of parking violation. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.110 Affidavit of nonliability – Leased or rented vehicle.
A registered owner shall be released from liability for a parking citation if the registered owner files with the processing agency an affidavit of nonliability in a form satisfactory to the processing agency and such form is returned within 30 days after the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation together with proof of a written lease or rental agreement between a bona fide rental or leasing company and its customer which identifies the renter or lessee and provides the operator’s driver’s license number, name and address. The processing agency shall serve or mail to the renter or lessee identified in the affidavit of nonliability a notice of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall inform the renter or lessee that he or she must pay the full amount of the parking penalty or provide notice to the processing agency that he or she intends to contest the parking citation pursuant to PMC 10.06.130 within 15 days of the mailing of the notice of delinquent parking violation. If the processing agency does not receive payment of the contest within those 15 days, the processing agency may proceed against the renter or lessee pursuant to PMC 10.06.140. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.120 Affidavit of nonliability – Sale.
(A) The registered owner of a vehicle shall be released from liability for a parking citation issued with respect to that vehicle if the registered owner served with a notice of delinquent parking violation files with the processing agency, within 30 days of receipt of the notice of delinquent parking violation, an affidavit of nonliability together with proof that the registered owner served with a notice of delinquent parking violation has made a bona fide sale or transfer of the vehicle and has delivered possession thereof to the purchaser prior to the date of the alleged violation. The processing agency shall obtain verification from the Department that the former owner has complied with the requirements necessary to release the former owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5602 of any successor statute thereto.

(B) If the registered owner has complied with California Vehicle Code Section 5602, or any successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall cancel the notice of delinquent parking violation with respect to the registered owner.

(C) If the registered owner has not complied with the requirements necessary to release the owner from liability pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5602, or any successor statute thereto, the processing agency shall inform the registered owner that the citation must be paid in full or contested pursuant to PMC 10.06.130. If the registered owner does not comply, the processing agency shall proceed pursuant to PMC 10.06.140. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.130 Contesting parking citation – Procedure.
(A) If an operator or registered owner contests a parking citation or a notice of delinquent parking violation, the processing agency shall do all of the following:

(1) First, either investigate with its own records and staff or request that the issuing agency investigate the circumstances of the citation with respect to the contestant’s written explanation of the reason or reasons for contesting the parking citation.

If, based on the results of that investigation, the processing agency is satisfied that the violation did not occur or that the registered owner was not responsible for the violation by virtue of having sold, rented or leased the vehicle, or because legally supportable or mitigating circumstances as set forth in the administrative policy warrant a dismissal, the processing agency shall cancel the parking citation, and make an adequate record of the reason or reasons for canceling the parking citation. The processing agency shall mail the results of the investigation by first class mail to the contestant within 10 days of the decision.

(2) If the contestant is not satisfied with the results of the investigation provided for in subsection (A)(1) of this section, the contestant may, within 15 days of the mailing of the results of the initial investigation, deposit the amount of the parking penalty and other related fees or provide proof of inability to deposit the parking penalty, and request an administrative review.

(3) If the contestant prevails at the administrative hearing, then the full amount of the parking penalty deposited shall be refunded.

(B) The administrative review procedure shall consist of the following:

(1) The contestant shall make a written request for administrative review on a form and in a manner satisfactory to the processing agency and may request to contest the parking citation either in person or by written declaration.

(2) If the contestant is a minor, that person shall be permitted to appear at a hearing or admit responsibility for a parking citation without the necessity of the appointment of a guardian. The processing agency may proceed against the minor in the same manner as if the minor were an adult.

(3) The administrative review shall be conducted before a Hearing Examiner.

(C) The issuing officer shall not be required to participate in an administrative review. The issuing agency shall not be required to produce any evidence other than the parking citation or copy thereof, and information received from the Department identifying the registered owner of the vehicle.

This documentation in proper form shall be considered prima facie evidence of the violation.

(D) The processing agency’s final decision shall be in writing and delivered personally to the contestant or the contestant’s agent, or delivered by first class mail within 10 working days following the hearing.

(E) If the contestant is not the registered owner of the vehicle, all notices to the contestant required under this section shall also be given to the registered owner by first class mail. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.140 Collection of unpaid parking penalties.
Except as otherwise provided below, the processing agency shall proceed under subsection (A) or (B) of this section, but not both, in order to collect an unpaid parking penalty:

(A) File an itemization of unpaid parking penalties and administrative and service fees with the Department for collection pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760 or any successor statute thereto.

(B) If more than $400.00 in unpaid parking penalties and other related fees have been accrued by any one registered owner or the registered owner’s renter, lessee or sales transferee, proof thereof may be filed with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment. Execution may be levied and such other measures may be taken for the collection of the judgment as are authorized for the collection of unpaid civil judgments entered against a defendant in an action on a debt.

The processing agency shall send notice by first class mail to the registered owner or renter, lessee or sales transferee indicating that a civil judgment has been filed and the date that the judgment shall become effective. The notice shall also indicate: that execution may be levied against that person’s assets, that liens may be placed against the person’s property, that the person’s wages may be garnished, and that other steps may be taken to satisfy the judgment. The notice shall also state that the processing agency will terminate the commencement of a civil judgment proceeding if all parking penalties and other related fees are paid prior to the date set for hearing. If judgment is entered, then the City may file a writ of execution or an abstract with the court clerk’s office identifying the means by which the civil judgment is to be satisfied.

If a judgment is rendered for the processing agency, that agency may contract with a collection agency licensed pursuant to Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 6850) of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code, or any successor statutes thereto, to collect the judgment.

(C) If the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for 60 days beyond the renewal date, and the citation has not been collected by the Department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760, or any successor statute thereto, then the processing agency may file proof of unpaid penalties and fees with the court with the same effect as a civil judgment as provided in subsection (B) of this section.

(D) The processing agency shall not file a civil judgment with the court relating to a parking citation filed with the Department unless the processing agency has determined that the registration of the vehicle has not been renewed for 60 days beyond the renewal date and the citation has not been collected by the Department pursuant to the California Vehicle Code Section 4760 or any successor statute thereto. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.150 Obligation of processing agency once parking penalty paid.
(A) If the operator or registered owner served with notice of delinquent parking violation, or any other person who presents the parking citation or notice of delinquent parking violation, deposits the penalty with the person authorized to receive it, the processing agency shall do both of the following:

(1) Upon request, provide the operator, registered owner or the registered owner’s agent with a copy of the citation information presented in the notice of delinquent parking violation. The processing agency shall, in turn, obtain and record in its records the name, address and driver’s license number of the person actually given the copy of the citation information.

(2) Determine whether the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the Department or a civil judgment has been entered pursuant to PMC 10.06.140.

(B) If the processing agency receives full payment of all parking penalties and other related fees and the processing agency has neither filed a notice of delinquent parking violation nor entered a civil judgment, then all proceedings for that citation shall cease.

(C) If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the Department and has been returned by the Department pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code and payment of the parking penalty has been made, along with any other related fees, then the proceedings for that citation shall cease.

(D) If the notice of delinquent parking violation has been filed with the Department and has not been returned by the Department, and payment of the parking penalty along with any other applicable fees or assessments has been made, the processing agency shall do all of the following:

(1) Deliver a certificate of payment to the operator, or other person making payment;

(2) Within five working days transmit the payment information to the Department in the manner prescribed by the Department;

(3) Terminate proceedings on the notice of delinquent parking violation; and

(4) Deposit all parking penalties and other fees as required by law. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.160 Deposit of parking penalties with the City.
(A) All parking penalties collected, including process service fees and costs related to civil debt collection, shall be deposited to the account of the processing agency, and then remitted to the City if the City is not also the processing agency.

(B) If the City is not the processing agency, then the City shall enter into an agreement with the processing agency for monthly distribution of parking citation receipts to the City along with a report setting forth the number of cases processed and the sums received. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

10.06.170 Filing of annual reports.
The processing agency shall prepare an audited report at the end of each fiscal year setting forth the number of cases processed, and all sums received and distributed, together with any other information that may be specified by the City or its authorized issuing agency or the State Controller. The report is a public record and shall be delivered to the City and its authorized issuing agency. (Ord. U-1014 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 10.08
ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING AND CHARGING
Sections:

10.08.010    Purpose.

10.08.020    Definition.

10.08.030    Expedited permitting process.

10.08.040    Permit application processing.

10.08.050    City-owned electric vehicle parking spaces.

10.08.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to comply with Government Code Section 65850.7 and to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 2018)

10.08.020 Definition.
“Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with all requirements of this code and any checklists approved by the Building Official, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 2018)

10.08.030 Expedited permitting process.
(A) Streamlined Process. Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply in order to be eligible for expedited review.

(B) Checklist Effective with Commission Approval. The Building Official’s checklist and procedures shall become effective upon approval by the Planning Commission, which approval may be granted by motion or resolution. Such procedures may be amended by the Planning Commission from time to time. The City’s adopted checklist and procedures shall be published on the City’s website, and shall be binding upon all applicants.

(C) Checklist Contents. The checklist and procedures may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” as published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. Such checklist must ensure that all requirements of this chapter are met, including the following:

(1) Standards for EV Station. Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a municipal electric utility company regarding safety and reliability.

(2) Electrical Code Requirements. Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

(3) Load Calculations. Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

(4) Anchorage. Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements.

(5) Property Owner Associations. In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the Building Official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 2018)

10.08.040 Permit application processing.
(A) Adverse Impact Prohibited. Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have a specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. Verification by the applicant includes but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.

(B) Permit Applications. A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the City’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. If the Building Official determines that the permit application is incomplete, the Building Official shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. Upon confirmation by the Building Official that the permit application and supporting documents meet the City’s checklist requirements and are consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the Building Official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, issue a permit for the electric vehicle charging station.

(C) Electronic Submission Permitted. Permit applications covered by this chapter and associated supporting documentation may be submitted via email to the Building Official, but such documentation shall only be considered received on the date the Building Official personally responds via email that the documents were received. In accepting such permit applications, the Building Official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant.

(D) Appeal. The Building Official’s determination may be appealed to the Planning Commission. Such appeal shall be governed by the procedures of Division 2 (Review Procedures) of PMC Title 17 (Zoning), except that the determination of the Planning Commission shall be final and cannot be appealed to the City Council. After conducting the public hearing, the reviewing body shall issue its determination in writing based upon substantial evidence in the record. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 2018)

10.08.050 City-owned electric vehicle parking spaces.
The Director of Public Works, or designee, is authorized to designate parking spaces or stalls in any off-street parking facility owned and operated by the City of Palmdale for the exclusive purpose of charging and parking a vehicle that is connected for electric charging purposes. (Ord. 1508 § 1, 2018; Ord. 1476 § 1, 2015. Formerly 10.08.010)

Title 11
(Reserved)
Title 12
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapters:

12.04    Underground Utilities

12.08    Highway Permits

12.12    Parades

12.16    Advertising Displays Adjacent to Landscaped Highways

12.20    Policy for Displaying Written Materials at City Facilities

12.24    Displaying Personal Property for Sale – Parking for Repair or Maintenance

12.30    Shopping Carts

12.32    Maintenance of Drainage Facilities

Chapter 12.04
UNDERGROUND UTILITIES
Sections:

Article I. Undergrounding Districts

12.04.010    Definitions.

12.04.020    Public hearing.

12.04.030    Engineering report.

12.04.040    Designation.

12.04.050    Compliance required.

12.04.060    Exceptions – Emergency or unusual circumstances.

12.04.070    Exceptions – Facilities.

12.04.080    Notice to property owners and utility companies.

12.04.090    Utility company responsibility.

12.04.100    Property owner responsibility.

12.04.110    City responsibility.

12.04.120    Time extension.

12.04.130    Penalty for violation.

Article II. New Construction

12.04.140    New construction – Underground installations required.

12.04.150    Development subject to undergrounding requirements.

12.04.160    Exceptions to undergrounding requirements for new construction.

12.04.170    Deferment of undergrounding.

12.04.180    Development of single-family residential lots and subdivision of less than five lots.

12.04.190    Manner of installation.

12.04.200    Plans required.

12.04.210    Waivers.

12.04.220    Placement of utility facilities.

Article I. Undergrounding Districts

12.04.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words or phrases shall be defined as follows:

(A) “Commission” means the California Public Utilities Commission.

(B) “Development” means the activity of preparing land and constructing buildings or other facilities in order to establish or expand a land use.

(C) “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

(D) “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

(E) “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the City within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is designated and described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of PMC 12.04.040.

(F) “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices.

(G) “Utility facilities” shall mean poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures as defined in subsection (D) of this section. (Ord. 724 § 2, 1988; Ord. 134 § 1, 1968)

12.04.020 Public hearing.
The Council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the City and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The City Clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of the hearings at least 10 days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the Council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 134 § 2, 1968)

12.04.030 Engineering report.
Prior to holding the public hearing, the City Engineer shall consult all affected utilities and shall prepare a report for submission at the hearing containing, among other information, the extent of the utilities’ participation and estimates of the total costs to the City and affected property owners. The report shall also contain an estimate of the time required to complete the underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 134 § 3, 1968)

12.04.040 Designation.
If, after any such public hearing the Council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal and the underground installation within a designated area, the Council shall, by resolution, declare the designated area an underground utility district and order the removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising the district and shall fix the time within which the removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for the removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for the removal and for the installation of the underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 134 § 4, 1968)

12.04.050 Compliance required.
Whenever the Council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in PMC 12.04.040, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by the resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by the owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for the owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in PMC 12.04.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this article. (Ord. 724 § 3, 1988; Ord. 134 § 5, 1968)

12.04.060 Exceptions – Emergency or unusual circumstances.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed 30 days, without authority of the Director of Public Works in order to provide emergency service. The Director of Public Works may grant special permission on such terms as the Director of Public Works may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 724 § 3, 1988; Ord. 134 § 6, 1968)

12.04.070 Exceptions – Facilities.
This article and any resolution adopted pursuant to PMC 12.04.040 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

(A) Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;

(B) Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

(C) Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when the wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

(D) Poles, overhead wires and associated structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of 34,500 volts;

(E) Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

(F) Antennas, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

(G) Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

(H) Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 724 § 3, 1988; Ord. 134 § 7, 1968)

12.04.080 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
(A) Within 10 days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to PMC 12.04.040, the City Clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the resolution of the adopting thereof. The City Clerk shall further notify the affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying the property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or the occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive the service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

(B) Notification by the City Clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to PMC 12.04.040, together with a copy of this article, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and the affected utilities. (Ord. 724 § 3, 1988; Ord. 134 § 8, 1968)

12.04.090 Utility company responsibility.
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to PMC 12.04.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 134 § 9, 1968)

12.04.100 Property owner responsibility.
(A) Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in PMC 12.04.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of this subsection (A) within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to PMC 12.04.040, the City Engineer shall post written notice on the property being serviced and 30 days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property; or

(B) Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in PMC 12.04.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to PMC 12.04.040, the City Engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of the premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within 10 days after the receipt of the notice;

(C) The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of the premises at the premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as the owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to the owner’s last known address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of Palmdale. If notice is given by mail, the notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within 48 hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of the premises, the City Engineer shall, within 48 hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by 10 inches in size to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises;

(D) The notice given by the City Engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify when work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within 30 days after receipt of the notice, the City Engineer will provide the required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon the property;

(E) If, upon the expiration of the 30-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the City Engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if the premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the City Engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the City Engineer, he shall file a written report with the City Council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which the cost is to be assessed. The Council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of the work upon the premises, which time shall not be less than 10 days thereafter;

(F) The City Engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing the protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of the premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the Council will pass upon the report and will hear protests against the assessment. The notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment;

(G) Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the Council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there are any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment;

(H) If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the Council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the City Engineer, and the City Engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year. (Ord. 1299 § 9, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 9, 2006; Ord. 134 § 10, 1968)

12.04.110 City responsibility.
The City shall remove at its own expense all City-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this article in ample time to enable the owner or user of the poles to remove them within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to PMC 12.04.030. (Ord. 724 § 3, 1988; Ord. 134 § 11, 1968)

12.04.120 Time extension.
In the event that any act required by this article or by a resolution adopted pursuant to PMC 12.04.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which the act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of the limitation. (Ord. 724 § 3, 1988; Ord. 134 § 12, 1968)

12.04.130 Penalty for violation.
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person violating any provision of this article or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this article. (Ord. 724 § 3, 1988; Ord. 134 § 13, 1968)

Article II. New Construction

12.04.140 New construction – Underground installations required.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, no building permit shall be issued for the construction of a building, nor shall any site plan be approved, nor any tract or parcel map be recorded, unless the Public Works Department has approved plans which show that the building or development will comply with the provisions of this article. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

12.04.150 Development subject to undergrounding requirements.
Except as otherwise provided in this article, all utility facilities shall be installed underground if they are located on or adjacent to a lot being developed.

For the purposes of this section, utility facilities shall be deemed “adjacent” to a lot if they are located in a public right-of-way contiguous to the lot, including, but not limited to, a public utility right-of-way, flood control or drainage channel, or street or alley. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

12.04.160 Exceptions to undergrounding requirements for new construction.
Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 12.04.150, the following facilities and equipment shall not be required to be placed underground:

(A) Utility facilities approved by the Director of Building Services to be installed and maintained for a period not to exceed 30 days in order to provide emergency service;

(B) Temporary utility facilities used, or to be used, in conjunction with construction projects;

(C) Utility facilities used for the transmission of electric energy at voltages in excess of 50,000 volts;

(D) Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes, meter cabinets and concealed ducts;

(E) Wires and enclosures attached to the exterior walls of a building for the purpose of interconnecting communication functions within the building;

(F) Street lighting, fire alarm devices, and traffic control apparatuses; and

(G) Utility facilities which are prohibited from being placed underground by rules and regulations of the Commission. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

12.04.170 Deferment of undergrounding.
If the City Engineer finds that location, topography, soil conditions, or other factors make undergrounding technically or economically infeasible at the time of construction of the development, then the City Engineer may authorize deferment of the undergrounding of utility facilities, subject to the following conditions:

(A) Undergrounding shall not be deferred unless a security of a type specified in California Government Code Section 66499 is posted in an amount equal to the estimated cost of the undergrounding. The security instrument shall be approved by the City Attorney as to form and legal sufficiency.

(B) The City Engineer shall determine the estimated cost of undergrounding based on an estimate of the cost of undergrounding provided by the developer who shall bear the expense of preparing such estimate. Cost estimates shall account for inflation and cost increases, and shall include a separate item for contingencies in the amount of 15 percent of the estimated cost. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

12.04.180 Development of single-family residential lots and subdivision of less than five lots.
Undergrounding of utility facilities “adjacent” to property being developed, as “adjacent” is defined in PMC 12.04.150, shall not be imposed as a condition upon the development of a single-family residential lot, the division of land resulting in four or fewer parcels, or the merger of four or fewer parcels, if the development, division, or merger is located in an area currently served by utility facilities. This section shall not restrict the City’s ability to require undergrounding of utility facilities located “on” a property. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

12.04.190 Manner of installation.
All undergrounding, including the undergrounding of service laterals, required by PMC 12.04.150 shall be completed prior to the paving of streets; provided, however, that the City Engineer may waive this requirement if the undergrounding will not require reconstruction or repair of streets, or if unusual circumstances warrant such waiver. Furthermore, upon approval of a proposed tentative tract map, the Planning Commission may waive this requirement if this requirement imposes an undue hardship due to the physical condition of the subdivision.

The developer shall be responsible for undergrounding or relocating utility facilities and cooperating with the utilities involved, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the utilities on file with the Commission. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

12.04.200 Plans required.
Plans detailing the location of all utility facilities required by PMC 12.04.150 to be installed underground shall be submitted for approval to the Public Works Department. The Public Works Department shall approve such plans if they meet the requirements of this article and other applicable provisions of this code.

The Public Works Department shall inspect each underground utility facility installation to ensure that such installation complies with City-approved plans. The developer installing the utility facilities shall bear the cost to the City of such inspections. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

12.04.210 Waivers.
The City Council or the Planning Commission may waive the requirements of PMC 12.04.150 upon a finding that compliance with the requirements of that section would be technically or economically infeasible due to geologic, soil, or topographic conditions.

The City Council or the Planning Commission may condition such waiver as it deems necessary to effectuate the purposes and intent of this article. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

12.04.220 Placement of utility facilities.
The placement or location of all utility facilities exempted from the provisions of this article pursuant to PMC 12.04.160 or 12.04.210 shall require approval by the Director of Planning. The Director shall not approve any location if the City Engineer determines that placement of a utility facility at the proposed location will unreasonably interfere with travel along a public right-of-way. (Ord. 724 § 4, 1988)

Chapter 12.08
HIGHWAY PERMITS
Sections:

12.08.010    County Code provisions adopted by reference.

12.08.020    Definitions.

12.08.030    Chapter 16.24 of highway permit ordinance amended – Special provisions for newspaper dispensing devices.

12.08.010 County Code provisions adopted by reference.
(A) Except as provided in this chapter, the highway permit ordinance of the County of Los Angeles, as set forth in Title 16, Division 1 of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended by Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 88-0056 and in effect on April 26, 1988, is adopted by reference and shall become the highway permit ordinance of the City of Palmdale.

(B) One copy of the County highway permit ordinance shall be kept at all times in the office of the City Clerk for public inspection. (Ord. 809 § 3, 1989)

12.08.020 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the County highway permit ordinance, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

(A) “Board of Supervisors” means the City Council.

(B) “Commissioner” means the Director of Public Works of the City of Palmdale.

(C) “County” or “County of Los Angeles” or “unincorporated territory of Los Angeles County” means the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 809 § 3, 1989)

12.08.030 Chapter 16.24 of highway permit ordinance amended – Special provisions for newspaper dispensing devices.
Chapter 16.24 of the highway permit ordinance is amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Chapter 16.24

SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR NEWSPAPER DISPENSING DEVICES

16.24.010 Purposes.

The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, welfare and safety by regulating the placement, appearance, maintenance and insuring of newspaper dispensing devices on public rights-of-way so as to:

A. Reduce or eliminate the exposure of the City to claims for personal injury and property damage attributable to the unregulated encroachment of newspaper dispensing devices onto freely accessible public property;

B. Eliminate newspaper dispensing devices that create visual blight on the public rights-of-way or which unreasonably detract from the aesthetics of store window displays, adjacent landscaping, or other improvements by increasing the uniformity of the newspaper dispensing devices in their size, shape, style and color;

C. Maintain and protect the values of properties adjacent to newspaper dispensing devices;

D. Provide for the safety and convenience of pedestrian and vehicular traffic by restricting unreasonable interference with the flow of such traffic, including interference with ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or with access from the street to the sidewalk by persons exiting or entering parked or standing vehicles;

E. Provide for the elimination of newspaper dispensing devices that may confuse or unreasonably interfere with the flow and direction of traffic by eliminating colors or shapes that are typically used for roadway danger or directional information, such as, but not limited to, triangular or octagonal boxes, or colors such as so-called “day-glow” colors or red, yellow or orange colors;

F. Assure sufficient space for unencumbered use of the public right-of-way, particularly sidewalks, by handicapped persons and others, consistent with regulations in the State Building Code;

G. Provide reasonable access for the use and maintenance of poles, posts, traffic signs and signals, hydrants, mailboxes and locations utilized for public transportation purposes;

H. Promote homeland security by ensuring that newspaper dispensing devices are located a reasonable distance from entrances to essential public facilities to reduce the likelihood that an explosive hidden in such a device would cause catastrophic damage; and

I. Regulate newspaper dispensing devices in accordance with constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech and freedom of the press for newspapers and periodicals using dispensing devices for distribution purposes on public rights-of-way.

16.24.020 Definitions.

As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, each of the following words or terms shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this section:

A. “ADA ramp” means a ramp installed pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act to provide access for persons in wheelchairs.

B. “Block” means one side of a street between two consecutive intersecting streets.

C. “Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City or his or her designated representative.

D. “Entry monument sign” means a monument sign stating the name of a residential subdivision or neighborhood.

E. “Essential public facility” means Palmdale City Hall, each police/sheriff station or substation, each fire station and each hospital.

F. “Newspaper dispensing device” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display, sale or distribution of newspapers or other publications.

G. “Parkway” means that area between the edge of the roadway or the curb of any street and the property line adjacent thereto, excluding therefrom any sidewalk. The term “parkway” also includes any area within a roadway or roadway easement that is not open to vehicular travel.

H. “Permittee” means the person who is authorized pursuant to this chapter to place and maintain a newspaper dispensing device in a public right-of-way.

I. “Public right-of-way” means any place of any nature which is dedicated to use by the public for pedestrian or vehicular travel including, without limitation, a street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, crossing, intersection, parkway, highway, alley, lane, mall, court, way, avenue, boulevard, road, roadway, viaduct, tunnel, bridge, thoroughfare, park, square, or similar public way.

J. “Residential structure” means a single-family residence or a multi-family residential building.

K. “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

L. “Sidewalk” means any surface of a public right-of-way provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.

M. “Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes including, without limitation, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks.

16.24.030 Encroachment permit required.

A. No person shall place, affix, erect, construct, or maintain a newspaper dispensing device which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

B. Any number of newspaper dispensing devices may be authorized under one encroachment permit to be installed or maintained in the public rights-of-way; provided, however, that the installation or maintenance of additional newspaper dispensing devices, and the relocation of authorized newspaper dispensing devices, subsequent to the issuance of an encroachment permit, shall require a new and additional encroachment permit.

16.24.040 Application for encroachment permit.

A. The application for an encroachment permit to install or maintain any newspaper dispensing device shall be on a form provided by the Director and shall contain or be accompanied by the following:

1. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

2. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant’s authorized representative, whom the City may contact or notify at any time concerning the applicant’s newspaper dispensing devices;

3. A fully-dimensioned map, sketch, drawing or other illustration which describes the exact location of each newspaper dispensing device proposed to be installed or maintained by the applicant in the City’s public rights-of-way;

4. A statement that, to the best of the applicant’s knowledge and belief, and based upon the applicant’s inspection of each proposed location, the installation or maintenance of each proposed newspaper dispensing device will be in compliance with all standards and requirements set forth in Section 16.24.080 of this chapter;

5. The categorical priority of the publication to be sold or offered in the newspaper dispensing device, as described in Section 16.24.100. Applicants who intend to install or maintain newspaper dispensing devices for the sale of daily publications, and who desire to have such publications considered as publications adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation pursuant to the California Government Code (Title 1, Division 7, Chapter 1, Article 2) should submit proof of such adjudication with the application for encroachment permit.

6. A statement whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees, from and against any claim, loss, liability or damage sustained by any person attributable to or arising out of the installation, use or maintenance of any newspaper dispensing device within the City which is authorized under the encroachment permit to be installed, used or maintained in public rights-of-way.

7. A statement whereby the applicant agrees to remove or relocate, without expense to the City, any newspaper dispensing device installed, used or maintained pursuant to the encroachment permit if and when made necessary by any improvements to or modifications of the public rights-of-way which may cause a previously approved location to be in nonconformity with any provision of Section 16.24.080.

8. A statement whereby the applicant agrees to notify the Director within five (5) days of any change in the information set forth in the application for encroachment permit, including any change in the ownership or control of any newspaper dispensing device and any change in the applicant’s authorized representative for purposes of notification.

9. Evidence of a current business license as required by the Palmdale Municipal Code.

10. An encroachment permit application fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

B. Prior to issuance of the encroachment permit, the permittee shall provide to the Director satisfactory evidence of having obtained a policy of public liability insurance from a company authorized to transact business in the State of California. The policy of public liability insurance shall be maintained at all times the encroachment permit is in effect and shall:

1. Be issued to the permittee and name the City, and its officers, agents and employees, as additional insureds.

2. Indemnify against all liability for personal injury, death and damage to property arising from activities and operations conducted by the permittee pursuant to the encroachment permit.

3. Provide combined single limit liability insurance in an amount not less than One Million Dollars ($1,000,000).

4. Be non-cancellable without thirty (30) days’ prior written notice thereof directed to the City.

16.24.050 Issuance or denial of encroachment permit.

A. Following the receipt of an application for encroachment permit submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the Director shall cause an inspection to be made of each location proposed by the applicant for the installation or maintenance of a newspaper dispensing device. The inspection fee established by resolution of the City Council shall be deemed to cover all newspaper dispensing devices proposed by the applicant to be installed or maintained on any one block.

B. Upon a determination by the Director that any or all of the proposed locations are in compliance with all standards and requirements set forth in Section 16.24.080, and that the proposed newspaper dispensing device for each such location is or will be in compliance with Section 16.24.090, an encroachment permit shall be issued to the applicant. Said encroachment permit shall identify with reasonable specificity the location of each newspaper dispensing device authorized thereunder.

C. The encroachment permit may authorize less than all of the locations proposed by the applicant for the installation or maintenance of newspaper dispensing devices. If a proposed location is disapproved by the Director, the applicant shall be given written notice of the reasons for such disapproval. The applicant shall have the right to a hearing on such determination in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.24.160. Disapproval of a proposed location shall not preclude the applicant from subsequently submitting a new and additional application for encroachment permit designating another proposed location.

D. If a newspaper dispensing device is not installed by the permittee at the location authorized by the encroachment permit within thirty (30) days after its issuance by the Director, such authorization shall be deemed to have been terminated and revoked.

16.24.060 Encroachment permit identification tags.

A. Concurrently with the issuance of an encroachment permit, the Director shall issue to the permittee for each authorized location an identification tag setting forth the number assigned to the encroachment permit. The fee therefor shall be established by resolution of the City Council. The identification tag shall be affixed by the permittee to each newspaper dispensing device at each approved location within the following time periods: (i) if already installed, within 24 hours after issuance of the identification tag; (ii) if not yet installed, at the time of installation of the newspaper dispensing device. The identification tag shall be affixed in the upper right hand corner of the rear panel of the newspaper dispensing device.

B. The encroachment permit identification tag shall be valid for a period of one year after date of issuance. At the expiration of the initial one-year period, and annually thereafter, the Director shall cause to be issued renewal identification tags upon application by the permittee, payment of such renewal and inspection fees as may be established by resolution of the City Council, and a determination by the Director that each location authorized by the encroachment permit and each newspaper dispensing device continues to comply with the standards and requirements set forth in Sections 16.24.080 and 16.24.090, respectively, of this chapter.

16.24.070 Identification required on newspaper dispensing devices.

The permittee under an encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall cause to be affixed to each newspaper dispensing device installed or maintained at a location authorized by such encroachment permit the following:

A. The name, address and telephone number of the permittee or of the permittee’s authorized representative as designated in the application for encroachment permit or any amendments thereto. Such notice shall be affixed to the newspaper dispensing device in a location readily visible to vendees so as to facilitate reports of malfunctions and to secure refunds if a coin-return mechanism is inoperable.

B. A current encroachment permit identification tag as required by Section 16.24.060.

16.24.080 Location of newspaper dispensing devices.

A. The installation or maintenance of newspaper dispensing devices shall be prohibited at the following locations:

1. On any portion of, or projecting onto, into or over any portion of, any roadway on which vehicles are lawfully permitted;

2. Within four feet of any marked crosswalk;

3. Within fifteen feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

4. Within ten feet of any fire hydrant, fire call-box or police call-box, or other emergency facility;

5. Within four feet of any utility poles, boxes or meters;

6. Within four feet of any driveway;

7. Within four feet ahead of, and fifteen feet to the rear of, any sign or pavement markings designating a bus stop, measured parallel to the flow of traffic;

8. Within four feet of any bus bench;

9. At any location whereby the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is reduced to less than four feet;

10. Within five feet of a curb painted in accordance with local parking regulations, pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 21458;

11. Within three feet of any area improved with lawn, flowers, shrubs, or trees or within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manner as to interfere with the reasonable use or utility of such window for display purposes;

12. Directly opposite and facing another newspaper dispensing device on the same sidewalk or parkway;

13. Within four feet of an ADA ramp access point;

14. Within four feet of an entry monument sign;

15. Within 50 feet of any point of a residential structure other than the garage;

16. In any City right-of-way within 150 feet of any doorway of an essential public facility, unless such dispensing device was already located at said location as of the date of this ordinance, and written permission to maintain the newspaper dispensing device within 150’ of the public facility has been granted by the agency occupying said public facility;

17. At any location where the Director determines, supported by written findings, that the proposed encroachment upon the public right-of-way by a newspaper dispensing device will interfere with or obstruct the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, create a hazard which endangers persons or property, or obstruct motorists’ vision of traffic control signage.

B. No more than eight newspaper dispensing devices shall be located on any public right-of-way within a space of 200 feet in any direction within the same block of the same street. No more than sixteen newspaper dispensing devices shall be located on public right-of-way on any one block unless the Director has established a higher limit pursuant to this subsection. The Director shall, upon request of any encroachment permit applicant, perform an engineering study to determine whether the public right-of-way on a particular block can accommodate more than sixteen newspaper dispensing devices installed in compliance with subsection A above. If the study concludes that more than sixteen newspaper dispensing devices can be accommodated, then the Director shall prescribe a higher limit and such limit shall apply to that particular block. The encroachment permit applicant requesting the study shall pay an engineering study fee to cover the cost of the study.

C. No more than four newspaper dispensing devices shall be permitted to be located immediately adjacent to each other. Any such cluster of up to four newspaper dispensing devices shall be separated by a distance of not less than four feet from any other individual newspaper dispensing device or cluster of such devices.

D. Newspaper dispensing devices shall be permitted to be installed or maintained only near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building in a location authorized by an encroachment permit. Newspaper dispensing devices installed near a curb shall be installed parallel to the curb not less than 18 inches nor more than 24 inches from the roadway edge or face of the curb, and shall face away from the street so as to be accessible from the sidewalk. Newspaper dispensing devices installed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be installed so that the back of such device is parallel to such wall and not more than 6 inches from the wall.

16.24.090 Standards for the installation, use and maintenance of newspaper dispensing devices.

Every newspaper dispensing device which, in whole or in part, is located upon any public right-of-way shall comply with the following standards and regulation:

A. All newspaper dispensing devices shall be generally square or rectangular in shape and not exceed 48.5 inches in height, 30 inches in width or 24 inches in thickness. The 48.5-inch height limitation shall not include any coin box mounted on top of the newspaper dispensing device.

B. Each newspaper dispensing device shall be colored white, black, dark blue or dark green.

C. Each newspaper dispensing device shall be substantially made of metal, except for miscellaneous parts such as operating buttons, card inserts and view windows.

D. Each newspaper dispensing device shall have an affirmative mechanical closing mechanism to provide for the closing of the door through which the publication may be accessed. Such affirmative closing device shall consist of either a spring, gas-powered or similar device that will close the door by itself without the assistance of individuals accessing the publication.

E. Each newspaper dispensing device shall have an affirmative mechanical locking mechanism to provide for the secure locking or latching of the door through which the publication may be accessed. This device should be sufficient to prevent accidental opening and to hold the device closed in inclement weather conditions.

F. No newspaper dispensing device shall have affixed thereto any advertising other than the following:

1. The name of the newspaper or other publication being sold or offered, which information shall be displayed on the lower one-third of the hood; and

2. Advertising rack cards inserted in card pans which are attached to and located on the front of the newspaper dispensing device and which do not exceed 15 inches in height and 22 inches in length. The rack cards shall be limited to the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper or other publication being sold or offered.

G. Each coin-operated newspaper dispensing device shall be equipped with a coin-return mechanism to enable a person using the device to obtain an immediate refund in the event the publication paid for is not dispensed. The coin-return mechanism shall be maintained in good working order.

H. Each newspaper dispensing device shall be bolted or otherwise secured to the public right-of-way in a manner approved by the Director.

I. No newspaper dispensing device shall be chained or otherwise attached to any other newspaper dispensing device, nor, without the consent of the owner thereof, attached to any permanently fixed object or other property.

J. Newspaper dispensing devices shall be maintained in good working order at all times. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, each newspaper dispensing device shall periodically be serviced by the permittee so that:

1. It is reasonably free of dirt and grease;

2. It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint in the visible painted areas thereof;

3. It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible unpainted metal areas thereof;

4. The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks, dents, blemishes and discoloration;

5. The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free of tears, peeling or fading; and

6. The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.

7. The locking and closing mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order at all times.

K. No newspaper dispensing device shall display or exhibit in a public place, other than a location from which minors are excluded, any material which is harmful to minors unless a device commonly known as a “blinder rack” is placed in front of the materials or the material is otherwise displayed or exhibited so that the lower two-thirds (2/3) thereof is not exposed to public view. For purposes of this subsection, “material which is harmful to minors” shall mean “harmful matter” as defined in California Penal Code Section 313 as currently in effect and as may hereafter be amended.

16.24.100 Resolution of conflicts regarding proposed locations.

A. If implementation or enforcement of the provisions of this chapter requires the Director to disapprove any proposed location for a newspaper dispensing device so as to establish or maintain any numerical or other restrictions set forth in Section 16.24.080, and competing claims for the same or an adjacent proposed location cannot be resolved by negotiations with the applicants or permittees involved, the Director shall be guided solely by the following criteria and categorical priorities in issuing an encroachment permit:

1. First priority shall be given to newspaper dispensing devices used for the distribution of daily publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week).

2. Second priority shall be given to newspaper dispensing devices used for the distribution of weekly publications (those published at least once but less than five days in a calendar week).

B. If there is a conflict between newspapers or news periodicals within the same categorical priority seeking the same or an adjacent proposed location, and there are insufficient locations remaining to accommodate the conflicting newspapers after first approving as many locations as possible by utilizing the criteria and priorities set forth above, the Director shall assign the location or locations at random by placing the names of all applicants for the available locations into a container from which an applicant’s name shall be drawn, one at a time, until the permissible number of newspaper dispensing devices has been reached. Such drawing shall be open to the public at a time, place and date designated by the Director.

16.24.110 Costs to be borne by permittee.

All costs and expenses of installation, maintenance, replacement, removal, or relocation of newspaper dispensing devices shall be borne by the permittee. Upon the removal of any newspaper dispensing device, the permittee shall, at its sole expense, cause the public right-of-way to be repaired and restored to a condition that is safe and is comparable to the surrounding area. Repair or restoration shall include removal of any bolts, brackets or other mounting equipment and filling of holes in the right-of-way surface attributable to the device. Upon any failure by the permittee to make such repairs and restoration, the work may be undertaken by the City and the cost thereof shall be charged to the permittee.

16.24.120 Notices of violation.

A. Unless a violation necessitates immediate impoundment of the newspaper dispensing device pursuant to Section 16.24.130, the Director shall notify any permittee or other person who installs, uses or maintains a newspaper dispensing device in violation of the provisions of this chapter that unless the violation is corrected or a hearing requested, the newspaper dispensing device will be impounded. Such notice shall be given by mail to the permittee or other responsible person, or, if no permittee or other responsible person can be identified, by affixing a notice to the newspaper dispensing device. Impoundment shall be authorized hereunder unless the violation is corrected or a hearing is requested within seven business days after the date on which notice is given by mail or affixed to the newspaper dispensing device.

B. Notwithstanding subsection A, if a violation of Section 16.24.080 is involved, the Director may immediately correct any such violation, and shall do so without impounding, if such correction can be accomplished easily, quickly and without expense to the city.

16.24.130 Removal and impoundment of newspaper dispensing devices.

A. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the Director may immediately remove and impound any newspaper dispensing device in violation of this chapter where one or more of the following is involved:

1. The newspaper dispensing device poses an imminent danger to pedestrians or vehicles.

2. A notice has been affixed to the newspaper dispensing device by the Director pursuant to this chapter, and the permittee has neither caused the violation to be corrected nor requested a hearing within the time specified in Section 16.24.120.

3. When a request for a hearing is withdrawn or abandoned by the permittee and the permittee has failed to correct a violation within the time specified in Section 16.24.120.

4. When, following a hearing or any subsequent appeal, a final determination is made that one or more violations exist and the permittee has failed to correct such violations within ten days after the date of such final determination.

B. Whenever any newspaper dispensing device is removed and impounded pursuant to paragraphs 1 or 2 of subsection A above, written notice of such action shall be mailed to the permittee by the Director within three working days after such removal and impoundment. The permittee may thereafter request a hearing pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.24.160.

16.24.140 Return of impounded newspaper dispensing devices.

A. Unless the newspaper dispensing device and its contents are being held as evidence in a criminal prosecution, the permittee or, if there is no known permittee, a claimant who provides sufficient proof of ownership of an impounded newspaper dispensing device may, at any time up to and including the thirtieth day after the impounding, or, if a hearing by the city manager or an administrative hearing officer, pursuant to this chapter is requested and held concerning the newspaper dispensing device, may, at any time up to and including, the thirtieth day after the decision at such hearing becomes final, obtain a return of the newspaper dispensing device and its contents, upon paying an impound fee, including the reasonable costs of removal and storage by the City, in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

B. The city manager or the administrative hearing officer may, after conducting any hearing in accordance with this chapter, order the newspaper dispensing device returned without payment of any impound fee, or, if an impound fee has previously been paid, may order the refund of any such impound fee.

16.24.150 Disposal after impoundment.

If a hearing on the impounding of a newspaper dispensing device is not timely requested, or if the newspaper dispensing device is not returned in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the Director may sell or otherwise dispose of the newspaper dispensing device and its contents. The proceeds, if any, from any such sale or other disposition, and any moneys contained in such newspaper dispensing device, shall be delivered to the Director of Finance and shall be credited to the general fund of the City.

16.24.160 Hearings on impoundment.

A. Any permittee or other person installing or maintaining a newspaper dispensing device in violation of this chapter or any person aggrieved by a determination of the Director may request in writing a hearing before the city manager within the following time periods:

1. If a notice of violation has been issued by the Director pursuant to Section 16.24.120, within the time periods specified in subsection A of Section 16.24.120. A timely request for a hearing made prior to any impounding shall operate to stay any impounding until five working days after the final determination is rendered by the city manager, unless further stayed pending any appeal therefrom.

2. If removal and impoundment has occurred pursuant to Section 16.24.130, within 30 days after the date of written notice of such action as required by subsection B of Section 16.24.130.

B. Within five (5) working days after the Director’s receipt of a request for hearing, the Director shall set a hearing date and shall notify the permittee or other person by first class mail of the date, time and place of said hearing. Unless continued by agreement, the hearing shall be held within ten (10) working days after the date the notice is mailed.

C. At the hearing, any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the newspaper dispensing device was in violation of this chapter, whether it was properly removed and impounded, and whether it should be returned without payment of an impound fee. Such hearing need not be conducted in accordance with technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses.

D. Not later than ten (10) working days after the close of the hearing, the city manager shall determine, based upon the facts adduced at the hearing, whether a notice of violation was properly issued, whether a newspaper dispensing device was properly impounded, or whether a newspaper dispensing device should be returned without payment of an impound fee, as applicable. The city manager may give oral notice of the determination at the close of the hearing or may send notice of the determination by first class mail.

E. The city manager may, at his or her sole discretion, refer the matter directly to the administrative hearing officer in lieu of hearing the matter and requiring an appeal to the independent administrative hearing officer.

16.24.170 Appeal after hearing.

A. Any permittee or other person who requested a hearing pursuant to Section 16.24.160 may, within ten (10) days after notice of the city manager’s determination is given pursuant to Section 16.24.160(D), appeal such determination to the independent administrative hearing office appointed by the city pursuant to Chapter 1.20 PMC. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the legal and factual basis upon which the appeal is to be based, and shall be filed with the Director. The Director shall forthwith transmit the appeal, together with a copy of the determination and other relevant documents, to the City Clerk for hearing before the administrative hearing officer in accordance with the provisions herein.

B. A timely appeal of the city manager’s determination shall operate to stay any impounding, pending action on the appeal by the administrative hearing officer pursuant to this section.

C. Upon receipt of the appeal, the city manager’s determination, and other relevant documents, and as soon as practical, the administrative hearing officer shall conduct a hearing and may thereafter take any of the following actions:

1. Approve, reverse or modify the city manager’s determination; or

2. Refer the matter back to the Director with or without instructions.

D. The administrative hearing officer shall render a determination within forty-five (45) days after the appeal is filed and such determination shall be deemed to be a final determination which shall become effective upon the issuance of a judgment of determination by the administrative hearing officer.

16.24.180 Time for compliance.

A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newspaper dispensing devices in the City, whether installed prior to or after the effective date of this chapter or of any amendment to this chapter. Any person who owns, controls or is otherwise responsible for the installation of any newspaper dispensing device on public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of this chapter shall file with the Director an application for encroachment permit within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter, subject to the provisions of subsection B hereof. Any person who owns, controls or is otherwise responsible for the installation of any newspaper dispensing device on public rights-of-way prior to the effective date of any amendment to this chapter shall bring such device into conformance with the amendment within ninety (90) days after the effective date of the amendment, subject to the provisions of subsection B hereof.

B. Compliance with this chapter may, in the discretion of the Director, be extended for a period not exceeding six (6) months if the Director determines, upon the basis of information submitted, that undue hardship would otherwise result. Such information shall be submitted to the Director within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter or the effective date of the amendment to this chapter that results in the newspaper dispensing device being nonconforming.

C. Any person who owns, controls or is otherwise responsible for the installation of any newspaper dispensing device upon the public right-of-way and who fails or refuses to file with the Director an application for encroachment permit, or to bring the device into conformance with an amendment to this chapter, within the time periods specified in this section shall be in violation of this chapter.

16.24.190 Cumulative remedies.

The remedies available to the City for violations of this chapter, as set forth in Sections 16.24.120 and 16.24.130 hereof, are cumulative and in addition to other penalties provided for in the Highway Permit ordinance.

16.24.195 Fees.

All fees provided for in this chapter shall be set by City Council resolution and shall not exceed the City’s reasonable administrative costs.

16.24.200 Severability.

If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any other provision or application of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid or unconstitutional provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. The City Council hereby declares that it would have adopted and passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, and word hereof, irrespective of the fact that one or more of the other sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or words hereof be declared invalid or unconstitutional.

(Ord. 1322 §§ 4, 5, 6, 2007; Ord. 1302 § 2, 2007; Ord. 1256 §§ 2 – 8, 2005; Ord. U-842 § 3, 1989; Ord. 809 § 3, 1989)

Chapter 12.12
PARADES
Sections:

12.12.010    Definitions.

12.12.020    Permit required.

12.12.030    Application for permit.

12.12.040    Permit issuance.

12.12.050    Alternate dates, times and routes.

12.12.060    Contents of permit.

12.12.070    Notification to other departments and agencies.

12.12.080    Notification of permit denial.

12.12.090    Appeal from permit denial.

12.12.100    Appeals hearings.

12.12.110    Duties of the permittee.

12.12.120    Revocation of permit.

12.12.130    Waivers and exemptions.

12.12.140    Penalty for violation.

    Prior legislation: Ords. 243 and 481.

12.12.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise clearly indicates, each of the following words or terms shall have the meaning ascribed to it in this section:

(A) “Parade” means any march, pageant, procession, ceremony, show, celebration, or exhibition of any kind in or upon any street, park or other public place in the City; provided, however, that said term shall not apply to funeral processions, students traveling to or from school, students participating in educational activities which are under the immediate supervision of responsible school authorities, or activities of any governmental agency acting within the scope of its powers and authority.

(B) “Person” means any individual, association, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation, organization, municipality, county, district or political subdivision.

(C) “Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes including, without limitation, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.020 Permit required.
No person shall organize, conduct, promote or manage any parade in or over any street, park or other public place in the City without first obtaining a permit from the City Engineer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.030 Application for permit.
(A) The application for a permit to organize, conduct, promote or manage a parade shall be on a form provided by the City Engineer and shall contain or be accompanied by the following:

(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

(2) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant’s authorized representative, whom the City may contact or notify at any time concerning the applicant’s proposed parade;

(3) The proposed date of the parade and the times at which the parade will begin and end;

(4) A description of the precise route to be traveled and a statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only one-half of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed;

(5) A description of the assembly area, the starting point, the termination point and the disbanding area;

(6) The estimated number of participants in the parade, including a description of any animals involved and a description of all vehicles which will be utilized;

(7) The estimated time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at the assembly area;

(8) The distance proposed to be maintained between units of the parade;

(9) A statement whereby the applicant agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, agents and employees, from and against any claim, loss, liability or damage sustained by any person attributable to or arising out of the conduct of the parade or the acts or omissions of its participants.

(B) Such additional information as may be requested by the City Engineer in order to evaluate the nature and extent of the proposed parade.

(C) The application for permit to organize, conduct, promote or manage a parade shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable permit processing fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

(D) The application for permit, and the accompanying processing fee, shall be filed with the City Engineer not less than 10 days prior to the date of a proposed parade; provided, however, that the City Engineer shall have authority, upon a showing of good cause by an applicant, to process an application filed less than 10 days prior to the date of a proposed parade. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.040 Permit issuance.
(A) Following the receipt of an application for permit submitted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the City Engineer shall review and evaluate said application and all information and documentation submitted in connection therewith. A permit shall be issued by the City Engineer upon a determination that the following standards will be met:

(1) The conduct of the proposed parade will not substantially interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic in the vicinity of the proposed parade route.

(2) The number of law enforcement personnel required to monitor the proposed parade and the assembly and disbanding areas will not unduly interfere with normal police protection in other areas of the City.

(3) The conduct of the proposed parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire.

(4) The conduct of the proposed parade will not prevent or obstruct any construction or maintenance work which is scheduled for any street, park or other public place proposed to be utilized in connection with the parade.

(5) The number of persons, animals and vehicles anticipated to congregate at the assembly area and at the disbanding area will not unduly interfere with fire, police or emergency ambulance services to such areas or to locations contiguous thereto.

(6) The manner in which the proposed parade is to be conducted affords maximum protection against potential injury to persons and property.

(7) The proposed parade will move from its starting point to its termination point in an expeditious manner and without excessive or unnecessary stops.

(8) Prior to issuance of the permit, the applicant shall provide to the City Engineer satisfactory evidence of having obtained a policy of public liability insurance from a company authorized to transact business in the state of California. The policy of public liability insurance shall be maintained at all times the permit is in effect and shall:

(a) Be issued to the permittee and name the City, and its officers, agents and employees, as additional insureds;

(b) Indemnify against all liability for personal injury, death and damage to property arising from parade activities and operations conducted by the permittee pursuant to the permit;

(c) Provide combined single limit liability insurance in an amount not less than $1,000,000;

(d) Be noncancellable without 30 days’ prior written notice thereof directed to the City. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.050 Alternate dates, times and routes.
If the conduct of the parade on the date, time and route as proposed by the applicant is determined by the City Engineer to be inconsistent or in conflict with compliance with any or all of the standards set forth in PMC 12.12.040(A), the City Engineer may recommend to the applicant an alternate date, time or route. Upon applicant’s written acceptance thereof, the City Engineer may further process the application and issue the permit. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.060 Contents of permit.
A permit issued by the City Engineer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall set forth the following:

(A) The permissible starting time;

(B) The minimum and maximum speeds of travel;

(C) The maximum distance to be maintained between units of the parade;

(D) The designated streets, parks or other public places within the City which may be utilized in connection with the parade;

(E) The maximum length of the parade in terms of miles or fractions thereof;

(F) The responsibility of the permittee to pay all costs and expenses invoiced by the Sheriff’s Department, the Fire Department, and other City departments and agencies for services rendered in connection with the conduct and activities of the parade. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.070 Notification to other departments and agencies.
Following the issuance of a permit, the City Engineer shall notify the Sheriff’s Department, the Fire Department, and any other affected City departments and agencies. Each affected department or agency shall be responsible for invoicing and collecting from the permittee any costs or expenses incurred for services rendered in connection with the conduct and activities of the parade. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.080 Notification of permit denial.
Within seven days after the filing of an application pursuant to this chapter, the City Engineer shall act thereon. If the City Engineer determines that a permit should not be issued, written notice shall be given to the applicant setting forth the reasons for such denial, consistent with the provisions of PMC 12.12.040(A). (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.090 Appeal from permit denial.
Within five days after notice of denial of a permit is given by the City Engineer, the applicant may appeal such determination to the administrative hearing officer appointed pursuant to Chapter 1.20 PMC. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state the legal and factual basis upon which the appeal is based, and shall be filed with the City Clerk to be set for hearing within 60 days of the date of the appeal. (Ord. 1322 § 7, 2007; Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.100 Appeals hearings.
(A) Upon receipt of an appeal filed in the time and manner set forth in PMC 12.12.090, and receipt of the City Engineer’s determination and other relevant documents, the administrative hearing officer shall, as soon as may be practical, conduct a hearing and may thereafter take any of the following actions:

(1) Approve, reverse or modify the determination of the City Engineer;

(2) Refer the matter back to the City Engineer with or without instructions;

(B) Action taken by the administrative hearing officer following a hearing on the appeal shall be deemed to be a final determination which shall become effective upon the issuance of a decision. (Ord. 1322 § 8, 2007; Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.110 Duties of the permittee.
(A) The permittee shall ensure that the individual having primary responsibility for the conduct of the parade is in personal possession of the permit, or a copy thereof, during the entire period of the parade.

(B) The permittee shall comply with all terms and conditions of the permit, all applicable laws and regulations of the state of California, and all applicable ordinances and regulations of the City. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.120 Revocation of permit.
The City Engineer shall be authorized to revoke any permit previously issued under the provisions of this chapter under any of the following circumstances:

(A) Where a representative of the Sheriff’s Department or the Fire Department advises the City Engineer that, because of an unforeseen change in circumstances, the protection of the public health, welfare and safety requires such revocation; or

(B) Where a disaster, calamity, riot or other emergency situation affecting the public health, welfare and safety requires such revocation. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.130 Waivers and exemptions.
No waiver of or exemption from any provision of this chapter shall be granted except upon application to and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

12.12.140 Penalty for violation.
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable as provided for in this code. (Ord. 900 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 12.16
ADVERTISING DISPLAYS ADJACENT TO LANDSCAPED HIGHWAYS
Sections:

12.16.010    Definitions.

12.16.020    Prohibited displays.

12.16.030    Exceptions.

12.16.040    Removal.

12.16.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, certain terms are defined as follows:

(A) “Advertising display” refers to advertising structures and to signs.

(B) “Advertising structure” refers to a structure of any kind or character erected or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes on which any poster, bill, printing, painting, or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary.

(C) Neither “advertising structure” or “sign,” as used in this chapter, includes:

(1) Official notices issued by a court or public body or officer;

(2) Notices posted by any public officer in performance of a public duty, or by any person in giving legal notice;

(3) Directional, warning, or information signs or structures required or authorized by law or by federal, state, or municipal authority.

(D) “Freeway” is deemed to mean a highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands or in respect to which the owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access, and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of the state.

(E) “Landscaped freeway” is deemed to mean a section or sections of a freeway which is now, or hereafter may be, improved by the planting, at least on one side of the freeway right-of-way, of lawns, trees, shrubs, flowers, or other ornamental vegetation which requires reasonable maintenance.

Planting for the purpose of soil erosion control, traffic safety requirements, reduction of fire hazards, or traffic noise abatement shall not change the character of a freeway to a landscaped freeway.

(F) “To place” and any of its variants, as applied to advertising displays, includes the maintaining and the erecting, constructing, posting, painting, printing, tacking, nailing, gluing, stitching, carving, or otherwise fastening, affixing, or making visible, any advertising display on or to the ground, or any tree, bush, rock, fence, post, wall, building, structure or thing.

(G) “Sign” refers to any card, cloth, metal, painted or wooden sign of any character placed for outdoor advertising purposes on or to the ground, or any tree, wall, bush, rock, fence, building, structure, or thing, either publicly or privately owned, other than an advertising structure. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1966)

12.16.020 Prohibited displays.
No advertising displays shall be placed or maintained on property adjacent to a section of freeway which has been, or hereafter may be, landscaped as defined in PMC 12.16.010, if the advertising display is designed to be viewed primarily by persons traveling on the landscaped section of a freeway. (Ord. 97 § 2, 1966)

12.16.030 Exceptions.
The provisions of PMC 12.16.020 shall not apply to any of the following listed advertising structures or signs used exclusively:

(A) To advertise the sale or lease of the property on which the advertising display is placed;

(B) To designate the name of the owner or occupant of the premises upon which the advertising display is placed or to identify the premises;

(C) To advertise the business conducted or goods manufactured or produced, or services rendered upon the property upon which the advertising display is placed. (Ord. 97 § 3, 1966)

12.16.040 Removal.
Any advertising structure or sign which is now, or hereafter may be, in violation of the provisions of PMC 12.16.020 shall be removed within three years from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or within three years from the date when the project for the landscaping of a section or sections of a freeway have been completed or accepted, and the character of the section or sections have been changed from a freeway to a landscaped freeway, whichever is later. (Ord. 97 § 4, 1966)

Chapter 12.20
POLICY FOR DISPLAYING WRITTEN MATERIALS AT CITY FACILITIES
Sections:

12.20.010    Compliance required.

12.20.020    Definitions.

12.20.030    Request approval.

12.20.040    Maximum length of time.

12.20.050    Size limit.

12.20.060    Commercial advertising.

12.20.070    Facility availability.

12.20.080    Penalty for violation.

12.20.010 Compliance required.
Written materials will be approved for displaying, placing or posting only if the materials conform to the criteria set out in this chapter. (Ord. 1269 § 1, 2006; Ord. 351, 1979)

12.20.020 Definitions.
(A) The terms “City facility” and “City facilities” mean any real or personal property owned or leased by the City of Palmdale.

(B) “Written materials” includes announcements, notices and general information in the form of posters, flyers, cards, leaflets, handbills, pamphlets and booklets.

(C) The term “the City” means the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1269 § 1, 2006; Ord. 351 §§ 2, 10, 1979)

12.20.030 Request approval.
(A) The City reserves the right to approve or deny any request for displaying written materials at or on a City facility. Any individual or entity wishing to display written materials at or on a City facility must receive approval from the City prior to posting any written materials. The City Manager, or his designee, is authorized to prepare and approve a request form to be completed by those individuals and entities seeking to display written materials at City facilities.

(B) The City Manager, or his designee, shall be responsible for the issuance or denial of any request for display under this chapter; provided, however, that any denial shall be in writing and shall be subject to appeal to the City Council within 30 days after the date of the denial. (Ord. 1269 § 1, 2006; Ord. 351 §§ 1, 11, 1979)

12.20.040 Maximum length of time.
Written materials will be displayed, placed or posted only for a 14-day period unless a longer period of time is requested and approved. (Ord. 1269 § 1, 2006; Ord. 351 § 4, 1979)

12.20.050 Size limit.
Written materials larger than approximately 18 inches by 24 inches shall not be approved for display, placement or posting. (Ord. 1269 § 1, 2006; Ord. 351 § 5, 1979)

12.20.060 Commercial advertising.
(A) Written materials in the nature of commercial, business, sales, help wanted or work wanted advertisements shall not be approved for posting, unless the written materials are submitted by a community nonprofit agency, group or organization.

(B) Commercial, business, sales, help wanted or work wanted advertisements shall include but not be limited to written materials advertising the sale of merchandise, goods, property or services, or written materials advertising meetings or conferences, whether open to the public or not, for the purpose of selling or promoting the sale of merchandise, goods, property or services. (Ord. 1269 § 1, 2006; Ord. 351 §§ 6, 12, 1979)

12.20.070 Facility availability.
Written materials submitted for display, placement or posting shall be displayed, placed or posted only in a City facility if a specific area is provided for this purpose. Display of written materials shall be limited to specific areas designated and identified as areas for display, placement or posting, such as dedicated literature racks, bulletin boards or message boards. Written materials shall not be displayed, placed or posted on trees, light posts, utility poles or boxes, fences, playground equipment, paved surfaces, park structures, walls, windows, doors or buildings located on or in City facilities. (Ord. 1269 § 1, 2006; Ord. 351 § 9, 1979)

12.20.080 Penalty for violation.
Every person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted, and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 1269 § 1, 2006; Ord. 351 § 13, 1979)

Chapter 12.24
DISPLAYING PERSONAL PROPERTY FOR SALE – PARKING FOR REPAIROR MAINTENANCE
Sections:

12.24.010    Definitions.

12.24.020    Prohibited parking or display.

12.24.030    Violation – Removal authorized.

12.24.040    Exceptions – Parking or display on private residential property.

12.24.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

(A) “Designated road” means the local street that runs adjacent and parallel to Avenue S, between 26th Street East and 30th Street East. The designated road shall be posted with signs with the following language, or language substantially similar: “Display of Vehicles for Sale Prohibited.”

(B) “Vehicle” means a vehicle as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code as the section reads as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or may thereafter be amended.

(C) “Vessel” means a vessel as defined in Section 9840(a) of the California Vehicle Code as it reads as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or may thereafter be amended. (Ord. 1417 § 1, 2011; Ord. 542 § 1, 1984)

12.24.020 Prohibited parking or display.
No person shall park a vehicle, vessel or other personal property:

(A) Upon a designated road for the purpose of displaying such vehicle, vessel or other personal property thereon for sale, hire or rental;

(B) Upon any roadway for the principal purpose of painting, greasing or repairing a vehicle or property thereon except repairs necessitated by emergency;

(C) Upon any roadway for the principal purpose of washing or polishing such vehicle or vessel or any part thereof when a charge is made for such service. (Ord. 1417 § 1, 2011; Ord. 542 § 2, 1984)

12.24.030 Violation – Removal authorized.
(A) Any person violating or failing to comply with any provision, regulation, or requirement of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a violation pursuant to Chapter 1.12 PMC.

(B) Vehicles parked on a designated road for the purpose of displaying such vehicle for sale may be removed pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22651.9. (Ord. 1417 § 1, 2011; Ord. 542 § 3, 1984)

12.24.040 Exceptions – Parking or display on private residential property.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, this chapter shall not prohibit any person from parking, for the purpose of displaying for sale, up to two vehicles on (1) privately owned property if such property is zoned for residential use and such person resides on such property or (2) the public street immediately adjacent to such private property. (Ord. 701, 1987)

Chapter 12.30
SHOPPING CARTS
Sections:

12.30.010    Purpose – Declaration of nuisance.

12.30.020    Definitions.

12.30.030    Shopping cart signs required.

12.30.040    Unauthorized removal or possession of a shopping cart.

12.30.050    Abatement, removal and storage of abandoned shopping cart.

12.30.060    Shopping cart control plan.

12.30.070    Shopping cart control plan approval.

12.30.080    Shopping cart control plan modification.

12.30.090    Shopping cart control plan renewal.

12.30.100    Enforcement.

Code reviser’s note: Section 2 of Ordinance 1336 provides, “Enforcement of this ordinance shall be stayed until January 1, 2009.”

12.30.010 Purpose – Declaration of nuisance.
Many retail establishments provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers while shopping on the premises of such businesses. However, shopping carts removed from the premises of such businesses and left abandoned on public or private property throughout the City constitute a public nuisance and a potential hazard to the health and safety of the public. The proliferation of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts on public and private property causes blighting conditions in the community, results in the obstruction of free access to public and private sidewalks, streets, parking lots and other ways, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on public and private streets, and impedes emergency services. For the aforesaid reasons, such lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts are declared to be a public nuisance which shall be subject to abatement in the manner set forth in this chapter or in any other manner provided by law. The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations to ensure that reasonable measures are taken by the owners and operators of businesses which provide shopping carts for the convenience of customers to deter the removal of shopping carts from business premises and parking lots, and provide for the prompt retrieval of lost, stolen or abandoned shopping carts, to complement and supplement provisions of state law, and to adopt local regulations to the extent not otherwise preempted by state statute. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.020 Definitions.
Except as otherwise expressly set forth herein, the following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

(A) “Abandoned shopping cart” means a shopping cart which is either (1) removed from the premises of a retail establishment by any person without the written permission or consent of the owner of the shopping cart or the retailer otherwise entitled to possession of such cart, or (2) left unattended, discarded or abandoned upon any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which the shopping cart was removed, regardless of whether such shopping cart was removed from the premises with the permission of the owner. For purposes of this chapter, any shopping cart located on any public or private property other than the premises of the retail establishment from which such shopping cart was removed shall be presumed lost, stolen or abandoned, even if in the possession of any person, unless such person in possession thereof either (1) is the owner, or an employee or authorized agent of the owner, entitled to possession of the shopping cart, (2) is an officer, employee or agent of a cart retrieval service hired by the owner to retrieve such carts, or (3) is an enforcement officer retrieving, storing or disposing of the cart pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

(B) “Cart control plan” means a written plan, developed in accordance with PMC 12.30.060 and approved by the City, to prevent customers from removing shopping carts from the premises of a retail establishment without authorization of the owner and to provide for the prompt retrieval of any abandoned shopping cart.

(C) “Director” means the Director of Planning of the City, or his or her designee.

(D) “Enforcement personnel” means any person authorized to issue citations as set forth in PMC 1.16.010.

(E) “Owner” means any owner, manager, or operator of any retail establishment.

(F) “Parking area” means a parking lot or other property provided by a retail establishment for the use of customers of such retail establishment for parking of customer vehicles. The parking area of a retail establishment located in a multistore complex or shopping center shall include the entire parking area used by the multistore complex or shopping center.

(G) “Planning Commission” means the Planning Commission of the City.

(H) “Premises” means any building, property or other area upon which any retail establishment business is conducted or operated in the City, including the parking area provided for customers of such retail establishment.

(I) “Retail establishment” means any business located in the City which offers or provides shopping carts for the use of the customers of such business regardless of whether such business is advertised or operated as a retail or wholesale business, and regardless of whether such business is open to the general public, or is a private club or business, or is a membership store.

(J) “Shopping cart” or “cart” means a basket which is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.030 Shopping cart signs required.
(A) Each shopping cart used within the City shall have a permanently affixed, and clearly visible, sign that:

(1) Identifies the owner of the cart or owner’s retail establishment, or both;

(2) Lists the address of the owner of the retail establishment for shopping cart return and a telephone number at which a person may contact the owner to retrieve the shopping cart;

(3) Notifies the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of the cart from the premises; and

(4) Notifies the public that the unauthorized removal of the cart from the premises or parking area of the retail establishment, or the unauthorized possession of the cart, is a violation of state law.

(B) It shall be the responsibility of each shopping cart owner to comply with subsection (A) of this section, and to continuously maintain, or cause to be maintained, the required sign in such a manner that the required information is accurate, current, and clearly legible. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.040 Unauthorized removal or possession of a shopping cart.
(A) It is unlawful to do any of the following acts, if a shopping cart has a permanently affixed sign as provided in PMC 12.30.030:

(1) To remove a shopping cart from the premises or parking area of a retail establishment with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.

(2) To be in possession of any shopping cart that has been removed from the premises or the parking area of a retail establishment, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.

(3) To be in possession of any shopping cart with serial numbers removed, obliterated, or altered, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.

(4) To leave or abandon a shopping cart at a location other than the premises or parking area of the retail establishment with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.

(5)  To alter, convert, or tamper with a shopping cart, or to remove any part or portion thereof or to remove, obliterate or alter serial numbers on a cart, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.

(6) To be in possession of any shopping cart while that cart is not located on the premises or parking lot of a retail establishment, with the intent to temporarily or permanently deprive the owner or retailer of possession of the cart.

(B) This section shall not apply to the owner of a shopping cart or to a retailer, or to their agents or employees, or to a customer of a retail establishment who has written consent from the owner of a shopping cart or a retailer to be in possession of the shopping cart or to remove the shopping cart from the premises or the parking area of the retail establishment, or to do any of the acts specified in subsection (A) of this section.

(C) In any civil proceeding, any shopping cart which has a sign affixed to it pursuant to PMC 12.30.030 shall establish a rebuttable presumption affecting the burden of producing evidence that the property is that of the person or business named in the sign and not abandoned by the person or business named in the sign.

(D) In any criminal proceeding, it may be inferred that any shopping cart which has a sign affixed to it pursuant to PMC 12.30.030 is the property of the person or business named in the sign and has not been abandoned by the person or business named in the sign. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.050 Abatement, removal and storage of abandoned shopping cart.
(A) The City Manager, or his designee, is authorized to abate, remove and store abandoned shopping carts found within the City. Procedures relating to the abatement, removal and storage of abandoned shopping carts shall be pursuant to Section 22435.7 of the California Business and Professions Code.

(B) The administrative fees for the removal and storage of shopping carts shall be established or modified by resolution of the City Council and shall include the actual cost of removal and storage of any shopping cart, or parts thereof, and the proportionate share of any administrative costs associated therewith. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.060 Shopping cart control plan.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every owner who provides shopping carts to customers for use on the premises of any retail establishment shall develop, implement and comply with the provisions of a written plan approved by the City designed to prevent customers from removing shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment without authorization of the owner and to provide for the prompt retrieval of any abandoned shopping cart.

(B) The shopping cart control plan shall be designed to effectively prevent the removal of shopping carts from the retail establishment. The owner shall have the obligation to provide demonstrable evidence to the Director that the elements proposed will be effective. The plan shall include the following elements:

(1) Signs Affixed to Carts. Every shopping cart made available for use by customers shall comply with the sign requirements of PMC 12.30.030.

(2) Signs Posted on Premises. Conspicuous signs, in both English and Spanish, shall be placed and maintained on the premises near all customer entrances and exits and throughout the premises, including the parking area, warning customers that removal of shopping carts from the premises is prohibited by state law.

(3) Shopping Cart Inventory. The cart control plan shall include a complete list of all shopping carts maintained on or in the retail establishment.

(4) Cart Containment. Specific physical measures shall be implemented and maintained by the owner to prevent, deter or impede the removal of shopping carts from the premises. Such physical measures shall be specifically identified in the cart control plan and may include, but are not limited to, the following:

(a) Electronic or other disabling devices installed and maintained on carts;

(b) Maintaining one or more security guards assigned the responsibility to deter or stop customers from removing shopping carts from the premises;

(c) Providing courtesy clerks to accompany customers out of the store and return shopping carts to the store;

(d) Any other physical measures designed to prevent, deter or impede the removal of shopping carts from the premises that is approved by the City.

(5) Employee Training. The owner of the retail establishment shall implement and maintain a periodic training program for its new and existing employees designed to educate such employees concerning the requirements of the cart control plan and the provisions of state law prohibiting the unauthorized removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment. The cart control plan shall expressly describe the employee training program.

(6) Cart Confinement During Non-Business Hours. The cart control plan shall include a plan for storing shopping carts during non-business hours to prevent theft while the retail establishment is closed.

(7) Shopping Cart Retrieval. The cart control plan shall include provisions for the retrieval of abandoned shopping carts. The cart retrieval element should identify the following:

(a) Retrieval Personnel. The owner shall provide personnel for purposes of the retrieval of abandoned shopping carts. Such personnel may be either employees of the business or one or more independent contractors hired by the owner to provide shopping cart retrieval services, or a combination of both. The cart control plan shall either (i) identify the number of employees who will be assigned such cart retrieval duties, the number of total hours per week that each assigned employee will perform such services (in addition to any on-premises retrieval duties to which such employee may be assigned), and the training each of such personnel has received or will receive concerning the retrieval of abandoned shopping carts, and/or (ii) include a copy of each contract with a cart retrieval service (other than confidential financial information which may be redacted from the contract).

(b) Retrieval Area. The owner shall provide retrieval personnel in sufficient number to assure that all public streets within a minimum one and one-half mile radius of the premises of the retail establishment are patrolled not less often than every 48 hours, and all bus stops within a minimum one and one-half mile radius of the retail establishment are patrolled not less often than every 24 hours, and each abandoned shopping cart owned or provided by the retail establishment which is found as a result of such patrols is immediately retrieved and removed from any public or private property upon which the cart is found. The cart control plan shall identify the perimeter streets and bus stops in which all streets within the perimeter area will be patrolled as required by this subsection; the manner, frequency and times of such patrols; and the procedures to be employed by the retail establishment to identify and retrieve any abandoned shopping carts. The cart control plan shall identify the number of trucks, hours of operation of the retrieval personnel, and such other information as reasonably required by the City to assure that the owner is devoting sufficient resources to cart retrieval operations to comply with the provisions of this section and the approved cart control plan.

(C) Collaboration with Other Businesses. Two or more retail establishments located within the same shopping or retail center or sharing a common parking area may collaborate and submit a single cart control plan.

(D) Exemption. The requirements of this section shall not apply to any retail establishment that provides a total of 10 or less shopping carts for use by customers. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.070 Shopping cart control plan approval.
(A) New or Relocated Retail Establishments. Unless exempt, each new retail establishment, and any existing retail establishment relocating to a different location within the City, shall submit a proposed shopping cart control plan complying with the requirements of PMC 12.30.060 to the Director, and obtain approval thereof by the City, prior to providing any shopping carts to customers of the retail establishment. Each proposed shopping cart control plan shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council. No proposed plan shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director unless accompanied by the processing fee established by the City Council.

(B) Existing Retail Establishments. Unless exempt, each existing retail establishment shall submit a proposed plan complying with the requirements of PMC 12.30.060 to the Director within 180 calendar days following the date of adoption of this chapter. Each proposed plan shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council. No proposed plan shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director unless accompanied by the processing fee as established by the City Council.

(C) Plan Review and Approval. Upon the filing of any proposed shopping cart control plan pursuant to PMC 12.30.060 or a request for renewal of an approved shopping cart control plan pursuant to PMC 12.30.090, and receipt of the required processing fee, the Director shall review the proposed plan and either approve or deny approval of the proposed plan within 30 calendar days following the receipt thereof by the Director. The Director may deny a plan based upon any of the following grounds:

(1) Implementation of the plan violates any provision of the building, zoning, health, safety, fire, police or other provision of this code or any county, state or federal law that substantially affects public health, welfare, or safety;

(2) The plan fails to include all of the information required by this chapter;

(3) The plan is insufficient or inadequate to prevent removal of shopping carts from the premises;

(4) The plan is insufficient or inadequate to ensure the prompt retrieval of shopping carts removed from the premises;

(5) The plan fails to address any special or unique conditions due to the geographical location of the premises as they relate to shopping cart retention and theft prevention efforts;

(6) Implementation of the plan violates a term or condition of a plan or other requirement of this code;

(7) The owner knowingly makes a false statement of fact or omits a fact required to be revealed in an application for the plan, or in any amendment or report or other information required to be made.

(D) The decision of the Director shall be made in writing and notice thereof shall be transmitted to the owner of the retail establishment by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, or by personal delivery or fax transmission. The notice of decision of the Director shall be deemed given to the owner on the date of personal delivery or on the date of the fax transmission to the owner. Notices given by the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid, shall be deemed given to the owner on the fifth day following the date of deposit in the course of transmission with the United States Postal Service, first-class mail, postage prepaid. If the proposed plan is denied, the notice of decision given to the owner shall state the grounds upon which the proposed plan was denied. If the plan is rejected as incomplete or inadequate, the Director shall indicate areas of incompleteness or inadequacy, and the owner shall have an additional 30 days in which to resubmit a complete and adequate plan. The decision of the Director is final.

(E) Upon approval, a shopping cart control plan shall be valid for a period of five years. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.080 Shopping cart control plan modification.
(A) Amendments by Owner. The owner of any retail establishment which has an approved shopping cart control plan conforming to the requirements of this chapter may, at any time, submit a proposed amendment to the approved plan, which amendment shall be processed in accordance with the procedure provided for a proposed shopping cart control plan as set forth in PMC 12.30.070. Each proposed amendment shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council. No proposed amendment shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director unless accompanied by the processing fee as established by the City Council.

(B) Revocation or Amendment by City. An approved shopping cart control plan may be revoked by the Director, or modified in lieu of revocation in the exercise of the Director’s sound discretion, upon any of the following grounds:

(1) The owner of any retail establishment is operating, or is permitting operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the provisions of the approved shopping cart control plan and has failed to correct the violation(s) for a period of at least 15 calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the City; or

(2) The owner of any retail establishment with an approved shopping cart control plan is operating, or is permitting the operation of, the retail establishment in violation of one or more of the requirements of this chapter and has failed to correct the violation(s) for a period of at least 15 calendar days following the date of receipt of written notice of such violation(s) from the City; or

(3) The shopping cart control plan, as approved, is inadequate to prevent the removal of shopping carts from the premises of the retail establishment, or reasonably ensure the prompt retrieval of abandoned shopping carts; or

(4) The owner of any retail establishment knowingly makes a false statement of fact or omits a fact required to be revealed in an application for the shopping cart control plan, or in any amendment or in any other required document. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.090 Shopping cart control plan renewal.
(A) Prior to the expiration of an approved shopping cart control plan, the owner of any retail establishment holding an approved shopping cart control plan shall submit to the Director a request for renewal. Each request for renewal shall be accompanied by a processing fee in an amount as set by resolution of the City Council. No request for renewal shall be accepted for filing and processing by the Director unless accompanied by the processing fee as established by the City Council.

(B) The request for renewal shall:

(1) Include a copy of the approved shopping cart control plan;

(2) Demonstrate compliance with the approved cart control plan;

(3) Identify any proposed amendments to the approved cart control plan; and

(4) Identify the number of carts retrieved under the approved cart control plan.

(C) Requests for renewal shall be processed in accordance with PMC 12.30.070(C) and the decision of the Director shall be made in accordance with PMC 12.30.070(D).

(D) A renewed shopping cart control plan shall be valid for a period of five years. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

12.30.100 Enforcement.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as set forth in PMC Title 1. Where the conduct constituting the violation is of a continuing nature, each day that the conduct continues shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. (Ord. 1336 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 12.32
MAINTENANCE OF DRAINAGE FACILITIES
Sections:

12.32.010    Findings.

12.32.020    Depositing or leaving debris.

12.32.030    Penalty for violation.

12.32.010 Findings.
The City Council finds, determines and declares as follows:

(A) Regulations as set forth in this chapter are required so as to permit drainage facilities and structures located on publicly and privately owned properties within the City to be free and clear of all trash, debris, vegetation and other material which would, or might, impede the free flow of storm waters therein; and

(B) Numerous complaints have been made by residents of the City concerning public and private drainage facilities, natural and manmade, which are overgrown with vegetation and blocked by such weeds, debris and other material; and

(C) This chapter is necessary in order to eliminate such conditions; damage to properties and possible injury to persons will result unless the ordinance codified in this chapter is immediately adopted; and

(D) The public interest, convenience and necessity require the immediate adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 2, 2009; Ord. 268 § l, 1975. Formerly 13.08.010)

12.32.020 Depositing or leaving debris.
No person, firm or corporation shall place, deposit or leave any trash, debris or any other material upon or in any natural or manmade storm water drainage facility, publicly or privately owned, within the City. Nor shall any such person who is the owner or person in possession of any real property located within the City, upon which a privately owned natural or manmade storm water drainage facility or channel is located, shall permit or allow the deposit in the facility of any trash, debris, vegetation or other material which could, or might, block, in whole or in part, the flow of water therein. (Ord. 1376 § 2, 2009; Ord. 268 § 2, 1975. Formerly 13.08.020)

12.32.030 Penalty for violation.
A violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed to be a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than six months, or both. Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed or permitted shall be deemed to be a separate offense. (Ord. 1376 § 2, 2009; Ord. 268 § 3, 1975. Formerly 13.08.030)

Title 13
SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Chapters:

13.02    Definitions and General Provisions

13.04    Repealed

13.05    Sewer Collection Service Charges

13.08    Permits, Fees, Design and Inspection Requirements

13.11    Industrial Waste

13.14    Sanitary Sewer Overflow Prevention Provisions

Chapter 13.02
DEFINITIONS AND GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

Article I. Definitions

13.02.010    Purpose of sanitary sewer and industrial waste ordinance provisions.

13.02.020    Definitions applicable to title.

Article II. General Provisions

13.02.030    Time limits – Extension permitted when.

13.02.040    Responsibility and maintenance of facilities – Applicability of provisions.

13.02.050    Inspection to ascertain compliance – Access required – Acceptance of permit conditions.

13.02.060    Notice service procedures.

13.02.070    Obstructing access to facilities prohibited.

13.02.080    Limitation and notification of uncontrolled discharges required.

13.02.090    Notification of uncontrolled or slug discharges required.

13.02.100    Violation – Penalty – Continued violations – Injunctive relief.

Article I. Definitions

13.02.010 Purpose of sanitary sewer and industrial waste ordinance provisions.
The provisions of the sanitary sewer and industrial waste ordinance codified in this title shall apply to the discharge, deposit or disposal of all wastes, including any material which may cause pollution of underground or surface waters, in, upon or affecting the City of Palmdale; and the design, construction, alteration, use and maintenance of public sewers and house laterals, industrial connection sewers, water pollution control plants, sewage pumping plants, industrial liquid-waste pretreatment plants, sand and grease interceptors, and appurtenances; the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor, and fees to pay the cost of checking plans, inspecting the construction and making record plans of the facilities permitted hereunder or as provided elsewhere in this code; and providing penalties for violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.02.020 Definitions applicable to title.
The definitions in this chapter shall govern the construction of this title and any permits issued thereunder unless otherwise apparent from the context or as identified separately in this chapter.

“Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. 1251, et seq.

“Best management practices (BMPs)” means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices to prevent or reduce pollutants in discharges, to implement the prohibitions listed in national pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b), and prevent the discharge of substance that may contribute to sanitary sewer overflows. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.

“Categorical industrial user (CIU)” means an industrial user that is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards.

“Categorical pretreatment standards” means limitations on pollutant discharges to publicly owned treatment works promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 of the Act that apply to specific process wastewaters or particular industrial categories (40 CFR 403.6 and 405 through 471).

“Cesspool” means a lined excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a drainage system, or part thereof, so designed as to retain the organic matter and solids discharging therein, but permitting the liquids to seep through the bottom and sides, and constructed pursuant to the provisions of PMC 8.04.600 et seq.

“Chimney” means a vertical section of a sewer pipe extending either from a vertical tee set 90 degrees to the main line or from a long-radius one-quarter bend set vertically at the curb of property line, and in either case suitably reinforced with concrete.

“Days” shall mean calendar days unless otherwise stated.

“Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City of Palmdale, or his authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector unless otherwise specifically defined.

“Discharge” means the introduction of pollutants either directly or indirectly into a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) from any nondomestic source regulated under Chapter 307(b), (c) or (d) of the Act.

“Discharger” shall mean any person that discharges or causes a discharge to a public sewer.

“Domestic sewage” means the waterborne wastes derived from ordinary living processes, and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or by means of a private sewage disposal system.

“Effluent” means the liquid flowing out of any treatment plant or facility constructed and operated for the partial or complete treatment of sewage or industrial waste.

“Fats, oils, and greases (FOG)” means non-petroleum organic polar compounds derived from animal and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain triglyceride molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using analytical procedures established in the United States Code of Federal Regulations 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are sometimes referred to herein as “grease” or “greases.”

“FOG disposal system” means a grease interceptor that reduces fats, oils, and grease (FOG) in effluent by separation, and mass and volume reduction.

“Food service establishment” means a facility engaged in preparing food for consumption by the public such as a restaurant, bakery, commercial kitchen, caterer, hotel, school, religious institution, hospital, prison, correctional facility, or care institution (e.g., hospital, medical center, retirement home, clinic, or physicians or dental office that provides direct patient care).

“Food waste disposal unit” shall mean a device installed under a kitchen sink to grind and liquefy food waste so that it can go down the drain.

“Frontage” means the length or width in feet applied to a lot based on the benefit received from the abutting sewer, as determined by the Director.

“Gravity grease interceptor” means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept FOG from a wastewater discharge and is identified by volume, 30-minute retention time, baffle(s), a minimum of two compartments, a minimum total volume of 750 gallons, and gravity separation.

“Grease interceptor” means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept FOG from a wastewater discharge.

“Grease removal device (GRD)” means any hydromechanical grease interceptor that automatically, mechanically removes FOG from the interceptor, the control of which is either automatic or manually initiated.

“Grease trap” means a multi-baffle, single compartment, 10- to 50-gallon capacity device, serving one to a maximum of four fixtures designed for the removal of FOG from food service establishment discharges.

“House lateral” means that part of the sewer piping which extends from the discharging premises to a connection with the mainline sewer.

“Hydromechanical grease interceptor” means a plumbing appurtenance or appliance that is installed in a sanitary drainage system to intercept FOG from a wastewater discharge and is identified by flow rate, and separation and retention efficiency. The design incorporates air entrainment, hydromechanical separation, interior baffling, and/or barriers in combination or separately, and one of the following:

(1) External flow control, with air intake (vent): directly connected.

(2) External flow control, without air intake (vent): directly connected.

(3) Without external flow control, directly connected.

(4) Without external flow control, indirectly connected.

“Illicit discharge” means any discharge to the sanitary sewer system that is prohibited under local, state, or federal statutes, ordinances, codes, or regulations. Illicit discharges include all non-domestic sewage discharges not permitted under the provisions of this title and discharges through connections to the sanitary sewer system, either directly or through satellite collection systems, not authorized pursuant to Chapter 13.08 PMC, sanitary sewers.

“Industrial building” means any building, structure or works which is, or which is designed to be used for the manufacture, processing or distribution of materials, equipment, supplies, food or commodities of any description; or which may be used or designed to be used as a school, sanitarium, hospital, penal institution or charitable institution, together with all appurtenances thereto and the surrounding premises under the same ownership or control.

“Industrial connection sewer” means that part of the sewer piping which extends from the building connection to a connection with the mainline sewer through which is discharged industrial waste.

“Industrial user” or “user” means a source of indirect discharge.

“Industrial waste treatment facility” means any works or device for the treatment, storage or control of industrial waste within a site prior to disposal.

“Industrial wastewater” means any and all waste substances, liquid or solid, except domestic sewage, rainwater, groundwater, stormwater and includes among other things radioactive wastes and explosive, noxious or toxic gas when present in the sewage system. Industrial wastewater may include all wastewater from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural, or other operation where the wastewater discharged includes significant quantities of wastes of nonhuman origin. All liquid wastes hauled by truck, rail, or another means for disposal to the sewer shall be considered as industrial wastewater regardless of the original source of the wastes. Hauled domestic wastewater is included in the category of industrial wastewater.

“Inflow/infiltration (I/I)” means water that is dumped into the sewer system through improper connections, such as downspouts and groundwater sump pumps. Sump pumps that pump only laundry water or other sanitary wastes are not a problem (inflow), nor is groundwater that enters the sewer system through leaks in pipes (infiltration).

“Interceptor” means a device designed and installed so as to separate and retain deleterious, hazardous or undesirable matter from wastes.

“Interference” means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources:

(1) Inhibits or disrupts the publicly owned treatment works (POTW), its treatment processes or operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and

(2) Is therefore a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent state or local regulations): Chapter 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Chapter II, more commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including the state regulations contained in any sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, and the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.

“Mainline sewer” means any public sewer in a dedicated right-of-way which attaches to and collects wastewater being discharged from a house lateral or industrial connection sewer. Such sewers are generally eight inches or more in diameter.

“National categorical pretreatment standard,” “NCPS,” “national pretreatment standard,” “pretreatment standard,” or “standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Chapters 307(b) and (c) of the Act which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to Chapter 403.5 of Chapter 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations.

“New source” means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Chapter 307(c) of the Act applicable to such source.

“North American Industry Classification System (NAICS)” means a classification of business establishments developed and updated periodically by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget.

“NPDES permit” means a National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permit issued pursuant to Chapter 402 of the Act.

“Off-site disposal” means the disposal or removal of industrial wastes or other materials regulated by this title to a site other than the premises where the wastes were generated, whether or not such site is under the control of the industrial waste disposal permittee.

“On-site disposal” means the management, treatment, control or disposal, other than to the public sewer system, of industrial wastes or other materials within the premises named in an industrial waste disposal permit, whether or not the wastes were generated at the permitted site or by the permittee.

“Pass through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW’s NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).

“Person” means an individual human being, a firm, partnership or corporation, his or their heirs, executors, administrators, assigns, officers or agents, any municipal, quasi-municipal or government agency, or district or officers thereof and any other organization or group of persons, public or private.

“Pollution of underground or surface waters” means affecting the chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of such waters by manmade or man-induced activities.

“Pretreatment” or “treatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW or other disposal facility. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes or process changes by use of an industrial waste treatment facility or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Title 403.6(d).

“Public sewer” means a mainline sanitary sewer dedicated to public use.

“Publicly owned treatment works” or “POTW” means a treatment works as defined by Title 212 of the Act, which is owned by a state or municipality (as defined by Title 502(4) of the Act). This definition includes any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. It also includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant (40 CFR 403.3).

“Radioactive material” is defined to be any material composed of or containing chemical elements which spontaneously change their atomic structure by the emission of alpha or beta particles or gamma rays or any other particles or rays or forms of energy.

“Rainwater diversion system” means any device designated to prevent the entry of storm waters into the public sewer system or other waste disposal or treatment systems, and to redirect storm flows to appropriate areas.

“Saddle” shall mean:

(1) “Wye saddle” means a short pipe-fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the mainline sewer such that the short pipe shall form a 45-degree angle from the mainline sewer pipe; or

(2) “Tee saddle” means a short pipe-fitting with a shoulder at one end to allow the application of the fitting to a hole tapped in the mainline sewer such that the short pipe shall form a 90-degree angle from the mainline sewer pipe.

“Sanitary sewer overflows (SSO)” means any overflow, spill, release, discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater from a sanitary sewer system. SSOs include:

(1) Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that reach waters of the United States;

(2) Overflows or releases of untreated or partially treated wastewater that do not reach waters of the United States; and

(3) Wastewater backups into buildings and onto private properties that are caused by blockages or flow conditions within the publicly owned portions of a sanitary sewer system.

“Seepage pit” means a line excavation in the ground which receives the discharge of a septic tank, so designed as to permit the effluent from the septic tank to seep through its bottom and sides.

“Septic tank” means a watertight receptacle which receives the discharge from a sewerage system, designed and constructed so as to retain solids, digest organic matter through a period of detention, and allows the liquids to discharge either into the soil outside of the tank through a drain field system or one or more seepage pits.

“Septic tank effluent” is effluent from private septic tanks and shall be considered, for the purposes of this title involving the discharge of septic tank effluent, the same as industrial waste. Whenever this title refers to industrial waste, the reference shall include septic tank effluent.

“Sewage” means any waterborne or liquid wastes, including domestic sewage and industrial waste, but does not include or mean stormwater, groundwater, and roof or yard drainage.

“Sewage pumping plant” means any works or device used to raise sewage from a lower to a higher level or to overcome friction in a pipeline.

“Sewer disposal” means the disposal of industrial wastes or other materials into the public sewer system by means of a direct connection to the public sewer system from the premises named in an industrial waste disposal permit.

“Significant industrial user (SIU)” means that except where the control authority of a POTW has found an industrial user to be exempt pursuant to 40 CFR 403.3(v)(2) and (v)(3):

(1) All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR chapter I, subchapter N; and

(2) Any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons or more of process wastewater to a POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blow down wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry-weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the POTW control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement.

“Slug discharge” means any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause interference or pass through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations, local limits or permit conditions. Discharge of any prohibited material in any concentration shall be considered a slug discharge.

“Standard Industrial Classification (SIC)” means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972, as amended.

“State Board” means the State Water Resources Control Board.

“Tapping” means the forming of a tee or wye branch connection to a mainline sewer by installing a tee or wye saddle after the sewer is in place.

“Tee” or “T” means a fitting for a branch on which the spur joins the barrel of the pipe at an angle of approximately 90 degrees.

“Trunk sewer” means a sewer under the jurisdiction of the County Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles or the Consolidated Sewer Maintenance District of Los Angeles County or any other public agency.

“Uncontrolled discharge” means any discharge, intentional or accidental, occurring in such a manner that the discharger is unable to determine or regulate the quantity, quality or effects of the discharge.

“Water pollution control plant” means any works or device for treating sewage except any industrial waste treatment facility, and except any private sewage disposal system covered by the Palmdale plumbing code.

“Wye” or “Y” means a fitting for a branch on which the spur joins the barrel of the pipe at an angle of approximately 45 degrees. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article II. General Provisions

13.02.030 Time limits – Extension permitted when.
Any time limit provided for in the provisions of this title may be extended by mutual written consent of both the City and the permittee or applicant, or other person affected, except as otherwise provided. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.02.040 Responsibility and maintenance of facilities – Applicability of provisions.
The requirements contained in this title covering the maintenance of sanitary sewer collection system pipelines, sewage pumping plants, industrial waste pretreatment plants, or other appurtenances shall apply to all such facilities now existing or hereafter constructed.

(A) Responsibility and Maintenance for House Laterals and Industrial Connection Sewer. Each property owner is responsible for the installation, repair and maintenance of the entire house lateral or industrial connection sewer up to and including the wye or tee in the City’s main line. Each owner shall keep his/her house lateral/industrial connection sewer in good working order at his/her own expense and is responsible for damage to any of the City’s property which results from the owner’s use, repair or maintenance of the house lateral or industrial connection sewer within the control and responsibility of the owner. If repair and maintenance of the house lateral or industrial connection sewer extends into the mainline sewer at the sewer line tap, then the sewer tap repair at the main line becomes the responsibility of the City and no such repairs shall be done without the permission and approval of the City. All house laterals or industrial connection sewer shall be maintained by the owners thereof in a safe and sanitary condition, and all devices or safeguards which are required by this title for the operation of such facilities shall be maintained in good working order.

The City shall have the right to enter onto private property for the purpose of inspection and evaluation of house laterals or industrial connection sewer to assure safe and sanitary conditions.

(B) Responsibility and Maintenance of Mainline Sewers. The City is responsible for the operation, maintenance, repair and replacement of any mainline public sewer.

(C) Resolution of Disputes over Location of Sewer Malfunctions – Reimbursement to City. If the location of a sewer malfunction and the responsibility for its repair is disputed or cannot be determined from surface observation, the City may expose parts of the sewer line within the public street, public right-of-way, or public sewer as necessary to determine the cause of the malfunction and whether it originates within either the house lateral or industrial connection sewer or within the public sewer. If the malfunction is determined to be within the City public sewer for which the City is responsible, the City shall conduct the repair at no charge to the property owner. If the malfunction is determined to be within the house lateral or industrial connection sewer for which the property owner is responsible, the City may proceed with the repairs to such house lateral or industrial connection sewer upon notice to the property owner of the need for repair. The City may require a written reimbursement agreement executed by the property owner before beginning repair. A malfunctioning house lateral or industrial connection sewer is declared to be a public nuisance. The property owner shall reimburse the City for all costs necessarily incurred by the City in performing the repair work to the house lateral.

(D) This title shall not be construed as permitting the removal or nonmaintenance of any devices or safeguards on existing facilities unless authorized in writing by the City. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.02.050 Inspection to ascertain compliance – Access required – Acceptance of permit conditions.
(A) The City may inspect, as often as City deems necessary, every mainline or public sewer, sewage pumping plant, industrial waste pretreatment plant or facility, industrial sewer connection, interceptor, or other similar appurtenances to ascertain whether such facilities are maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this title. All persons shall permit and provide the City with access to all such facilities at reasonable times.

(B) An applicant by accepting a permit issued pursuant to this title does thereby consent and agree to entry upon the premises described in the permit by the City at all reasonable times for the purpose of:

(1) Inspection, sampling, flow measurement or examination of records;

(2) Placing on the premises devices for monitoring, flow measurement or metering;

(3) Inspecting and copying any records, reports, test results or other information required to carry out the provisions of this title; and

(4) Photographing any waste, waste container, vehicle, waste treatment process, discharge location, or violation discovered during an inspection. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.02.060 Notice service procedures.
Unless otherwise provided herein, any notice required to be given by the City under this title shall be in writing, and served in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure for the service of process, or by registered or certified mail. If served by mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address known to the City. Where the address is unknown, service may be made as above provided upon the owner of record of the property. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.02.070 Obstructing access to facilities prohibited.
No object, whether a permanent structure, or a temporary structure, or any object which is difficult to remove, shall be located in a sewer easement or placed in such a position as to interfere with the ready and easy access to any sewer easement. Any such obstruction, upon request of the City, shall be immediately removed by the violator at no expense to the City, and shall not be replaced. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.02.080 Limitation and notification of uncontrolled discharges required.
(A) No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into a public sewer:

(1) Any water, wastes or other matter which will result in the contamination, pollution or a nuisance;

(2) Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff or subsurface drainage.

(B) In the event of an uncontrolled discharge, the person, discharger or permittee shall within three hours notify the City of the incident by telephone. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of material, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken.

(C) Within 10 days after the uncontrolled discharge, the discharger or permittee shall submit to the City a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge, corrective action taken and measures to be taken to prevent future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the discharger or permittee of liability or fines incurred as a result of the uncontrolled discharge.

(D) Notification of the City does not relieve the person, discharger or permittee from notifying other agencies as required by law within the time frame required by the various agencies. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.02.090 Notification of uncontrolled or slug discharges required.
(A) In the event of an uncontrolled or slug discharge, the discharger or permittee shall immediately notify the City by telephone. The notification shall include location of the discharge, type of material, duration, concentration and volume, and corrective actions taken.

(B) Within 10 days after the uncontrolled or slug discharge, the discharger or permittee shall submit to the City a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge, corrective action taken and measures to be taken to prevent further occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the discharger or permittee of liability or fines incurred as a result of the uncontrolled or slug discharge. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.02.100 Violation – Penalty – Continued violations – Injunctive relief.
This title is enforceable as set forth in PMC Title 1 and violations of this title are punishable as set forth therein. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Chapter 13.04
SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE
(Repealed by Ord. 1376)

Chapter 13.05
SEWER COLLECTION SERVICE CHARGES
Sections:

13.05.010    Purpose.

13.05.020    Definitions.

13.05.030    Charge for sewer collection service.

13.05.040    Computation.

13.05.050    Sewer collection service charge.

13.05.060    Sewer enterprise fund established.

13.05.070    Power to inspect premises.

13.05.080    Collection of charges on tax roll.

13.05.090    Alternate method of collection.

13.05.100    Disputed bills.

13.05.110    Adjustments.

13.05.120    Refunds.

13.05.130    Table A – Sewage units for designated land uses.

13.05.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to impose a charge on users of the sanitary sewer collection system to reimburse the City for the reasonable costs of providing this service. The cost of providing sanitary sewer collection service includes the costs of acquisition, construction, reconstruction, maintenance, repairs, replacement and operation of the sanitary sewer system and the payment of principal and interest on bonds or other debt instruments issued for the construction or reconstruction of the sanitary sewer system. These costs are not related to expenses incurred to accommodate new development. The amount of the charge to each property owner shall be reasonably related to the services provided by the City. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.020 Definitions.
(A) “Parcel of real property” means a parcel of real property as shown on the local secured tax rolls of the county of Los Angeles.

(B) “Sewage unit” means that number listed in Table A of PMC 13.05.130 determined by the land use of a parcel of real property.

(C) “Sewage unit charge” means the annual charge determined by dividing the annual revenue requirement to provide sewer collection services by the total number of sewage units from all properties within the City of Palmdale corporate boundaries. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.030 Charge for sewer collection service.
There is hereby adopted and imposed a sewer collection service charge in the amounts as set forth herein and all persons whose real property is served by a connection to the City sewer system shall pay such charge pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. The charges established and imposed herein are applicable only to parcels of real property to which a City sewer main is connected. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.040 Computation.
The amount of the sewer collection service charge for each parcel of real property is computed by determining the total cost to the City to provide sewer collection services, dividing that total by the number of sewer units within the City, which result constitutes the sewage unit charge. The sewage unit charge is then multiplied by the number of sewage units allocated to a specific parcel based on the then current land use of such parcel, as shown in Table A, set forth in PMC 13.05.130, which result constitutes the annual sewer collection service charge for such parcel. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.050 Sewer collection service charge.
The annual sewage unit charge is $103.63. (Ord. 1466 § 1, 2015; Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.060 Sewer enterprise fund established.
There is hereby established a sewer enterprise fund in the financial records of the City. All fees and charges imposed, levied and collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited into the sewer enterprise fund. Nothing herein shall prevent the City from depositing other revenues in the sewer enterprise fund. The Director of Finance may establish such subaccounts within the sewer enterprise fund as may be necessary to properly account for collections and expenditures of the sewer collection service charges. The sewer collection service charges shall be used for the purposes allowed by law. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.070 Power to inspect premises.
In order to enforce the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to Section 6523.2 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, the City’s Director of Public Works shall have the power and authority to enter upon private property for the purpose of inspection and maintenance of sanitary and waste disposal facilities, including, but not limited to, ascertaining the nature of such premises, the type of activities carried on therein, the number of plumbing fixtures situated therein, and any other facts or information reasonably necessary to ascertain the applicability of any charges to such premises, or the amount of such charges. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.080 Collection of charges on tax roll.
(A) Except as specifically provided herein, sewer collection service charges, together with any delinquent charges or penalties, shall be collected on the tax roll by following the procedure set forth in Section 5473 et seq. of the California Health and Safety Code. The Director of Public Works and City Clerk shall prepare and file such reports and other documents as necessary to comply with the provisions thereof. Thereafter the amount of the charges shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner and by the same persons as, together with and not separately from, the general taxes for the City and shall be delinquent at the same time and thereafter be subject to the same delinquency penalties.

(B) The amount of the sewer collection service charges shall constitute a lien against the lot or parcel of land against which the charge has been imposed as of the date prescribed by law as the lien date for general property taxes.

(C) All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of general taxes of the County, including but not limited to those pertaining to matters of delinquency, collection, cancellation, refund and redemption, are applicable to such charges.

(D) The sewer service charges for any and all governmental or public premises or for any premises which are not subject to taxation on the tax roll shall be collected in accordance with other provisions of this chapter.

(E) If any parcel of real property for which a sewer collection service charge is owed is omitted from the report to the auditor or the tax roll, either because the charge therefor shall not have yet been ascertained by the Director of Public Works as of the date of the report or for any other reason, the sewer collection service charge for each such parcel shall be collected in accordance with other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.090 Alternate method of collection.
Sewer collection service charges imposed under the provisions of this chapter against owners of property not subject to taxation on the tax roll and against owners whose property is omitted from the report filed with the auditor or from the tax roll shall be billed on an annual or semiannual basis as determined by the Director of Public Works/designee, and shall be payable upon the billing of such charges to the owner. Bills for such sewer collection service charges are due and shall become delinquent 30 days after the date the bill is mailed and a penalty of 10 percent of the amount of such charge shall be added thereto and in addition shall bear interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month for each month or portion thereof that said charge remains unpaid after becoming delinquent. Delinquent charges, interest and penalty shall constitute a lien upon the real property served (except publicly owned property), and such lien shall continue until the charge and all penalties and interest thereon are fully paid. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.100 Disputed bills.
If any owner disputes the amount of the annual sewer collection service charge, the number of sewage units allocated to his or her parcel of real property, or the computation of the sewer collection service charge based on that number of units, such owner may submit, at or before the public hearing on the annual report, a protest or objection with the Director of Public Works accompanied by detailed supporting factual data in support of the claim. It shall be the duty of each such owner to provide evidence to the Director of Public Works showing that such charge, number of sewage units and/or computation by the City is in error and the correct amount thereof. If the Director of Public Works, after consulting with the City Engineer and Planning Director, determines that the number of units allocated or the computation was in error, the Director of Public Works shall make the necessary corrections to the report. Failure to protest or object within the time specified herein shall be deemed acceptance of the correctness of the charge, the number of units allocated and the computation of the charge and the adoption of the report by the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.110 Adjustments.
(A) It is the intent of the provisions of this chapter, in establishing different sewer service charges for different categories of properties, to reflect the benefit from such service to each parcel of real property. If, in respect to any customer, the Council should find that the charge is inequitable, or unfair because of unusual circumstances, it may establish a special service charge for such customer, differing from those otherwise established, which will bear a closer relationship to the benefit received from the City system. Such special charge may be revoked at any time by the Council whenever it finds that continuation thereof would be inequitable or unfair under the circumstances then prevailing.

(B) The owner of any premises who by reason of special circumstances finds that the applicable rates are unjust or inequitable as applied to his or her premises may make written application to the Director of Public Works, stating the circumstances and requesting a different basis of charges for such premises. If such application is approved, the Council may fix and establish fair and equitable rates for such premises to be effective as of the date of such application and continuing during the period of such special circumstances. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.120 Refunds.
When any refund becomes due and owing by virtue of action of the City Council or by virtue of any error made in ascertaining the charge applicable to any customer, the Director of Public Works is authorized to make payable such moneys from the specific fund established for the deposit of sewer service charges. (Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

13.05.130 Table A – Sewage units for designated land uses.
Table A – Number of Sewage Units for Current Land Use 

Land Use

Number of Sewage Units

RESIDENTIAL

 

Single Residential Unit – Condominium

1.00

Planned Unit Development (PUD)

1.00

Single Residential Unit

1.00

Single Residential Unit with Pool

1.00

Single Residential Unit Pool and Miscellaneous

1.00

Single Residential Unit with Spa

1.00

Single Residential Unit with Guesthouse

1.00

Other Improvements Only

1.00

Double, Duplex or Two Units

2.00

Double, Duplex or Two Units with Pool

2.00

Three Units (Any Combo)

3.00

Three Units (Any Combo) with Pool

3.00

Four Units (Any Combo)

4.00

Four Units with Pool

4.00

Five or More Apartments per Individual Residential Unit

1.00

Five or More Apartments per Individual Residential Unit with Pool

1.00

Manufactured Homes

 

Manufactured Homes

1.00

Rooming/Boarding House

 

Rooming/Boarding House

3.00

Manufactured Home Parks

1.00

Manufactured Home Parks with Pool

1.00

Mobile Home Park

1.00

Commercial

 

Commercial – General

1.00

Vacant Parcel That Has Improvement Value Due to Existing Nonstructural Other Improvements

2.00

Stores

 

Stores

1.00

Stores Combination

 

Store and Office Combo

2.00

Store and Residential Combo with Lift

2.00

Store and Residential Combo

2.00

Department Store

 

Department Store

5.00

Discount Department Store

5.00

Building Supplies

5.00

Retail-Warehouse Combo

5.00

Department Store/Warehouse

5.00

Supermarket

 

Supermarket

5.00

Supermarket (1,199 Square Feet through 6,000 Square Feet)

5.00

Shopping Center (Neighborhood)

 

Shopping Center

10.00

Shopping Center with Lift

10.00

Shopping Center (Regional)

 

Shopping Center

30.00

Office and Government Building

 

Office and Government Building

5.00

Office and Residential (2-story)

5.00

Office Building (Loft Type Building)

3.00

Office and Residential

2.00

Hotel and Motel

 

Hotel and Motel (Under 50 Rooms)

25.00

Hotel (50 Rooms and Over)

40.00

Motel (50 Rooms and Over)

40.00

Motel (50 Rooms and Over with Pool)

40.00

Professional Buildings

 

Professional Building

5.00

Medical Dental Building

5.00

Medical Dental Building (2-story)

5.00

Veterinary Clinic

5.00

COMMERCIAL

 

Restaurant, Cocktail Lounge

 

Restaurant, Cocktail Lounge

5.00

Fast Food – Walk Up

2.00

Wholesale and Manufacturing Outlet

 

Wholesale and Manufacturing Outlet

2.00

Bank, Savings and Loan

 

Bank, Savings and Loan

1.00

Service Shop

 

Service Shop

2.00

Service Station

 

No Additional Services

1.00

Service Station with Lift

1.00

Convenience Store

2.00

Self-Service with Lift

1.00

Self-Service Station

1.00

Self-Service with No Additional Services

1.00

With Carwash, with Lift

5.00

With Carwash, with No Additional Services

5.00

Auto, Recreational Equipment, Construction Equipment Sales and Service

 

Auto, Recreational Equipment, Construction Equipment Sales and Service

1.00

Auto Body Repair Shop

1.00

Used Car Sales

1.00

New Car Sales and Service

3.00

Car Wash Only

5.00

Car Wash Only, Self-Service Type

5.00

Auto Service Centers (No Gasoline)

1.00

Parking Lot (Commercial Use Property)

 

Parking Lot with Lift

0.50

Parking Lot

0.50

Lots – Commercial Parking

0.50

Parking Lot Commercial

0.50

Nursery or Greenhouse

 

Nursery or Greenhouse

1.00

Vacant Land

 

Vacant Parcel That Has Improvement Value Due to Existing Nonstructural Other Improvements

2.00

INDUSTRIAL

 

Miscellaneous Industrial

2.00

Light Manufacturing

 

Light Manufacturing with Lift

5.00

Light Manufacturing

5.00

Industrial Heavy Manufacturing

100.00

Warehousing Distribution Storage

 

Warehousing Distribution Storage Under 10,000 Square Feet

2.00

Warehousing Distribution Storage – 10,000 to 24,999 Square Feet

2.00

Warehousing Distribution Storage – 25,000 to 50,000 Square Feet

2.00

Warehousing Distribution Storage Over 50,000 Square Feet

2.00

Public Storage – Mini Warehouse

2.00

Food Processing Plant

 

With Wireless Communication Tower

200.00

Motion Picture, Radio, TV

 

General Motion Picture, Radio, TV

1.00

Lumber Yard

 

Lumber Yard

1.00

Mineral Processing

 

Mineral Processing General

2.00

Mineral Processing Cement/Gravel

2.00

Parking Lots – Industrial Use Open Storage

0.50

Vacant Parcel That Has Improvement Value Due to Existing Nonstructural Other Improvements

1.00

Open Storage

1.00

Irrigated Farms

 

Private Rural Pumping Plant

0.50

Irrigated Farm – Field Crops

0.50

Irrigated Farm – Fruit and Nuts

0.50

Irrigated Farm – Feed Lots

0.50

Dry Farm

 

Dry Farm – Fruit and Nuts

0.50

Dry Farm – Pasture

0.50

Dry Farm – Field Crops

0.50

Recreational

 

Theatre

2.00

Bowling Alleys

 

Bowling Alley

5.00

Clubs, Lodge Halls, Fraternal Organizations

 

Clubs, Lodge Halls, Fraternal Organizations

2.00

Athletic and Amusement Facilities

 

Athletic and Amusement Facilities

10.00

Commercial Swimming Pools, School

5.00

Athletic and Amusement Facilities – Gyms

2.00

Athletic and Amusement Facilities – Tennis

2.00

Golf Courses

3.00

Church

 

Church

2.00

Church Parking Lot

0.50

School

 

School

5.00

Hospital

 

Hospital

100.00

Convalescent Hospital, Nursing Home

50.00

Homes for Aged and Others

 

Homes for Aged and Others

10.00

Cemetery, Mausoleum, Mortuary

 

Cemetery, Mausoleum, Mortuary

1.00

Cemetery, Mausoleum

1.00

Miscellaneous

 

State Assessed Property Utility, Commercial and Mutual: Pumping Plant

5.00

(Ord. 1361 § 1, 2009; Ord. 1353 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 13.08
PERMITS, FEES, DESIGN AND INSPECTION REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

Article I. Sewer Permit Required

13.08.010    Sanitary sewer policy.

13.08.020    Sewer permit required when – Period of validity.

13.08.030    Permits – Issuance authorized when.

13.08.040    Exception.

13.08.050    Application – Form and contents.

13.08.060    Plan approval prerequisite to issuance.

13.08.070    Permit from other agencies required.

13.08.080    Connections to trunk sewers – Permit requirements.

13.08.090    Sewer permit – Determination of capacity – Agreement on future assessments.

13.08.100    Manhole inspection permit.

13.08.110    No transferability of permits.

Article II. Fees

13.08.120    Connection to public sewer – Payment of fees required.

13.08.130    Fees – Estimated valuation procedures.

13.08.140    Sewer capacity fee (connection fee) – Designated.

13.08.150    Tapping fee established, payment required when.

13.08.160    Area and connection charges in reimbursement districts.

13.08.170    Tap fee.

13.08.180    Manhole inspection fee.

13.08.190    Consolidated sewer maintenance district withdrawal fees.

13.08.200    Sewer maintenance charges.

13.08.210    Geographical information system (GIS) fees.

13.08.220    Charges for substantial increase in public sewer capacity.

13.08.230    Refund procedures.

Article III. Design Standards

13.08.240    Sanitary sewer system design standards.

13.08.250    Copy of the City Engineering Design Guidelines maintained by Director of Public Works.

13.08.260    Participation in project – Letter requirements.

13.08.270    Dedication of sewers.

13.08.280    Exceptions to requirements authorized when.

13.08.290    Plan preparation by registered civil engineer.

13.08.300    Sewer plans.

13.08.310    Materials and construction – Conformity with standard specifications.

13.08.320    Sewer easement requirements.

Article IV. Inspections

13.08.330    Inspection by City – Requirements.

13.08.340    Notice to City when ready for inspection.

13.08.350    Work to be convenient and uncovered.

13.08.360    Using facilities before inspection prohibited – Exceptions.

13.08.370    CCTV inspection of sewers prior to acceptance.

13.08.380    Correction of defective work.

13.08.390    Certificate of final inspection – Conditions.

Article V. Maintenance

13.08.400    Injuring or removing sewers or equipment.

13.08.410    Manholes – Opening or entering prohibited.

13.08.420    Reconnection following violations – Conditions – Cost reimbursement.

13.08.430    Reimbursement for repairs and maintenance following violations.

Article I. Sewer Permit Required

13.08.010 Sanitary sewer policy.
All new buildings constructed for human occupancy in the City of Palmdale shall be connected to a public sewer unless the parcel complies with General Plan Policy PS 2.2.4. All such sewers shall be designed and constructed according to the provisions of this title and any other provisions of the Palmdale Municipal Code. All sanitary sewers, including pumping stations, constructed and dedicated for public use shall be operated and maintained by the City of Palmdale and the benefitting property owner shall bear the cost thereof as provided in Chapter 13.05 PMC. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.020 Sewer permit required when – Period of validity.
(A) No person other than the person specifically excepted by this chapter shall commence, do or cause to be done, construct or cause to be constructed, use or cause to be used, alter or cause to be altered any public sewer, mainline sewer, manholes, inspection or sampling site, house lateral, sewage pumping plant, or other appurtenance thereto in the City of Palmdale without first obtaining a sewer permit from the City.

(B) Whenever a public sewer becomes available within 200 feet of the property where no public sewer was previously available under the provisions of this title, the property owner shall connect all building sewers or industrial connection sewers to the public sewer within 90 days after receiving official notice from the City. Property owners must abandon and fill with suitable materials, as determined by the City, any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or similar private sewage disposal systems.

(C) Prior to performing any construction, reconstruction or adjustment adjacent to an existing sewer manhole, the property owner or person performing such work must obtain a sewer permit from the City to ascertain that the sewer lines and manholes have been thoroughly cleaned and the manholes have been satisfactorily constructed, reconstructed or adjusted to City standards.

(D) A sewer permit is required for construction of industrial waste measuring manholes, reconstruction or adjustment of any portion of a manhole due to service connections or grading or paving operation, or any other work which in the opinion of the City may cause damage to a manhole.

(E) A sewer permit issued by the City shall expire one year from the date of issuance, except when the plans were approved in accordance with an agreement either with another governmental agency or for a subdivision as required by PMC Title 16, and the permit shall be valid for the period specified in the agreement. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.030 Permits – Issuance authorized when.
If it appears from the application for any permit required by this chapter that the application complies with all applicable requirements and that the work to be performed thereunder is to be done according to the provisions of this title, the City, upon receipt of the fees hereinafter required, may issue such permit. No permit will be issued pursuant to this chapter until the applicant has paid all appropriate fees and sewer collection service charges, as established from time to time by the City Council, to cover all costs including but not limited to the cost of field inspection of the proposed construction, procuring or preparing record plans, and all overhead and indirect costs. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.040 Exception.
Contractors constructing, maintaining or repairing public sewers and/or sanitary sewer pumping stations pursuant to a contract with the City of Palmdale are exempt from the requirement to obtain a sewer permit. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.050 Application – Form and contents.
Application for a sewer permit shall be made to the City on forms provided by the City and shall include all plans and other information requested by the City regarding the proposed work. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.060 Plan approval prerequisite to issuance.
No sewer permit will be issued until the application, plans and project details have been approved by the City as meeting all applicable City requirements and all required fees have been paid. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.070 Permit from other agencies required.
No sewer permit will be issued for the construction, installation, repair or removal of any public sewer, or appurtenances thereto which will necessitate any excavation or fill, in, upon or under any public street, highway or right-of-way under the jurisdiction of another public agency, unless the applicant has first obtained a permit from the agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.080 Connections to trunk sewers – Permit requirements.
No permit shall be issued for the direct connection of any lot to a trunk sewer until the applicant has first obtained a permit for such connection from the agency or owner of such trunk sewer. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.090 Sewer permit – Determination of capacity – Agreement on future assessments.
No sewer permit shall be issued for the direct connection of any lot to a public sewer which was not designed for and intended to directly serve such lot unless the City first determines that there is additional capacity available in such sewer beyond that required to serve the property for which it was designed. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.100 Manhole inspection permit.
(A) A permit shall be obtained from the City wherever construction, reconstruction or adjustment is to be performed adjacent to an existing sewer manhole, to ascertain that the sewer lines and manholes have been thoroughly cleaned and the manholes have been satisfactorily constructed, reconstructed or adjusted to City standards.

(B) This inspection is also required for construction of industrial waste measuring manholes, reconstruction or adjustment of any portion of a manhole due to service connections or grading or paving operation, or any other work which in the opinion of the City may cause damage to a manhole. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.110 No transferability of permits.
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter are not transferable from one person to another person or from one location to another location. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article II. Fees

13.08.120 Connection to public sewer – Payment of fees required.
Any person desiring to connect to a public sewer shall, as a prerequisite to obtaining the permits required by this chapter, pay all fees or charges which may be required by the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.130 Fees – Estimated valuation procedures.
Whenever the fees required by this chapter are based on valuations, the City shall determine the estimated valuation in all cases, and for such purposes the City shall be guided by approved estimating practices. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.140 Sewer capacity fee (connection fee) – Designated.
(A) No permit shall be issued for connection to the public sewer until there has been paid to the City a sewer capacity fee as established by the City Council and set forth in the City’s fee schedule. At the time of submission of application for permit for connection to the public sewer, an applicant shall pay such sewer capacity fee.

(B) The sewer capacity fee for all uses shall be determined in accordance with a sewer capacity fee study adopted by the City Council.

(C) Sewer capacity fees as defined by this chapter shall automatically adjust annually by the same percentage of change in the Consumer Price Index on March 1st of each year, for the All Urban Consumers, for the Los Angeles-Riverside-Orange County Area (CPI), as determined by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, or its successor. Should the Bureau of Labor Statistics revise such index, the Director of Finance shall use the revised index or a comparable system as approved by the City Council for determining fluctuations in the cost of living. The sewer capacity fees may also be recalculated at new sewer capacity fee unit costs established from time to time by the City Council to keep pace with changing cost of construction. (Ord. 1400 § 2, 2010; Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.150 Tapping fee established, payment required when.
(A) Any person seeking to connect a house lateral or industrial connection sewer to a public sewer at a point where no connection has been provided shall apply and obtain a City sewer permit and pay the tap fee established by the City Council before the City will schedule the new tap to be constructed.

(B) Tapping of the public sewer as required on sewer plans approved by the City shall be coordinated and installation contracted by the City upon payment of all fees. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.160 Area and connection charges in reimbursement districts.
(A) If any property is in a sewer reimbursement district, no permit shall be issued for the connection of such property to a public sewer until, in addition to any other fees required by this chapter, all area charges and frontage charges required by this section have been paid.

(B) An area charge computed by the area rates established for the reimbursement district shall be collected, whether or not additional public sewer is being constructed to serve the property. If the property is in more than one reimbursement district, an area charge shall be collected for each district.

(C) Additionally, if a reimbursement agreement pursuant to Chapter 16.165 PMC provides for frontage reimbursement, any lot located in the frontage reimbursement area and seeking direct house connection to any public sewer shall pay a reimbursement district connection charge in the amount specified in subsection (D) of this section.

(D) The reimbursement district connection charge shall be computed at the rate as established from time to time by the City Council in the fee resolution or as designated in the reimbursement agreement affecting the property. If a reimbursement district connection charge is collected as provided in this section, then the connection charge required by PMC 13.08.140 shall not be collected. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.170 Tap fee.
The applicant shall pay a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the Council to tap the public sewer and reimburse the City for all costs and expenses to coordinate, inspect and install the tap on behalf of the applicant or permittee. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.180 Manhole inspection fee.
A manhole inspection fee shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the City Council. These fees shall cover the costs of engineering, field inspection, and all overhead and indirect costs. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.190 Consolidated sewer maintenance district withdrawal fees.
Any person who desires to place a newly constructed public sewer system in operation and connect such sewer system to that operated by the City of Palmdale, and the property to be so benefited is not within the City limits of the City of Palmdale, then they shall pay a charge as determined from time to time by the City Council to cover all costs incurred to accomplish a withdrawal from the consolidated sewer maintenance district and inclusion within the City of Palmdale sanitary sewer service area, including the necessary State of California processing fee. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.200 Sewer maintenance charges.
(A) Any person who desires to connect a new house or industrial connection to a mainline sewer, or to place a newly constructed public sewer system in operation prior to the availability of sewer maintenance revenue from the property to be served by such sewer system, shall pay a sewer collection service charge in an amount determined by the City to cover such cost of maintaining such system from the time the sewer is placed in operation until the property so benefited is included on the next available property tax rolls and revenue becomes available.

(B) Such charge shall be computed by multiplying the sewage unit charge, as annually determined by the City Council from time to time, times the number of sewage units to be discharging from the subject property as determined in Chapter 13.05 PMC. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.210 Geographical information system (GIS) fees.
Any person desiring to connect to the public sewer system shall be required to pay a fee established from time to time by the City Council to reimburse the City for the costs to add all sewer collection system elements including pump stations and miscellaneous appurtenances data and information to the City GIS system, including mapping and data such as pipe materials, slope, size, etc., as required by the City. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.220 Charges for substantial increase in public sewer capacity.
The provisions of this chapter shall also apply to any property previously connected to a public sewer, the discharge from which is later proposed to be increased or is found to have been increased substantially beyond the proportionate share of public sewer capacity allotted to the property by the sewer permit. Any previously connected property discharging more than that permitted may be charged an additional sewer capacity fee and a charge to cover the cost of maintenance at the then-current fee or rate or any other fees and charges applicable to the substantial increase in public sewer capacity. (Ord. 1400 § 3, 2010; Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.230 Refund procedures.
(A) In the event that any person shall have paid a fee as required under this chapter and no work or processing has been done on these functions by the City and the project has been formally abandoned or cancelled, such person, upon presentation to the City of a request in writing, shall be entitled to a refund in an amount equal to not more than 75 percent of the fee actually paid.

(B) In the event that the City has commenced any plan checking or other work for which a fee was paid, or the contractor has commenced work on the construction, no portion of the fee shall be refunded.

(C) Refund requests must be submitted within a one-year period after the date the fee was paid.

(D) The City shall satisfy itself as to the right of such person to a refund, and each refund shall be paid as provided by law for the payment of claims against the City. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article III. Design Standards

13.08.240 Sanitary sewer system design standards.
All sanitary sewer system facilities and infrastructure shall be designed according to the latest edition of the City of Palmdale Engineering Design Guidelines, Chapter VII, Sanitary Sewer Plans, as adopted and incorporated by reference as if fully set forth below. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.250 Copy of the City Engineering Design Guidelines maintained by Director of Public Works.
A copy of the Palmdale Engineering Design Guidelines has been deposited in the office of the Director of Public Works and is maintained for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.260 Participation in project – Letter requirements.
Prior to approval and permitting of a Palmdale private contract, the developer shall submit a letter of participation identifying all parcels and lots agreeing to be serviced by the private contract and any new public sewers as follows:

(A) A letter of participation, prepared on a form provided by the City, shall be submitted before approval of public sewer plans describing all properties which have participated in the cost of the project.

(B) All such properties listed will be exempt from the connection charge only, specified in this chapter.

(C) The letter of participation shall not be revised after the sewers have been accepted for public use by the Council.

(D) Exception. The letter of participation shall not be revised after a reimbursement agreement authorized under Chapter 16.165 PMC has been approved by the Council. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.270 Dedication of sewers.
(A) An offer of dedication of mainline sewers to the City shall be included in the agreement to construct sewers for a new subdivision which accompanies the faithful performance security guaranteeing the construction required as a condition for the recordation of the tract map or parcel map.

(B) Before plans for the construction of any other public mainline sewer are approved by the City, the person causing such plans to be prepared shall present an offer of dedication, signed and acknowledged, on forms provided by the City.

(C) When the construction of the mainline sewer has been completed pursuant to all City requirements and accepted by the Council, the sewer becomes a public sewer.

(D) No sewer shall be accepted for dedication by the City unless such sewer has been constructed in conformity with all requirements of this title. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.280 Exceptions to requirements authorized when.
If a literal compliance with any engineering requirement of this chapter is impossible or impractical because of peculiar conditions in no way the fault of the person requesting an exception, and the purposes of this chapter may be accomplished and public safety secured by an alternate construction or procedure, and the City so finds that such alternate complies with sound engineering practice, the City may grant an exception permitting such alternate construction or procedure. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.290 Plan preparation by registered civil engineer.
Any plans submitted for approval under the provisions of this chapter shall be prepared by or under the direction of and shall be signed by a registered civil engineer of the state of California or by a professional engineer registered in the discipline required for the type of infrastructure proposed. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.300 Sewer plans.
(A) Before a sewer permit required by this chapter may be issued, plans for the proposed construction shall be submitted to and approved by the City, unless the City determines that plans are not necessary.

(B) Failure to make required plan corrections and other changes necessary for plan approval and to re-submit such corrected plans within one year after the checked plans are returned by the Public Works Department shall constitute abandonment of the work.

(C) Approval of a sewer plan shall expire two years from the date of the approval, unless construction of the facilities has commenced.

(D) Resubmission of abandoned and expired plans shall be subject to all new fees as if it was a new project. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.310 Materials and construction – Conformity with standard specifications.
All material used in any work done under provisions of this chapter shall be new, first-class material and shall conform to and the manner of construction shall meet all the requirements prescribed by this chapter, by the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, and by the Special Provisions for the Construction of Sanitary Sewers (supplement to the Standard Specifications) and Standard Plans on file in the office of the City. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.320 Sewer easement requirements.
(A) A person desiring to construct a sewer in an easement under the provisions of this chapter shall present to the City a request for processing, sufficient information to enable the preparation of a written description, together with all applicable fees.

(B) The location and dimensions of sanitary sewer easements shall be sufficient to provide present and future sewer service to abutting areas and adequate access for maintenance as determined by the City.

(C) Until the required easements have been properly executed and recorded:

(1) No plans shall be approved by the City for sewer facilities to be constructed by any person across the property of others;

(2) No sewer facilities shall be accepted for public use, nor placed in use by any person. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article IV. Inspections

13.08.330 Inspection by City – Requirements.
All work done under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to inspection by and shall meet the approval of the City; provided, however, that approval by the City shall not relieve the permittee or any other person from complying with all of the applicable provisions of this title or the Palmdale plumbing code, and no provision of this title or chapter supersedes, affects or modifies in any way the provisions of said Palmdale plumbing code. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.340 Notice to City when ready for inspection.
The permittee shall request an inspection at least 24 hours prior to the time any inspection is to be made by the City. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.350 Work to be convenient and uncovered.
At the time of the inspection the permittee shall have all work uncovered and convenient, and shall give the City every facility to make a thorough inspection. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.360 Using facilities before inspection prohibited – Exceptions.
No sewer or other facility constructed under the provisions of this chapter may be placed in use until the work has been approved by the City and for public sewers has been accepted for maintenance by the City Council. The City may grant exceptions to this requirement only when the work is substantially complete and has been inspected, and if the City determines that the best interests of the public are served by permitting such use prior to completion of the work. Such approval, prior to completion, shall make the properties being served by the sewer subject to the sewer collection service charge required by Chapter 13.05 PMC. The charge will be placed on the next available tax rolls for the subject properties. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.370 CCTV inspection of sewers prior to acceptance.
The developer/permittee shall cause the new mainline sewers to be air tested and video inspected to the requirements of the City prior to being placed into operation or accepted for maintenance. Videos will clearly show the quality of work and cleanliness of the pipe. Pipe that is determined to have defective joints or cracked, broken, dirty or otherwise be unacceptable shall be repaired and/or cleaned to the satisfaction of the City prior to being placed into operation. Video requirements shall be as referenced in the latest version of the Engineering Design Guidelines prepared by the City and available in the office of the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.380 Correction of defective work.
If the construction does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, or if the permittee fails to prosecute the work with such diligence to ensure its completion within the time specified, the City shall notify the permittee in writing to comply. If the permittee fails to comply within five business days after the written notice, the permit shall be suspended or revoked in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter and no further work shall be done by the permittee until the suspension is removed either by correction of the work or after an appeal hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.390 Certificate of final inspection – Conditions.
When it appears to the satisfaction of the City that all work done under the permit has been constructed according to and meets the requirements of all the applicable provisions of this title, and that all fees have been paid, the City, if requested, shall cause to be issued to the permittee constructing such work a certificate of final acceptance. The certificate shall recite that such work as is covered by the permit has been constructed according to this title and that said work is in an approved condition. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article V. Maintenance

13.08.400 Injuring or removing sewers or equipment.
An unauthorized person shall not remove or cause to be removed, or damage, impair, destroy or misuse or cause to be damaged, impaired, destroyed or misused, any portion of any public sewer, sewage pumping plant, or any appurtenances thereto. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.410 Manholes – Opening or entering prohibited.
An unauthorized person shall not open or enter, damage, impair, destroy or misuse, or cause to be opened or entered, damaged, impaired, destroyed or misused for any purpose whatsoever, any manhole in any public sewer. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.420 Reconnection following violations – Conditions – Cost reimbursement.
Whenever an industrial connection sewer has been disconnected from the public sewer by the City for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, reconnection shall be made only upon issuance of a sewer permit as elsewhere in this chapter provided. Before such permit is issued, the applicant shall pay all fees required by this title for new permits and also reimburse the City for all costs of the disconnection made. The City may also require the installation of a manhole for the purpose of measuring the flow, or for making periodic tests of the wastes from such connection. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.08.430 Reimbursement for repairs and maintenance following violations.
Whenever an industrial sewer connection permittee by reason of violation of this title, or any other person by reason of violation of this title, causes obstruction, damage or destruction of a public sewer, or any appurtenances thereto, or pumping plants in connection therewith, they shall reimburse the City for the cost of flushing, cleaning, repairing and reconstruction of such sewer or facility, made necessary by such violation, within 30 days after the City has rendered an invoice for the same. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Chapter 13.11
INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Sections:

Article I. Permits

13.11.010    Definitions applicable to this chapter.

13.11.020    Discharge of offensive or damaging substances prohibited.

13.11.030    Industrial waste permit required.

13.11.040    Dilution prohibited.

13.11.050    Construction of new industrial buildings – Information required.

13.11.060    Construction of new industrial buildings – Building permit issuance prerequisites.

13.11.070    Permit to discharge industrial waste – Issuance conditions.

13.11.080    Revised or renewal of permit – Application required when.

13.11.090    Expiration of application.

13.11.100    Grant or denial – Notice to applicant.

13.11.110    Hearing – Time limit for request.

13.11.120    Hearing – Appointment of Administrative Hearing Officer.

13.11.130    Hearing – Notice requirements.

13.11.140    Hearing – Conduct – Administrative Hearing Officer determination authority.

13.11.150    Decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer final.

13.11.160    Failure to obtain permit deemed violation when.

13.11.170    Successor in interest – New permit required.

13.11.180    Interim permit – Ongoing discharge.

13.11.190    Permit not transferable from one location to another.

13.11.200    Monitoring and sampling – Prenotification.

13.11.210    Notice to correct violations.

13.11.220    Investigation of complaints – Correction of violations.

13.11.230    Suspension of permit – Conditions.

13.11.240    Discontinuance of discharge or deposit required when.

13.11.250    Rights of permittee following notice of violation or suspension.

13.11.260    Reinstatement of suspended permit.

13.11.270    Cancellation of permit and facility closure – Conditions.

Article II. Fees and Deposits – Industrial Waste

13.11.280    Industrial waste related fees and charges.

13.11.290    Fees are not refundable.

13.11.300    Discharges covered by national categorical pretreatment standards.

13.11.310    Classes of businesses, processes and industries for plan review and inspection fee.

13.11.320    Annual fee, wastewater sampling and analysis fee and miscellaneous service fee – Payment time – Penalties for delinquency.

13.11.330    Annual fee – Refund conditions.

13.11.340    Annual review of fees.

Article III. Discharge of Industrial Waste to Public Sewers

13.11.350    Application of article provisions.

13.11.360    Permit – Required when.

13.11.370    Permit – Application forms – Information required.

13.11.380    Confidential information – Public access.

13.11.390    Permit – Issuance conditions.

13.11.400    Determination of type of liquid waste.

13.11.410    Pretreatment – Plans prerequisite to permit issuance when.

13.11.420    Permit – Revocation conditions.

13.11.430    Public participation – Notification of significant violations.

13.11.440    Disconnection following permit revocation.

13.11.450    Pretreatment – Standards and criteria.

13.11.460    FOG disposal systems – Installation required.

13.11.470    Rainwater diversion systems – Authorized when.

13.11.480    Deposit of certain substances prohibited.

13.11.490    National categorical pretreatment standards (NCPS) – Compliance.

13.11.500    Compliance with local limits.

13.11.510    Slug discharge control plan – When required.

13.11.520    Toxic substances.

13.11.530    Control of pH.

13.11.540    Temperature restrictions.

13.11.550    Cooling water.

13.11.560    Ground garbage.

Article IV. Other Methods of Disposal

13.11.570    Applicability of article provisions.

13.11.580    Depositing or discharging wastes prohibited without permit.

13.11.590    Maintenance of existing, nonused facility for industrial waste deposit, discharge or storage.

13.11.600    Permit – Not required when.

13.11.610    Permit – Application – Form and contents.

13.11.620    Permit – Plans required with application when.

13.11.630    Use of public property – Permit required when.

13.11.640    Notification of public agencies required.

13.11.650    Deposits creating menace to public health – Notice requirements.

13.11.660    Permit – Issuance conditions.

Article V. Industrial Waste Treatment Plants and Facilities

13.11.670    Installation – Required when.

13.11.680    Pretreatment – Standards and criteria.

13.11.690    Facilities not required when.

13.11.700    Installation – Access of inspection and maintenance.

13.11.710    FOG disposal systems – Installation requirements.

13.11.720    Separation of domestic and industrial wastes.

13.11.730    Operation and maintenance.

13.11.740    Inspection and testing.

13.11.750    Right of entry for inspection authorized when.

13.11.760    Owner’s safety regulations – Compliance by City inspector.

13.11.770    Test manholes or other structures.

Article I. Permits

13.11.010 Definitions applicable to this chapter.
“Director” means the Director of Public Works of the City of Palmdale or an authorized deputy, agent, representative or inspector designated by the Director of Public Works. (Ord. 1408 § 5, 2010; Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.020 Discharge of offensive or damaging substances prohibited.
No person shall discharge or deposit or cause or suffer to be discharged or deposited at any time or allow the continued existence of a deposit of any material which may create a public nuisance or menace to the public health or safety, or which may pollute underground or surface waters, or which may cause damage to any storm drain channel or public or private property. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.030 Industrial waste permit required.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any industrial wastewater to the public sewer system without first acquiring an industrial waste permit issued pursuant to Article III of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.040 Dilution prohibited.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any water or other substance added for the purpose of diluting any industrial waste to achieve compliance with limitations imposed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.050 Construction of new industrial buildings – Information required.
Every person applying for an industrial waste permit for construction of a new industrial building, or for a change in use of an industrial building or for an addition or alteration to an existing industrial building shall furnish to the Director such plans, information, data, statements or affidavits as the Director may require for determination of the nature and quantity of industrial waste involved and the facilities to be provided for the disposal thereof. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.060 Construction of new industrial buildings – Building permit issuance prerequisites.
An application for an industrial waste permit to construct a new industrial building, to change the use of an industrial building or for an addition or alteration to an existing industrial building will not be approved until provision has been made for the installation of such pretreatment facilities and disposal methods or both as, in the opinion of the Director, are necessary to carry out the provisions and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.070 Permit to discharge industrial waste – Issuance conditions.
(A) The Director may issue a permit containing limitations or conditions, or both, and may modify an existing permit by the addition of or elimination of such conditions and limitations as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of this chapter as determined necessary by the Director. No person shall discharge industrial waste in violation of the maximum permissible rate of discharge stated in the permit or in violation of any other concentrations or limitations in the permit.

(B) The Director shall impose a permit expiration date not to exceed a term of five years to ensure compliance with all applicable laws and regulations governing the disposal of industrial wastes. Application for renewal of such a permit shall be made not later than 180 days prior to the expiration date of the existing permit. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.080 Revised or renewal of permit – Application required when.
A permittee shall submit to the Director an application for revised industrial waste disposal permit and obtain approval prior to affecting any of the following waste discharge conditions:

(A) Change in method of disposal;

(B) Change in disposal point for nonsewered discharge;

(C) Change in discharge volume affecting treatment or storage facilities;

(D) Change in character of the waste discharge; or

(E) Expiration of term of existing industrial waste permit granted pursuant to PMC 13.11.070. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.090 Expiration of application.
An application for an industrial waste disposal permit for which no permit is issued within 180 days following the date of application submittal shall expire by limitation. The application and other information submitted may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed. The City may extend the time for action by the applicant for a period not to exceed 180 days upon written request by the applicant, showing that circumstances directly related to the processing of the application, but beyond the control of the applicant, have prevented action from being taken. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit all necessary application forms and other data and pay a new application fee and plan review fee. No application shall be extended more than once. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.100 Grant or denial – Notice to applicant.
(A) The Director shall either grant, conditionally grant or deny a permit within a reasonable time after all fees required by this title have been paid and upon the receipt of a complete application with all supplemental data.

(B) The Director shall notify the applicant whenever City grants a permit, conditionally grants a permit, denies a permit, grants a permit subject to special conditions or limitations, or adds to or eliminates any conditions or limitations of an existing permit. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.110 Hearing – Time limit for request.
Any interested person, including the applicant or permittee, may appeal any decision of the Director by filing with the Director a written appeal and request for an appeal hearing within 30 days of notice of the decision. If the permittee does not file an appeal within such time, the permittee will be deemed to have consented to the action of the Director, and to have waived any right to an appeal. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.120 Hearing – Appointment of Administrative Hearing Officer.
Upon receipt of a written demand for an appeal hearing, the City Manager shall, within 15 calendar days, appoint one or more Administrative Hearing Officer(s) to conduct the appeals hearing. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.130 Hearing – Notice requirements.
Not later than 60 days after written demand for an appeal hearing has been requested, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall give notice of the time and place of appeal hearing to the applicant or permittee or any interested person, the Director, and when matters pertaining to public health are involved, not less than 20 days in advance of the date set for such appeal hearing. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.140 Hearing – Conduct – Administrative Hearing Officer determination authority.
Within 30 days after the close of the appeal hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer will issue a written decision to:

(A) Confirm the action of the Director in denying a permit or issuance of a permit subject to special conditions and limitations; or

(B) Instruct the Director to issue a permit without conditions or limitations or with such special conditions and limitations as the Administrative Hearing Officer may designate; or

(C) Continue suspension of an existing permit invoked by the Director pending correction of objectionable conditions by the permittee; or

(D) Remove the suspension of an existing permit invoked by the Director pending correction of objectionable conditions by the permittee; or

(E) Deny that objectionable conditions exist and reinstate an existing permit; or

(F) Revoke an existing permit on any of the following grounds:

(1) Failure of the permittee to correct conditions as required by the Director;

(2) Conditions which would justify the denial of a permit;

(3) Fraud or deceit was employed in the obtaining of a permit;

(4) Any other violation of this chapter or of any permit, license or exception granted hereunder; or

(G) Take any other appropriate action regarding the appealed permit, license, condition, limitation or exception. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.150 Decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer final.
The written decision of the Administrative Hearing Officer when issued will constitute the final administrative decision on the matter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.160 Failure to obtain permit deemed violation when.
A person who does not have an industrial waste permit and who has been notified by the Director that he is required to obtain an industrial waste permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately submit to the Director an application and all fees as required by this chapter for such permit, and shall rectify and cure all such violations. Failure to do so shall constitute a willful violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.170 Successor in interest – New permit required.
The change of owner, operator or possessor, including a change in ownership of a majority of stock in any corporation, of a premises for which a permit had previously been granted shall file with the Director a new permit application, in accordance with the provisions of PMC 13.11.370 or 13.11.610, within 30 days after assumption of such title or interest, and shall furnish plans and data as may be required by the Director. If it appears from the application, data, and/or inspection of the facility that the succeeding operation and disposal practices comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Director, upon receipt of the fees hereinafter required, may issue a new industrial waste permit. The Director may issue an interim permit pursuant to PMC 13.11.180 to allow continued operations during the permit processing period. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.180 Interim permit – Ongoing discharge.
Upon determination that any person is discharging industrial wastewater directly or indirectly to a facility regulated by this chapter without a valid permit or upon receipt of an application for a permit for an ongoing discharge, an interim permit may be issued by the Director to allow the continuation of such discharge during the application review period, subject to such conditions, limitations, restrictions, and other provisions or requirements which the Director determines are necessary or advisable to protect the City sewage collection system and to assure compliance with all federal, state and local laws and that the continuation of such discharge will not be detrimental to the public health and safety. An interim permit is revocable by the Director at any time. Any person whose interim permit is revoked shall immediately cease and desist all unpermitted discharge of industrial waste. Unless revoked by the Director, the interim permit shall be enforceable until such time as a permit is issued or denied by the Director and shall be subject to annual inspection fees pursuant to PMC 13.11.310. The discharger shall immediately comply with all of the provisions and requirements of such interim permit and, if the discharger has not already applied for a permit, shall apply for a permit within 30 days from the issuance of the interim permit. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.190 Permit not transferable from one location to another.
Permits issued under this chapter are not transferable from one location to another, and discharge of wastes shall be made strictly in accordance with all provisions contained in the permit, at the location specifically designated therein. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.200 Monitoring and sampling – Prenotification.
Any permittee or discharger required by the Director, by permit or otherwise, to engage in periodic, stand alone, backup, follow-up, compliance or confirmation monitoring or sampling of a discharge shall notify the Director by telephone or other authorized means, at least 48 hours in advance of any monitoring or sampling to be done. Prior to the commencement of any sampling or monitoring, the Director may request that the permittee furnish the Director a split sample and all supporting data. Notification is not required for internal monitoring and sampling by a discharger for the purpose of process and pretreatment controls unless so requested by the Director. However, such procedures, results and records shall be made available to the Director upon request. Sample acquisition and monitoring shall be performed at a location or sampling point as designated in any permit or as specified by the Director. The Director may require installation of a secured sampling facility to be designated as the sampling point. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136 and amendments thereto. Dischargers to a public sewer system subject to an approved pretreatment program administered by the POTW shall submit to the Director, at minimum, all conditions required by 40 CFR 403.12 as may be amended unless otherwise directed. Each permittee or discharger, regardless of industrial waste disposal method, shall submit to the Director, certified under penalty of perjury by the permittee or discharger, all required monitoring and sampling reports or other requested data within the times specified in the permit. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.210 Notice to correct violations.
(A) The Director may serve notice of violation upon the person owning or operating premises describing the conditions and requiring prompt correction thereof, when they find that:

(1) Industrial waste, effluent, or any other material is being maintained, discharged or deposited in such a manner as to create, or if allowed to continue will create, any one or more of the following conditions:

(a) A public nuisance;

(b) A menace to the public safety;

(c) Pollution of underground or surface waters;

(d) Adverse effect or damage to any public sewer, storm drain, channel, or public or private property; or

(2) The permittee has failed to conform to conditions or limitations of any permit issued in accordance with this chapter; or

(3) The industrial waste disposal permit was issued in error, or on the basis of incorrect information supplied, or in violation of any ordinance, law or regulation.

(B) Failure to comply with such notice shall constitute a willful violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.220 Investigation of complaints – Correction of violations.
The Director shall promptly investigate every complaint charging violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, and shall take action to correct any violation discovered. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.230 Suspension of permit – Conditions.
When the conditions described in PMC 13.11.210 are so aggravated that immediate cessation of operation is necessary and the Director so finds, the Director shall suspend the permit. The Director shall serve notice of such suspension on the permittee. The Director may also suspend a permit if objectionable conditions listed in a notice to correct, served in accordance with PMC 13.11.210, are not corrected within the time specified in such notice. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.240 Discontinuance of discharge or deposit required when.
A person whose industrial waste permit has been suspended, or who has been notified of violation, as provided in this chapter, shall immediately discontinue the deposit or discharge of industrial waste, sewage, or effluent, or use of any described facility, and shall not resume such deposit or discharge, or use of the described facility, until a permit has been issued or reinstated by the Director or Administrative Hearing Officer as hereinafter provided. Failure to do so shall constitute willful violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.250 Rights of permittee following notice of violation or suspension.
Within the time specified in the notice of violation or suspension, the permittee shall:

(A) Correct and remedy the conditions so specified, to the satisfaction of the Director; or

(B) File with the Director a denial that all of the conditions so specified exist, request an appeal hearing, and correct the conditions which the permittee admits do exist. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.260 Reinstatement of suspended permit.
The Director shall reinstate a suspended permit when all violations are corrected and all fees required by this chapter have been paid. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.270 Cancellation of permit and facility closure – Conditions.
(A) A person owning or operating premises containing industrial waste treatment or disposal facilities operated under a valid industrial waste permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may file a written application with the Director to cancel such permit upon termination of operations and/or closure of the permitted facility. Upon receipt of such an application, the Director shall investigate and cancel the permit if it is determined that:

(1) All industrial waste producing operations have ceased;

(2) Any industrial waste treatment facilities have been removed or rendered inoperable to prevent further use;

(3) All permits to abandon or disconnect, as may be required by the Palmdale plumbing code, have been obtained;

(4) Any industrial wastes remaining on the premises have been removed to a legal point of disposal;

(5) All fees required by Article II of this chapter due up to the date of closure of the facility have been paid;

(6) The applicant has demonstrated that no environmental contamination has occurred by the previous operation of the treatment facility or that any contamination found has been mitigated.

(B) Should the Director deny an application for a permit cancellation or closure of the facility, the owner or operator of any facilities required by the permit shall maintain these facilities in good operating condition and pay all fees required by this chapter to maintain a valid permit. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article II. Fees and Deposits – Industrial Waste

13.11.280 Industrial waste related fees and charges.
The City Council shall establish by resolution the amounts of the fees and charges listed below to reimburse the City for the cost of review and processing industrial waste permits, plan review, inspections and the administration of all permits issued by the City. All fees and charges shall be set based upon the direct and indirect cost of personnel, materials, equipment and outside support services necessary to provide services related to the permitting and servicing of industrial waste disposal permits.

(A) Industrial waste disposal permit application fee.

(B) Change in ownership or operation application fee.

(C) Industrial waste plan review fee.

(D) Plan reinstatement fee.

(E) Annual inspection fee.

(F) Annual industrial waste permit fee.

(G) Annual wastewater sampling and analysis fee.

(H) Fee for each additional wastewater sampling and analysis.

(I) Extraordinary services fee. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.290 Fees are not refundable.
All such fees described in PMC 13.11.280 are separate and apart from any fee or deposit paid for industrial waste plan review or imposed under provisions of the Palmdale plumbing code. Application fees shall not be refundable even though the application be denied except as provided in PMC 13.11.330. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.300 Discharges covered by national categorical pretreatment standards.
Industries subject to national categorical pretreatment standards (NCPS) and not regulated by a joint permit pursuant to this title shall have fee amounts governed by the NCPS facility designations. Where an industry or process falls into more than one fee class category, the higher fee shall prevail unless the Director determines a lesser amount is appropriate. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.310 Classes of businesses, processes and industries for plan review and inspection fee.
Plan review and inspection classes shall be established in accordance with Table 13.11.310. The classes for any business, process, industry or connection not listed in Table 13.11.310 shall be determined by the Director using Table 13.11.310 as a guide.

Table 13.11.310
 

Business Class

Plan Review Class

Inspection Class

Agricultural Production, Food Processing and Handling

Animal slaughtering (except fowl)

3

D

Bakery plants

2

C

Beverages, canning and bottling

2

C

Breweries, wineries

3

D

Canned and preserved fruits and vegetables

3

B

Cold storage and refrigeration plants

1

A

Dairies and dairy products

2

D

Food markets

1

A

Frozen foods

2

B

Hydroponic farms

2

B

Poultry

3

E

Prepared meat, poultry and fish products

2

C

Public eating places and plant cafeterias

1

A

Rendering

3

C

Schools, institutions, and public eating places that serve but do not prepare food

1

S

Sugar and confectionery products

1

A

Vegetable fats and oils

2

B

Vegetable packing

3

D

Mining, Manufacturing and Processing

Aircraft

3

C

Aircraft engines, parts and accessories

3

C

Ammunition and explosives

2

D

Asphalt and asphalt products

4

E

Battery manufacturing, servicing and reclaiming

3

E

*NCPS facilities

4

M

Blast furnaces, steel works, rolling and finishing mills

4

E

*NCPS facilities

5

M

Carpet mills with dyeing

4

D

*NCPS facilities

5

E

Carpet mills without dyeing

1

A

Cement manufacturing

3

B

Ceramics

2

D

Chemical milling

5

E

*NCPS facilities

6

M

Chemical plants

5

E

*NCPS facilities

6

M

Coating, electroplating, engraving and related services

4

E

*NCPS facilities

5

M

Concrete batch plants

2

D

Cut stone and stone products

2

A

Electric power generation plants except waste-to-energy facilities

3

B

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Enameled products

2

B

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Guided missiles, space vehicles, space vehicle propulsion units and propulsion unit parts

4

D

Iron and steel foundries and heat treating

4

D

*NCPS facilities

5

E

Linoleum, asphalt-felt-base and other hard-surface floor covering

2

B

Metal fabrication (no chemical wastes)

1

B

Metals – with chemical wastes (not otherwise classified)

3

D

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Metals – with no chemical wastes (not otherwise classified)

1

B

Motor vehicle parts and accessories

2

B

Motor vehicles, vehicle bodies and trailers

3

B

Musical instruments (metal)

2

C

Nonmetals – with no chemical wastes (not otherwise classified)

3

D

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Nonmetals – with chemical wastes (not otherwise classified)

1

A

Oil field production

2

C

*NCPS facilities

3

D

Paint manufacturing

3

D

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Paper manufacturing

3

C

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Paper products

2

B

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Pesticides

4

D

*NCPS facilities

5

E

Petroleum refining and processing

5

E

*NCPS facilities

6

M

Pharmaceuticals

4

D

*NCPS facilities

5

E

Photographic equipment and supplies

2

C

Pottery, china, earthenware, porcelain and related products

2

C

Primary smelting and refining of nonferrous metals

3

B

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Printed circuit boards

4

E

*NCPS facilities

5

M

Quarrying and rock crushing

4

D

Railroad equipment

2

B

Rolling, drawing and extruding nonferrous metals

2

C

*NCPS facilities

3

D

Rubber and plastics products

3

C

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Sand and gravel washing and screening

3

D

Secondary smelting and refining of nonferrous metals

2

C

*NCPS facilities

3

D

Semiconductor and related devices

3

D

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Silverware, plated ware and stainless steel ware

5

M

*NCPS facilities

5

M

Spray-painting shops

1

A

Steel springs manufacturing

3

E

*NCPS facilities

4

M

Tanning and wool pulling

3

D

*NCPS facilities

4

E

Textile mills, treating and dyeing

4

D

*NCPS facilities

5

E

Wood fabrication (no chemical wastes)

1

A

Retail Trade and Services

Airports, flying fields and airport terminal services

1

B

Automotive repair

1

A

Bottle and can washing

2

B

Car wash

1

C

Chemical laboratories

1

B

Cleaners, retail

1

B

Commercial laundries (not coin-operated)

2

B

Cooperages

3

D

Dry cleaning plants

2

D

Film processing plants

2

C

Film processing, retail

1

A

Kennels, dog and cat hospitals

1

A

Marine service

2

C

Schools, churches and institutions

1

A

Service stations – incidental car washing, repairs and maintenance

1

A

Tank truck interior washing

2

D

*NCPS facilities

3

E

Truck repair and exterior washing

1

C

Waste Disposal Facilities

Cogeneration facilities (not otherwise classified)

2

C

Hazardous waste treatment, recycling, storage and transfer facilities

6

M

Injection wells, non-oilfield wastes (liquids)

3

M

Landfill gas recovery facilities

6

M

Liquid waste storage and transfer facilities, nonhazardous

4

E

Solid-waste transfer, recycling and composting facilities

3

D

Solid-waste incinerators

6

M

Waste-to-energy facilities

6

M

Miscellaneous

Facilities jointly permitted through Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts

1

A

Facilities with multiple industrial waste dischargers

1

T

Groundwater cleanup

1

A

Open facilities, not used

1

A

Residences (per septic tank)

no charge

no charge

Sanitary dump station

1

A

Storm water monitoring

1

A

Storm water treatment BMP approval/monitoring

1

A

S – Special: Business operation only requires inspection upon new permit issuance/once every five years.

T – Tenant: Property owner/operator operates property grease trap/interceptor and each tenant is responsible for operation of tenant business.

(Ord. 1428 § 2, 2012; Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.320 Annual fee, wastewater sampling and analysis fee and miscellaneous service fee – Payment time – Penalties for delinquency.
All annual fees, wastewater sampling and analysis fees and any other fees required by PMC 13.11.280 shall be due and payable on the billing date as established by the Director. Fees not paid within 30 calendar days from the billing or invoice date shall be considered delinquent. Delinquent fees shall be subject to a late fee established by resolution of the City Council. Permits for which the annual fee is delinquent for 60 days or more are subject to suspension as provided in PMC 13.11.230. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.330 Annual fee – Refund conditions.
Upon cancellation of a permit pursuant to PMC 13.11.270, and upon written request of the permittee, the Director shall refund a portion of the annual fee as determined from the table below:

Days from Previous Payment Date

Percent Required

1 – 60

75%

61 – 150

50%

151 – 240

25%

241 or more

0%

(Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.340 Annual review of fees.
Beginning on July 1, 2009, and thereafter on each succeeding July 1st, the amount of each fee in this chapter shall be adjusted as follows: calculate the percentage movement between April of the previous year and March of the current year in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) for all urban consumers in the Los Angeles, Anaheim, Riverside areas, as published by the United States Government Bureau of Labor Statistics, adjust each fee by said percentage amount and round off to the nearest $1.00; provided, however, that no adjustment shall decrease any fee, and no fee shall exceed the reasonable cost of providing the services. When it is determined that the amount reasonably necessary to recover the costs of providing the services is in excess of this adjustment, the Director may present fee proposals to the City Council for approval. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article III. Discharge of Industrial Waste to Public Sewers

13.11.350 Application of article provisions.
The provisions of this article shall pertain to the disposal of industrial waste to the public sewer only. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.360 Permit – Required when.
(A) No person may discharge industrial waste to a public sewer without first obtaining an industrial waste permit from the Director.

(B) No industrial waste permit shall be granted unless the Director determines that sufficient capacity exists in the public sewer to allow for such industrial waste.

(C) A separate permit shall be required for each connection discharging industrial wastes to the public sewer.

(D) For the purpose of this chapter, discharges resulting from garbage grinders powered by motors of less than one and one-half horsepower installed in food service establishments in accordance with the provisions of the Los Angeles County Plumbing Code prior to July 1, 2009, or the City of Palmdale Plumbing Code thereafter, and where such facilities are not required by other provisions of this chapter, are not considered to be industrial waste discharges.

(E) A person shall obtain an industrial waste permit from the Director to maintain an existing but nonused industrial waste connection to the public sewer. The annual fee for such permit shall be as that for Inspection Class A. The connection shall be removed upon the expiration or revocation of such permit pursuant to the criteria established by PMC 13.11.270. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.370 Permit – Application forms – Information required.
(A) The Director shall provide printed application forms for the industrial waste permit required by this article, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. The application shall be signed under penalty of perjury by the authorized representative of the discharger.

(B) For the purpose of this chapter, the Director may utilize joint permit application forms under agreements established with other public agencies as provided in Chapter 13.08 PMC. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.380 Confidential information – Public access.
Information and data concerning an industrial user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs and inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user except where the City has a requirement to release information pursuant to the California Public Records Act. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.390 Permit – Issuance conditions.
If it appears from the application and supporting information submitted for any industrial waste permit required by this chapter that the proposed disposal complies with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances, the Director, upon receipt of the fees hereinafter required, shall issue such permit. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.400 Determination of type of liquid waste.
Before granting an industrial waste disposal permit to any applicant, the Director shall determine either that the waste is one which will not damage or destroy the public sewer, or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of maintenance of the public sewer, or retard or inhibit the treatment of the sewage, or is one that can be made acceptable after pretreatment. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.410 Pretreatment – Plans prerequisite to permit issuance when.
In event pretreatment or special facilities are required to make the waste acceptable as provided under the provisions of this chapter, the applicant for an industrial waste disposal permit may be required to furnish plans showing the method of collections and pretreatment proposed to be used, and a permit shall not be issued until said plans or required modification thereof have been checked and approved by the Director. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.420 Permit – Revocation conditions.
By following the procedure set forth in Article I of this chapter, the Director may revoke any permit if, after due investigation, the Director finds:

(A) A failure of the permittee to correct conditions as required by the Director; or

(B) Conditions which would justify the denial of a permit; or

(C) Fraud or deceit was employed in obtaining the permit; or

(D) Any other violation of this article or of any conditions of any permit, including the one to be revoked, license or exception granted hereunder. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.430 Public participation – Notification of significant violations.
At least annually, the Director shall provide public notification, in a newspaper(s) of general circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction(s) served by the POTW of industrial users which, at any time during the previous 12 months, were in significantly violating noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. For the purpose of this section, a significant industrial user (SIU) (or any industrial user which violates subsection (C), (D), or (H) of this section) is in significant noncompliance if its violation meets one of the following criteria:

(A) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l);

(B) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH);

(C) Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(l) (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that a POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public);

(D) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in a POTW exercising its emergency authority under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;

(E) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance;

(F) Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;

(G) Failure to accurately report noncompliance;

(H) Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices (BMPs), which the director determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.

The Director need not provide such notification if a notice meeting all applicable 40 CFR 403 requirements has been published by the POTW operator. The cost of such public notification shall be collected by the Director from the discharger causing such violation and/or notification. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.440 Disconnection following permit revocation.
If a permit is revoked, the Director may disconnect from the public sewer any industrial connection sewer which was connected pursuant to such industrial waste permit. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.450 Pretreatment – Standards and criteria.
The Director may establish uniform minimum standards and criteria for the application of such standards for pretreatment of specific industrial waste discharges. The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the Director from requiring additional pretreatment to accomplish the objective of PMC 13.11.400. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.460 FOG disposal systems – Installation required.
Wastewater discharge originating at food service establishments (FSE) from fixtures and equipment which may contain fats, oils and grease (FOG), including but not limited to scullery sinks, pot and pan sinks, soup kettles, automatic vent cleaning devices, and floor drains located in areas where FOG-containing materials may exist, shall be drained into the sanitary waste system through a FOG disposal system approved by the Director. Multiple FOG disposal systems may be required to satisfy the requirements of this section. The Director may waive this requirement for specific fixtures upon determination that compliance may create a health hazard and/or impeded by a physical constraint that is impractical to overcome when retrofitting an existing facility. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.470 Rainwater diversion systems – Authorized when.
The Director may authorize the installation of a rainwater diversion system in lieu of roofing to prevent the discharge of storm waters to the sewer system where roofing is impractical, in conflict with existing laws or regulations, may create a hazardous or unsafe working condition, or may cause undue hardship on the applicant, providing the Director finds that:

(A) The applicant has applied for an industrial waste disposal permit and has submitted all plans and specifications of the proposed system;

(B) The system provides for continuous 24-hour protection to the public sewer system;

(C) The system meets minimum operational and component standards as may be established pursuant to PMC 13.11.450; and

(D) Pollution of underground or surface waters, or damage to any streets, gutters, storm drains, channels or any public or private property will not be caused by the diverted storm flows. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.480 Deposit of certain substances prohibited.
No person shall place, throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be placed, thrown, discharged or deposited in any public sewer or mainline sewer:

(A) Any dead animal, offal, or garbage, fish, fruit or vegetable waste, or other solid matters, or materials or obstructions of any kind whatever of such nature as shall clog, obstruct or fill such sewer, or which shall interfere with or prevent the effective use or operation thereof.

(B) Any water or sewage, or liquid waste of any kind containing chemicals, fats, greases, oils, tars or other matters in solution or suspension, which may clog, obstruct or fill the same, or which may in any way damage or interfere with or prevent the effective use thereof, or which may necessitate or require frequent repair, cleaning out or flushing of such sewer to render the same operative.

(C) Any discharge or effluent which may obstruct or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of treatment of the sewage, or which may introduce into a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) any pollutant(s) which creates a fire or explosive hazard in the sewer or POTW, pollutants which will cause corrosive structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with a pH lower than specified in PMC 13.11.530, pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW, or which may introduce into a POTW any pollutant(s) which may cause pass through or interference.

(D) Stormwater runoff shall not be discharged into a sanitary sewer. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.490 National categorical pretreatment standards (NCPS) – Compliance.
Upon the promulgation of mandatory NCPS for any industrial subcategory, the NCPS, if more restrictive than limitations imposed by this chapter, shall apply. The Director may impose a phased compliance schedule to ensure that affected industries meet the NCPS. Failure to meet the phased compliance schedule may result in permit suspension or revocation. Those dischargers subject to NCPS shall comply with all reporting requirements in accordance with the General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution (40 CFR 403). Facilities subject to this chapter and regulated by joint permits issued in conjunction with other agencies may meet the requirements of this chapter as set forth in such joint permit and by furnishing such evidence of compliance as may be required by the Director. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.500 Compliance with local limits.
No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced wastewater to the public sewer system or a POTW that exceeds specific local limits which have been developed by the receiving POTW. Said local limits shall not apply where more restrictive limitations are imposed by permit or national categorical pretreatment standards. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.510 Slug discharge control plan – When required.
A slug discharge control plan shall be prepared, implemented and maintained by SIUs discharging to the public sewer system unless determined to be unnecessary by the Director. Such plan shall be submitted in conjunction with an application to discharge industrial waste to a public sewer or within one year of being designated an SIU, whichever comes first. An SIU shall immediately notify the Director of any changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge. At a minimum, the plan shall contain the following elements:

(A) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges;

(B) Description of stored chemicals;

(C) Procedures for immediately notifying the Director of slug discharges, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under PMC 13.11.480 with procedures for follow-up written notification within five days;

(D) When appropriate, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including maintenance and inspection of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.520 Toxic substances.
All toxic chemical substances shall be retained or rendered acceptable before discharge into the public sewer. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.530 Control of pH.
No person shall discharge acids or alkali materials into the public sewer until the pH has been controlled to a level not less than 6.0 nor at or higher than a level which the Director finds excessive. No discharge shall have any corrosive or detrimental characteristics that may cause injury to wastewater treatment, inspection or maintenance personnel or may cause damage to structures, equipment or other physical facilities of the public sewer system. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.540 Temperature restrictions.
A person shall not discharge into the public sewer effluent exceeding a temperature of 140 degrees Fahrenheit or which will exceed 104 degrees Fahrenheit at the point of entry into the POTW treatment plant. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.550 Cooling water.
No uncontaminated cooling water shall be discharged into a public sewer. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.560 Ground garbage.
Garbage resulting from the preparation of food may be discharged into the public sewer if ground to a fineness sufficient to pass through a three-eighths-inch screen. Ground garbage, dishwasher effluent or other ground food wastes shall not be discharged into a FOG disposal system. Excessive or unnecessarily large quantities of water shall not be used to flush ground garbage into the sewer. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article IV. Other Methods of Disposal

13.11.570 Applicability of article provisions.
The provisions of this article shall pertain to the disposal, discharge or deposit of all industrial waste except where such wastes are discharged to a public sewer in accordance with the provisions of Article III of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.580 Depositing or discharging wastes prohibited without permit.
A person shall not maintain a deposit of waste material, or discharge or deposit or cause or suffer to be discharged or deposited, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any waste material or effluent in or upon lands of the City of Palmdale, or into streams or bodies of surface or subsurface water, or storm drains, or flood control channels, where the same is deposited upon or may be carried through or upon lands of the City without first securing, in the manner provided in this chapter, a permit from the Director, and at all times having an unrevoked permit therefor, unless otherwise exempted by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.590 Maintenance of existing, nonused facility for industrial waste deposit, discharge or storage.
A person shall obtain a permit from the Director to maintain an existing but nonused facility designed or formerly used for the deposit, discharge or storage of industrial wastes. The annual fee for such permit shall be the same as that for Inspection Class A.

Exception: Such permit is not required when, to the satisfaction of the Director, compliance with the permit cancellation criteria of PMC 13.11.270 has been provided. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.600 Permit – Not required when.
No permit shall be required for the disposal of waste which consists only of domestic sewage into septic tanks or cesspools constructed pursuant to the provisions of the Palmdale Plumbing Code. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.610 Permit – Application – Form and contents.
Any person requiring a permit under the provisions of this article shall make written application therefor to the Director, giving such information as the Director may require. The Director shall provide printed application forms, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. The Director may require from the applicant, in addition to the information furnished on the printed form, any additional information including detailed plans and specifications which will enable the Director to determine that the proposed discharge or deposit and plan of operation complies with the provisions of this chapter and other applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.620 Permit – Plans required with application when.
(A) The Director may require that an application for a permit to dispose of industrial waste other than to a public sewer shall be accompanied by suitable plans showing the proposed method of collection, treatment and disposal, and a permit shall not be issued until said plans or required modification thereof have been checked and approved by the Director.

(B) The Director may submit the application or plans, or both, to any public agency for comment or recommendation. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.630 Use of public property – Permit required when.
Whenever facilities for the discharge of industrial waste connect to structures, or encroach on the property or rights-of-way owned or controlled by a public agency, the Director may either:

(A) Require that the applicant obtain a property use permit, license, easement, or other right to use said properties prior to the issuance of a permit to dispose of industrial waste; or

(B) Issue such permit subject to the execution of a property use permit, license, easement, or other right to use said properties. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.640 Notification of public agencies required.
Whenever an application for permit is filed, the Director shall notify such other public agencies that may be affected, and shall request a prompt reply containing their recommendations. Upon request, the Director shall secure from the applicant and furnish to the affected department or agency such additional plans or information as it may require, relative to such application. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.650 Deposits creating menace to public health – Notice requirements.
When the Director finds that industrial waste or effluent, or any other material, is being discharged or deposited in such manner as to create a menace to the public health, he may serve notice of violation upon the person owning or operating the premises, describing the conditions, and requiring the prompt correction. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.660 Permit – Issuance conditions.
The Director may issue a permit as required by this chapter only if the Director determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

(A) All fees or deposits hereinafter required have been paid;

(B) Recommendations and conditions of any other public agency, as contained in their reports, if any, have been met and found to be necessary and applicable by the Director;

(C) The material to be discharged or deposited does not or will not, in the opinion of the Director, constitute a potential public nuisance or menace to the public health and safety, and will not violate other provisions of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California;

(D) The material to be discharged or deposited does not or will not involve disposal of any toxic materials or chemicals in such manner as to cause pollution of any stream, watercourse, lake, or other body of water, or underground or surface water storage reservoir, either natural or artificial;

(E) The material to be discharged or deposited does not or will not damage or adversely affect any storm drain, channel, or any public or private property;

(F) Under existing circumstances and conditions it is necessary and reasonable to dispose of such waste matter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Article V. Industrial Waste Treatment Plants and Facilities

13.11.670 Installation – Required when.
Industrial waste treatment plants or facilities shall be installed whenever the Director shall find as a fact that such facilities are required to safeguard the public health; prevent pollution of streams or bodies of surface or underground water; prevent pollution of water wells or storage reservoirs, either natural or artificial; prevent damage or increased maintenance costs in the sewerage system; prevent damage to public or private property; prevent a public nuisance; or to comply with applicable regulations of any other public agency. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.680 Pretreatment – Standards and criteria.
The Director may establish uniform minimum standards and criteria for the application of such standards for pretreatment of specific industrial waste discharges. The provisions of this chapter shall not prohibit the Director from requiring additional pretreatment to accomplish the objective of PMC 13.11.400. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.690 Facilities not required when.
Installation of industrial waste treatment facilities may not be required if the Director determines that:

(A) The waste is prohibited for discharge to the available systems by this chapter or other applicable ordinances or regulations;

(B) The affected industry has guaranteed to separately dispose of any objectionable waste to legal points of disposal;

(C) Adequate facilities are to be provided for the collection and containment of such wastes, and that provisions have been made to prevent intentional or accidental discharge of such wastes to the public sewer system, ground surface, surface or underground water supplies, rivers, channels, storm drains, public streets or gutters;

(D) An application for industrial waste disposal permit has been filed in accordance with Article IV of this chapter; and

(E) All fees required by this chapter have been paid. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.700 Installation – Access of inspection and maintenance.
Interceptors or other industrial waste treatment facilities shall be so installed and constructed that they shall be at all times easily accessible for inspection and maintenance by the City. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.710 FOG disposal systems – Installation requirements.
Each FOG disposal system shall be installed at a location shown on plans approved by the Director in full compliance with PMC Title 8. Such systems shall be located in an area that is at all times easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, maintenance, and removal of the recovered FOG in a manner that does not require entry into a food or utensil handling area as follows:

(A) Hydromechanical grease interceptors shall not be installed in a food or utensil handling area unless specifically approved by the Director. Plumbing fixtures and equipment connected to such device shall be provided with an approved type of flow control so that the total flow through the device or devices shall not be greater than the rated flow of the grease interceptor.

(B) Grease removal devices (GRDs) shall be installed as provided for hydromechanical grease interceptors in subsection (A) of this section with the additional provision that the storage of removed FOG also be outside food and utensil handling areas in a secure location that protects against the accidental spill of grease into floor drains, parking lots, catch basins, storm drains, sidewalks, streets, or gutters and is protected from inundation by stormwater flows.

(C) Gravity grease interceptors shall be installed outside of the structure containing the kitchen, food or utensil handling area(s) in a location affording ease of inspection, maintenance and servicing without entry to the structure unless otherwise approved by the director and the health officer. Such devices shall be designed and sized to retain FOG until accumulations can be removed by pumping the interceptor. When so required by the Director, gravity grease interceptors shall be equipped with an approved sample box. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.720 Separation of domestic and industrial wastes.
All domestic wastes from restrooms, showers, drinking fountains, etc., shall be kept separate from all industrial wastes until the industrial wastes have passed through any required pretreatment facilities. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.730 Operation and maintenance.
All industrial waste treatment facilities and all appurtenances thereto existing as of July 1, 2009, or hereafter constructed under jurisdiction of this chapter shall be maintained by the owner or person having jurisdiction of the property affected in good operating condition and in a safe and sanitary condition at all times. All devices and safeguards which are required by this chapter for the operation thereof, and all records of such operation, shall be maintained in good order and made available to the City upon request. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.740 Inspection and testing.
The Director may make tests of industrial wastes, and/or periodic inspections of industrial waste treatment plants or facilities to determine whether such treatment plants or facilities are maintained in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The Director shall also make periodic tests on samples of sewage, industrial waste or effluents obtained at the point of discharge or deposit to determine whether such discharges or deposits are made in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.750 Right of entry for inspection authorized when.
(A) The Director shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to inspect water pollution control plants and industrial waste treatment plants or facilities, and to enter and inspect the place, enclosure or structure where industrial wastes or effluent are discharged or deposited.

(B) A person shall not refuse to permit, and shall not hinder or obstruct in any way, any reasonable inspection or investigation of such treatment plant or facilities or deposits or discharges by the Director. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.760 Owner’s safety regulations – Compliance by City inspector.
All persons performing inspections on behalf of the City shall comply with any special safety regulations brought to his attention by the owner, discharger or operator. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.11.770 Test manholes or other structures.
The Director may require the installation of a test manhole or other structure through which all industrial waste shall pass. Said structure shall be so designed that flows may be measured and samples readily obtained therefrom. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Chapter 13.14
SANITARY SEWER OVERFLOW PREVENTION PROVISIONS
Sections:

13.14.010    Purpose.

13.14.020    Duty of the discharger.

13.14.030    House lateral maintenance.

13.14.040    Illicit discharges prohibited.

13.14.050    Limitations – City may establish.

13.14.060    Existing FOG disposal systems.

13.14.070    Investigation of sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) incidents.

13.14.080    Use of unauthorized substances prohibited.

13.14.090    FOG control programs.

13.14.100    Minimum standards – City may develop.

13.14.110    Food service establishments – Operating permit required.

13.14.120    Food waste disposal units and dishwashers.

13.14.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to implement additional specific requirements for the use of the public sewer system to ensure compliance with Statewide General Waste Discharge Requirements for Sanitary Sewer Systems, State Board Order No. 2006-0003-DWQ (State Board Order) and as may be hereinafter amended or superseded. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.020 Duty of the discharger.
All dischargers to the public sewer system shall implement best management practices (BMPs) to ensure that their discharge, either singularly or in combination with other discharges, does not create a condition in the system that might cause damage to the system or a sanitary sewer overflow (SSO). Commercial and industrial discharges shall be made only in full compliance with Chapter 13.11 PMC. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.030 House lateral maintenance.
Dischargers to the public sewer system shall use house lateral maintenance procedures that maximize the recovery of deleterious materials and minimize the passage of fats, oils and grease (FOG), debris, cut roots and similar materials to the mainline sewers. PMC 13.02.040 notwithstanding, no person shall interfere with the City’s access to house laterals extending from the mainline sewer and the right-of-way boundary or property line. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.040 Illicit discharges prohibited.
No person shall cause any discharge to the public sewer system unless such discharge:

(A) Consists entirely of domestic sewage;

(B) Consists of nondomestic sewage that is authorized pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 13.08 or 13.11 PMC;

(C) Consists of domestic and nondomestic sewage combined in accordance with PMC 13.11.720; and

(D) Does not consist of storm water or infiltration/inflow. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.050 Limitations – City may establish.
The City may establish numerical limitations on the amount of FOG and other debris that may cause blockages or contribute to SSOs on discharges to all or portions of the sanitary sewer system where the City finds that such limitation is necessary to protect the system from damage or potential SSOs. Industrial waste disposal permits issued pursuant to Chapter 13.11 PMC shall include such limitations where imposed. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.060 Existing FOG disposal systems.
Existing grease interceptors, grease traps or other FOG disposal systems, previously approved by the City, may remain in service provided such systems are properly maintained to effectively reduce FOG discharges, are operating within original design parameters, have not been altered in a manner not approved by the City, and where required are operated under a valid industrial waste disposal permit pursuant to Chapter 13.11 PMC. Such authorization does not preclude the City from establishing discharge limitations which may require the modification, enlargement, addition, or replacement of FOG disposal system to protect the sanitary sewer system from blockages or overflows. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.070 Investigation of sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) incidents.
The City shall investigate and determine the probable cause of an actual or potential SSO incident. In the course of any such investigation, the City may enter the premises of any discharger to the sanitary sewer system to determine the presence of potential sources of FOG, inspection of FOG disposal systems, review wastewater disposal procedures, ascertain if BMPs are in place and adequate, review records, photograph disposal systems, take samples and other measurements in order to determine the cause or sources of an SSO. PMC 13.14.060 notwithstanding, where the City determines that additional, improved, upgraded, repaired or more frequently maintained FOG removal systems are required to prevent the contribution to actual or potential SSOs, the City may serve notice on the discharger to implement such improvements. Such notice may include prohibitions against unauthorized discharges, timetables and/or deadlines. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.080 Use of unauthorized substances prohibited.
No person shall introduce any chemical, biological, enzyme or bacterial agent or substance into a FOG disposal system with the intent to enhance performance and/or reduce maintenance of such system without the specific authorization of the City. Such prohibition is not intended to preclude the use of commercial drain cleaning substances within plumbing fixtures not tributary to a FOG disposal system unless the City or POTW has found that such substances present a general hazard to the sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.090 FOG control programs.
Where a discharger is required to install and maintain a FOG disposal system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and/or is found to be a potential uncontrolled source of FOG, the City may require that the discharger develop and implement a FOG control program. Where required, such a program is subject to approval by the City and may be included as a part of the conditions and limitations of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Such a program may be required to include but is not limited to the following provisions:

(A) A plan and schedule for the education and training of personnel or employees that may dispose of FOG containing effluent to the sanitary sewer system.

(B) The development of source control measures to minimize the discharge of FOG to the sanitary sewer system and maximize the efficiency of any required FOG disposal system and/or GRD.

(C) A plan and schedule for the removal and legal disposal of FOG removed from effluent by a FOG disposal system and/or GRD. When so required by the City, such a plan and schedule may include the maintenance of a log record detailing cleaning, repair, inspection, and accidental spill and disposal events in connection with the system or device. The City shall have access to any required log during reasonable business hours and may specify a time period during which such a log is maintained.

(D) A description of facilities used to store removed FOG prior to disposal and measures taken to prevent accidental and/or uncontrolled discharge of FOG to the sanitary sewer system, sidewalks, parking lots, streets, gutters, storm drains, or other private or public property.

(E) A description of equipment and supplies, including the location of such materials, available for the cleanup of accidental and/or uncontrolled spills of FOG or similar materials.

(F) The posting in a conspicuous place of notification requirements to the City or other specified entity in the event of any accidental and/or uncontrolled spill of FOG or similar materials that leave or may be carried off the discharger’s premises. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.100 Minimum standards – City may develop.
The City may develop minimum standards for the performance, construction, installation and maintenance of FOG disposal systems, gravity grease interceptors, GRDs, hydromechanical grease interceptors, and/or components associated with such devices. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.110 Food service establishments – Operating permit required.
Where the City has determined that installation of a FOG disposal system at a food service establishment (FSE) is necessary to protect the public sewer system, such installation shall be subject to plan review and operating industrial waste disposal permit requirements pursuant to Chapter 13.11 PMC. Each separate system connected to the public sewer system shall require a separate permit. The City may authorize multiple FSEs to discharge through a single FOG disposal system provided each establishment enters into an agreement with a single entity that maintains the device including continuous maintenance of any permits required for operation of the facility and submits the agreement to the City. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

13.14.120 Food waste disposal units and dishwashers.
Unless specifically required or permitted by the City, no food waste disposal unit, garbage grinder or dishwasher shall be connected to or discharge into any FOG disposal system. Commercial food waste disposers shall discharge directly into the building’s sewage drainage system. (Ord. 1376 § 4 (Exh. A), 2009)

Title 14
ENVIRONMENTAL MANAGEMENT
Chapters:

14.04    Joshua Tree and Native Desert Vegetation Preservation

14.05    Water Efficient Landscape

Chapter 14.04
JOSHUA TREE AND NATIVE DESERT VEGETATION PRESERVATION
Sections:

14.04.010    Purpose and intent.

14.04.020    Title cite and applicability.

14.04.030    Definitions.

14.04.040    Prohibition of removal.

14.04.050    Desert vegetation preservation plan requirements.

14.04.060    Desert vegetation preservation criteria.

14.04.070    Maintenance requirements.

14.04.080    Native desert vegetation bank and preserve criteria.

14.04.090    Exceptions to provisions.

14.04.100    Unlawful activities prohibited.

14.04.110    Violation – Penalty.

14.04.120    Compliance with other laws and regulations.

14.04.010 Purpose and intent.
It is determined by the City Council that appropriate action must be taken in order to protect and preserve desert vegetation, and particularly Joshua trees, so as to retain the unique natural desert aesthetics in some areas of this City, and to promote the general welfare of the community. Although it may not be feasible, practicable, or in the public interest to preserve all healthy desert vegetation regulated under this chapter due to reasonable planning, developmental or property rights considerations, the design of development projects should strive to protect and maintain the most desirable and significant of the healthy desert vegetation in a manner consistent with the City general plan and the California Environmental Quality Act. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.020 Title cite and applicability.
(A) This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Palmdale native desert vegetation ordinance.”

(B) The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all public and private property within the City which contains Joshua trees or other desert vegetation as defined by this chapter. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be defined as follows unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

(A) “Damage” means any action which may cause injury, death, or disfigurement to desert vegetation. This includes, but is not limited to, cutting, mutilating, harvesting, overwatering and excavating.

(B) “Desert native plant specialist” means any professional person whose combination of education and background in native desert vegetation is sufficient for he or she to be considered an expert in the field of native desert vegetation. The City’s Landscape Architect will maintain a listing of qualified desert native plant specialists who shall be deemed authorized to carry out the duties set forth in this chapter.

(C) “Desert vegetation” means Joshua trees and California juniper as defined by this chapter, and other living plants identified pursuant to the California Desert Native Plants Act (Food and Agricultural Code Section 80001, et seq.) as protected or designated on any state or federal rare and endangered species list.

(D) “Development proposal” means an application for approval of a specific plan, a subdivision, conditional use permit, tentative tract map, parcel map or any other development permit or entitlement application which has been filed with and is pending for consideration by the City.

(E) “Growing season” means the period of time each year from March 1st through August 31st.

(F) “Joshua tree” means a living tree of botanical name of Yucca brevifolia, including Y. brevifolia var. Herbertii, and all other varieties and forms thereof.

(G) “California juniper” means a living tree of the botanical name of Juniperus californica.

(H) “Maintenance” means all actions needed for the continued good health of Joshua trees and other desert vegetation, including, but not limited to, insect control, spraying, and removal of dead wood.

(I) “Native desert vegetation preserve” means a site accepted by the City containing stands of native desert vegetation that will be preserved in a natural condition for passive recreation uses.

(J) “Remove” means the physical removal of desert vegetation by grading or any other method likely to cause death of the vegetation.

(K) “Tree bank” means a site accepted by the City for management and maintenance that will be utilized for the temporary storage of native desert vegetation until permanent transplantation sites can be located. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.040 Prohibition of removal.
(A) Desert vegetation shall not be removed, nor caused to be removed, on or from any parcel of land, except as provided by the provisions of this chapter.

(B) A native desert vegetation removal permit shall be obtained from the City’s Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee, prior to the removal of any native desert vegetation as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.050 Desert vegetation preservation plan requirements.
All development proposal applications for sites containing native desert vegetation shall include a desert vegetation preservation plan, submitted with the development application, containing the following:

(A) A written report and a site plan which depicts the location of each Joshua tree and California juniper, discusses their age and health, identifies and locates all trees and shrubs which can be saved in place or relocated. The report shall be prepared by a desert native plant specialist.

(B) A site landscaping plan showing the proposed location of those Joshua trees or California junipers, and any other native desert vegetation that will remain on-site.

(C) A long-term maintenance program for any desert vegetation preserved on the site. The minimum term of any maintenance program shall be two growing seasons, unless a shorter length of time is determined by the City’s Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee in cases where the trees retained on the site are of such health and vigor after one growing season that their survival is assured.

(D) Such other and further information as the Director of Planning may deem necessary to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter in a particular case. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.060 Desert vegetation preservation criteria.
All development proposals for land which contains desert vegetation shall be subject to the following provisions regarding the preservation of native desert vegetation both on- and off-site:

(A) The minimum standard of preservation shall be:

(1) Two Joshua trees or California junipers per gross acre, averaged for the gross site area covered by the development application; or

(2) Where soil conditions or conditions of the Joshua trees or California juniper prohibit the preservation of two trees per acre, or where the total number of healthy trees per gross acre is not equal to two per acre, the minimum standard of preservation will be determined by a desert native plant specialist and confirmed by the City’s Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee, in accordance with the following criteria:

(a) Soil characteristics of a proposed area for relocation of vegetation,

(b) Health of the native desert vegetation, including damage to trunk or root system,

(c) Size of the Joshua tree and the location to where the tree will be transplanted,

(d) A suitable top-root ratio;

(3) Where possible, a minimum of two California juniper trees per gross acre shall be retained undisturbed on-site. California junipers are valuable components of the native desert vegetation and it is desirable to retain specimens whenever possible. However, California junipers do not transplant well, are large plants which are difficult to incorporate into landscaping and are not readily available as nursery stock;

(4) To enhance the likelihood of survival, native desert vegetation that cannot be fenced and left undisturbed will not be left in place while grading. The options for preserving trees on-site after grading are the following:

(a) Move the vegetation slated to remain on-site to a holding area. After grading has been completed, move vegetation once again to a permanent location,

(b) Remove vegetation per options in subsection (B)(2) of this section. After grading, import new Joshua trees to landscaped area,

(c) Grade in Phases. Ready the area to receive vegetation first, then transplant and complete grading.

(B) The quantity of Joshua trees or California junipers calculated under the minimum standard of preservation as determined above shall be preserved by any combination of the following means:

(1) The development proposal shall be prepared in a manner which retains on-site those plants that can be incorporated into the design of the development. Development proposals should use native desert vegetation to landscape on-site detention basins, entry statement areas, and other open space sites whenever possible, where xeric landscaping is appropriate;

(a) California junipers retained on-site shall be credited toward the two trees per gross acre or other minimum standard of preservation,

(b) Other methods of preservation as shown in subsections (B)(2)(a) through (c) and (B)(3) shall not apply to California junipers;

(2) Of the total number of Joshua trees required to be preserved under the two trees per acre required under subsection (A)(1) of this section, the Joshua trees which are not preserved on-site shall be preserved by the following means, and shall count towards the required two trees per acre or other minimum standard of preservation:

(a) The development proposal shall make available to the City for transplantation any Joshua trees identified by the City’s Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee, as suitable for use in landscaping any City property or facility,

(b) The development proposal shall include an offer to make available to other commercial, industrial or residential development projects, native desert vegetation that can be incorporated into another development proposal’s landscaping,

(c) The development proposal shall include an offer to make available native desert vegetation to the public for use as landscaping. The native desert vegetation taken from the site may be used for landscaping. Vegetation from the site shall remain available to the public for a minimum of 30 days after appropriate public notice as determined by the Planning Director,

(i) The development proposal will provide for public notice of the availability of Joshua trees or other desert vegetation or transplantation to other suitable property. The public notice shall be in a form prescribed by the Director of Planning and shall generally conform to the Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091, although direct mail notice shall not be required. The public notice shall provide at least a 30-day period during which transplantation may occur,

(ii) The proponent of the development proposal may require reasonable security and/or indemnification before permitting persons to enter upon the property for transplantation,

(iii) The proponent of the development proposal may not impose any fee or other charge upon persons entering upon the property for any purpose relating to the transplantation of native vegetation,

(iv) The proponent of the development proposal shall use all reasonable efforts to encourage and permit transplantation to occur to the maximum possible extent,

(d) Any Joshua trees, which are required to be preserved and remain after the previous options have been pursued, may be transplanted to an off-site location, approved by the City’s Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee, at the expense of the proponent of the development proposal. Identifying a suitable off-site location shall be the responsibility of the developer. The City shall provide areas for off-site tree banks. The City-administered tree banks that are identified will be made available for this use. This measure shall be viewed as an interim solution with the ultimate goal of relocating this native desert vegetation to permanent locations as can be found. Maintenance of vegetation transplanted to a City-administered tree bank is the responsibility of the City. The proponent of the development proposal shall be responsible for retaining a qualified consultant to provide initial watering of trees after transplantation to a tree bank as required by the City Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee, at the expense of the proponent of the development proposal;

(3) Only after all other options are exhausted, proponents may pay an in-lieu fee to the City to fulfill their obligation of preservation of native desert vegetation. The fee will be used to provide partial funding for the maintenance and coordination of the native desert vegetation banks and preserves. The in-lieu fee will be accepted only when preservation of Joshua and/or juniper trees is not possible due to site constraints that preclude the feasible preservation of desert vegetation, and no alternative preservation options remain. When a proponent must pay an in-lieu fee, the fee shall be calculated on the minimum standard of two trees per acre, less any trees preserved by other means. The in-lieu fee amount shall be determined by resolution of the City Council;

(a) Where California junipers are retained on-site, they shall be credited toward the minimum standard or two trees per acre. However, where they cannot be retained undisturbed on-site, no in-lieu fee is required;

(4) Any native desert vegetation in excess of the minimum standard for preservation may be removed after the public has had the opportunity to transplant native desert vegetation per subsection (B)(3)(a) of this section, and after the native desert vegetation preservation plan and native desert vegetation removal permit has been approved by the City, or if applicable, after the payment of the in-lieu fee. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.070 Maintenance requirements.
Upon completion of construction of the development proposal and after final inspection and acceptance by the City, the following standards relative to ongoing maintenance of native desert vegetation shall apply:

(A) Provisions shall be made assuring, at the expense of the proponent of the development, that the Joshua trees and other desert vegetation preserved on-site, in landscape easements, or landscape assessment districts are maintained in a healthy condition for a minimum of two growing seasons.

(B) After one year, an inspection and evaluation of Joshua trees and other desert vegetation retained on-site will be performed by a desert native plant expert, at the expense of the proponent of the development. Based upon this evaluation, if it is determined that any quantity of Joshua trees or other desert vegetation have died, it will be the responsibility of the proponent to provide replacement desert vegetation as determined by the City Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee.

(C) The Director of Planning shall require posting of a bond or other appropriate security at the time of development proposal approval to assure maintenance of on-site trees, or trees in landscape easements or assessment districts, for a period of two years. If the project is otherwise required to have a bond posted for landscape maintenance requirements, this requirement shall be incorporated into the same bond. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.080 Native desert vegetation bank and preserve criteria.
Appropriate sites that can be acquired by the City through dedication, easement, or other appropriate means will be utilized as native desert vegetation banks and preserves.

(A) Native desert vegetation preserves will be established on those sites acquired by the City which already contain stands of native desert vegetation that is of sufficient vigor and health to demand preservation. The intent of these sites is long-term preservation of the natural biological systems without disturbance. Secondarily, the sites shall be utilized for passive forms of recreation. The City shall administer the long-term maintenance of the sites.

(B) Tree banks shall be established on those sites acquired by the City which are suitable for the temporary storage of transplanted desert vegetation. The intent of these sites will be to serve as storage facilities for native desert vegetation stored off-site until permanent locations for transplantation can be determined. The City shall administer the maintenance of these sites.

(1) Proponents wishing to utilize these sites for storage of vegetation shall obtain the permission of the City Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee, prior to placing vegetation on-site.

(2) Access to the sites for placement or removal of trees or charges shall require permission of the City Landscape Architect, or in lieu thereof, the Director of Public Works’ designee.

(3) Placement, relocation, and removal of trees shall only be allowed by native plant specialists or their approved subcontractors.

(4) Any trees stored in a City tree bank shall be available to the public for use in private landscaping, according to the terms of this section. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.090 Exceptions to provisions.
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

(A) Development proposals upon which the City has taken final action before the effective date of this chapter;

(B) Construction of one single-family home on a lot or parcel;

(C) Additions to existing single-family homes;

(D) Cases of emergency where the Director of Housing, or his or her designee, or any member of a law enforcement agency or the Los Angeles County fire protection district, in the performance of his or her duties, determines that desert vegetation poses an imminent threat to the public safety;

(E) Removal or relocation of native desert vegetation necessary to obtain adequate line-of-site distance as required by the City Traffic Engineer;

(F) Removal of street trees from within the public right-of-way, which, in the opinion of the Director of Public Works or his or her designee, will or may cause damage to public improvements;

(G) Action taken for the protection of existing electrical power or communication lines or other property of a public utility;

(H) Routine maintenance of a Joshua tree or other desert vegetation intended to ensure its continued health;

(I) Joshua trees or other desert vegetation planted, grown and/or held for sale by a licensed nursery. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.100 Unlawful activities prohibited.
(A) Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to damage any desert vegetation as defined in this code.

(B) It is unlawful for any person to falsify any oral statement, paper or document issued to give permission for any person to remove desert vegetation or fail to comply with all conditions or stipulations of this chapter. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.110 Violation – Penalty.
Penalties for violations of this chapter shall be as specified in Chapter 1.12 PMC.

(A) In addition to other penalties imposed by this code, any person, company, organization, firm or corporation shall be required to replace any damaged, illegally cut, destroyed, killed, removed, mutilated or harvested Joshua trees, California junipers, or other desert vegetation pursuant to the recommendation of an authorized desert native plant specialist, to be retained at the expense of the violator. Such specialist shall determine the appropriate number, size, species, location and make written recommendations regarding the replacement of said trees or other desert vegetation. Replacement shall be in sufficient quantities to revegetate the illegally disturbed area either on-site or off-site within six months of adjudication.

(B) Should the person, company, organization, firm or corporation who committed the violation fail to replace the damaged, cut, destroyed, killed, removed, mutilated or harvested Joshua trees or other desert vegetation within six months after adjudication, the City may contract to have such plants replaced and the violator shall be charged the replacement costs. Said costs may be placed as a lien on real property. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

14.04.120 Compliance with other laws and regulations.
Nothing in the provisions of this chapter shall relieve nor be interpreted to exempt a proponent of a development proposal from complying with the requirements of the California Desert Native Plants Act, Food and Agricultural Code Section 80001, et seq., and/or any applicable federal laws and regulations. Nor shall any provision of this chapter be construed so as to conflict with, duplicate, or otherwise interfere with general law preemptive of local regulation. (Ord. 952 § 2, 1992)

Chapter 14.05
WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE
Sections:

14.05.010    Purpose and intent.

14.05.020    Definitions.

14.05.030    Applicability.

14.05.040    Compliance with landscape documentation package.

14.05.050    Penalties.

14.05.060    Elements of the landscape documentation package.

14.05.070    Water efficient landscape worksheet.

14.05.080    Soil management report.

14.05.090    Landscape design plan.

14.05.100    Irrigation design plan.

14.05.110    Grading design plan.

14.05.120    Certificate of completion.

14.05.130    Waivers and variances.

14.05.140    Irrigation scheduling.

14.05.150    Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.

14.05.160    Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.

14.05.170    Irrigation efficiency.

14.05.180    Recycled water.

14.05.190    Graywater systems.

14.05.200    Stormwater management and rainwater retention.

14.05.210    Public education.

14.05.220    Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.

14.05.230    Water waste prevention.

14.05.240    Effective precipitation.

14.05.250    Reporting.

14.05.260    Evapotranspiration (ETo) table.

14.05.010 Purpose and intent.
(A) The purpose of this model ordinance is to:

(1) Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water;

(2) Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible;

(3) Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

(4) Use water efficiently without waste by setting an estimated total water use as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount.

(B) Landscapes that are planned, designed, installed, managed and maintained with the watershed based approach can improve California’s environmental conditions and provide benefits and realize sustainability goals. Such landscapes will make the urban environment resilient in the face of climatic extremes. Consistent with the legislative findings and purpose of the ordinance, conditions in the urban setting will be improved by:

(1) Creating the conditions to support life in the soil by reducing compaction, incorporating organic matter that increases water retention, and promoting productive plant growth that leads to more carbon storage, oxygen production, shade habitat and aesthetic benefits.

(2) Minimizing energy use by reducing irrigation water requirements, reducing reliance on petroleum based fertilizers and pesticides, and planting climate appropriate shade trees in urban areas.

(3) Conserving water by capturing and reusing rainwater and graywater wherever possible and selecting climate appropriate plants that need minimal supplemental water after establishment.

(4) Protecting air and water quality by reducing power equipment use and landfill disposal trips, selecting recycled and locally sourced materials, and using compost, mulch and efficient irrigation equipment to prevent erosion.

(5) Protecting existing habitat and creating new habitat by choosing local native plants, climate adapted nonnatives and avoiding invasive plants. Utilizing integrated pest management with least toxic methods as the first course of action. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.020 Definitions.
The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:

(A) “Application rate” means the depth of water applied to a given area, measured in inches per minute, inches per hour, or gallons per hour.

(B) “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

(C) “Automatic irrigation controller” means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

(D) “Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

(E) “Best management practices for water waste” means those practices contained within the City of Palmdale Engineering Design Standards Section VI: Landscape and Irrigation that reduce or prevent water waste and promote water conservation.

(F) “Certificate of completion” means the document required under PMC 14.05.120.

(G) “Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Designer Certification Program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer Program.

(H) “Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Auditor Certification Program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor Program.

(I) “Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

(J) “Common interest developments” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351.

(K) “Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.

(L) “Controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves or heads to set an irrigation schedule. A weather-based controller is a controller that used evapotranspiration or weather data. A self-adjusting irrigation controller is a controller that uses sensor data i.e., soil moisture sensor.

(M) “Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

(N) “Development proposal” means an application for approval of a specific plan, subdivision, conditional use permit, site plan review, tentative tract map, parcel map or any other discretionary development permit or entitlement application which has been filed with and is pending consideration by the City.

(O) “Distribution uniformity” means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.

(P) “Drip irrigation” means any nonspray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate (equal to or less than two gallons per hour) measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

(Q) “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

(R) “Effective precipitation” or “usable rainfall” (EPPT) means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

(S) “Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

(T) “Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth.

(U) “Established period of the plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment.

(V) “Estimated total water use” (ETWU) means the total water used for the landscape as described in PMC 14.05.070.

(W) “ET adjustment factor” (ETAF) means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing nonrehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

(X) “Evapotranspiration rate” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time.

(Y) “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

(Z) “Flow sensor” means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or sub-meter.

(AA) “Friable” means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.

(BB) “Fuel modification plan guide” means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in fire hazard severity zone.

(CC) “Graywater” means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthy processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. Graywater includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12.

(DD) “Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and nonpervious).

(EE) “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or set of valves with the same schedule and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated. For example, a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established is a nonirrigated hydrozone.

(FF) “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

(GG) “Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by County agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weeds database.

(HH) “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s landscape irrigation auditor certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “WaterSense” labeled auditing program.

(II) “Irrigation efficiency” (IE) means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

(JJ) “Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

(KK) “Irrigation water use analysis” means a review of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

(LL) “Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the State of California Business and Professions Code Section 5615.

(MM) “Landscape area” means all the irrigated planting areas, turf areas, and water features and up to 10 percent of the square footage of pervious nonirrigated planting areas in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) calculation. The 10 percent of nonirrigated planting area shall be added to the low water use hydrozone area, used in the landscape documentation package. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or nonpervious hardscapes, and other nonirrigated areas designated for nondevelopment (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). Designated recreation areas and areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens are subject to the MAWA with an ET adjustment factor not to exceed 1.0.

(NN) “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed (i.e., C-27) by the State of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems and facilities per Business and Professional Code Sections 7058 and 7059.

(OO) “Landscape document package” means the documents required under PMC 14.05.060.

(PP) “Landscape irrigation audit” shall mean a process to perform site inspection, evaluate irrigation systems, and develop efficient irrigation systems. At a minimum, the audit shall be in accordance with the California landscape water management program as described in the Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, the entire document that is hereby incorporated by reference. (See Landscape Irrigation Auditor Handbook, Department of Water Resources, Water Conservation Office, 2004.)

(QQ) “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under PMC 14.05.030.

(RR) “Landscape water meter” means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use.

(SS) “Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

(TT) “Local agency” means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is responsible for adopting and implementing the ordinance. The local agency is also responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including, but not limited to, approval of a permit and plan check or design review of a project.

(UU) “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county or private water company, that provides retail water service.

(VV) “Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. Any irrigation system with a flow rate equal to or less than 0.75 inches per hour, including drip irrigation, subsurface drip, micro-sprinklers and similar irrigation types.

(WW) “Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

(XX) “Master shut-off valve” is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed, water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.

(YY) “Maximum applied water allowance” (MAWA) means for design purposes the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in PMC 14.05.070. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water, are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + (1-ETAF) x SLA].

(ZZ) “Median” is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.

(AAA) “Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.

(BBB) “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

(CCC) “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperatures, and preventing soil erosion.

(DDD) “New construction” means, for the purpose of this chapter, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

(EEE) “Nonresidential landscape” means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.

(FFF) “Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

(GGG) “Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

(HHH) “Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area, wetting pavements, walks, structures, or other nontargeted areas.

(III) “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

(JJJ) “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

(KKK) “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor that, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

(LLL) “Precipitation rate” means the rate of application of water measured in inches per hour.

(MMM) “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under PMC 14.05.060 to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the City. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee.

(NNN) “Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shut-off device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

(OOO) “Record drawing” or “as-builts” means a set of reproductive drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

(PPP) “Recreation area” means areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens.

(QQQ) “Recycled water,” “reclaimed water,” or “treated sewage effluent water” means treated or recycled wastewater of a quality suitable for nonpotable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

(RRR) “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in PMC 14.05.260, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four-to-seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

(SSS) “Regional water efficient landscape ordinance” means a local ordinance adopted by two or more local agencies, water suppliers and other stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical region. Regional ordinances are strongly encouraged to provide a consistent framework for the landscape industry and applicants to adhere to.

(TTT) “Rehabilitated landscape” means any modification to existing relandscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of PMC 14.05.030, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet.

(UUU) “Residential landscape” means landscapes surrounding single or multifamily homes.

(VVV) “Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

(WWW) “Soil moisture sensing device” or “soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

(XXX) “Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.

(YYY) “Special landscape area” (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water.

(ZZZ) “Sprinkler head” means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

(AAAA) “Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

(BBBB) “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

(CCCC) “Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

(DDDD) “Sub-meter” means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.

(EEEE) “Turf” means a groundcover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, perennial ryegrass, red fescue, and tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, seashore paspalum, St. Augustine’s grass, zoysia grass, and buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

(FFFF) “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. It may also mean all of the sprinklers or emitters in a line controlled by the valve.

(GGGG) “Water conserving plant species” means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.

(HHHH) “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

(IIII) “Water use efficiency statement” means a narrative summary of the water use efficiency practices to be applied in the landscape project.

(JJJJ) Reserved.

(KKKK) “Water efficient landscape worksheet” means the document required as part of the documentation package.

(LLLL) “Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

(MMMM) “WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources, 2014. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.030 Applicability.
(A) After December 1, 2015, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

(1) New development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 500 square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

(2) Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than 2,500 square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;

(3) Existing landscapes limited to PMC 14.05.220 and 14.05.230; and

(4) Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to PMC 14.05.070, 14.05.150 and 14.05.160; and existing cemeteries are limited to PMC 14.05.220 and 14.05.230.

(B) Any project with an aggregate landscape area of 2,500 square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter.

(C) For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than 2,500 square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to City of Palmdale Engineering Standards Section VI.

(D) This chapter does not apply to:

(1) Registered local, State or Federal historical sites;

(2) Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

(3) Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

(4) Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.040 Compliance with landscape documentation package.
(A) Prior to construction, the City shall:

(1) Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for permits, plan checks, or design review;

(2) Review the landscape documentation package submitted by the project applicant;

(3) Approve or deny the landscape documentation package;

(4) Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and

(5) Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, file a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet in the project file for future reference.

(B) Prior to construction, the project applicant shall:

(1) Submit a landscape documentation package to the City.

(C) Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the City, the project applicant shall:

(1) Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion; and

(2) Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or his/her designee. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.050 Penalties.
The City may establish and administer penalties to the project applicant for noncompliance with the ordinance to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.060 Elements of the landscape documentation package.
(A) The landscape documentation package shall include the following six elements:

(1) Project information:

(a) Date;

(b) Project applicant;

(c) Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));

(d) Total landscape area (square feet);

(e) Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed);

(f) Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;

(g) Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package;

(h) Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner;

(i) Applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape ordinance and submit a complete landscape documentation package”;

(2) Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet.

(a) Water budget calculations.

(i) Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA);

(ii) Estimated total water use (ETWU);

(3) Soil management report;

(4) Landscape design plan;

(5) Irrigation design plan; and

(6) Grading design plan. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.070 Water efficient landscape worksheet.
(A) A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet in City of Palmdale Engineering Standards Section VI which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.

(1) In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the Reference Evapotranspiration Table in PMC 14.05.260. For geographic areas not covered in PMC 14.05.260, use data from other cities located nearby in the same reference evapotranspiration zone, as found in the CIMIS Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, Department of Water Resources, 1999.

(B) Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

(1) The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researches with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

(2) All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

(3) All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in City of Palmdale Engineering Standards Section VI.

(4) ETAF for new and existing nonrehabilitated special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.080 Soil management report.
(A) In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows:

(1) Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

(a) Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

(b) The soil analysis shall include:

(i) Soil texture (percent clay, silt, sand), indicating the percentage of organic matter;

(ii) Approximate soil infiltration rate either measured or derived from the soil texture infiltration rate tables. A range of infiltration rates shall be noted where appropriate, determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

(iii) pH;

(iv) Total soluble salts;

(v) Sodium;

(vi) Percent organic matter;

(vii) Recommendations; and

(viii) Other soil physical or chemical properties relevant to improving water use efficiency and maintaining plant health (e.g., conductivity, nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, calcium, magnesium, sodium, sulfur, etc.).

(c) In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately 15 percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots.

(d) A laboratory soil analysis may be excluded if a qualified soil specialist or scientist provides a certified statement addressing reasons for not completing such a soil analysis.

(e) Prior to installation, an on-site assessment by a qualified soil specialist that identifies soil attributes or conditions that may minimize water use efficiency or limit plant growth shall be required. The on-site soil assessment shall:

(i) Identify planting or turf areas that may need amendment;

(ii) Provide a statement of recommendations to correct or improve soil conditions (i.e., applying organic compost as a soil amendment in planting and turf areas);

(iii) Conduct a further analysis of soil conditions (i.e., soil profile, hardpan, bulk density, soil toxicity, salinity, etc.) where applicable; and

(iv) A project applicant shall implement the recommendations from the on-site soil assessment and apply any relevant information from the on-site soil assessment to the design plans.

(2) The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following:

(a) If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the landscape documentation package; or

(b) If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the local agency as part of the certificate of completion.

(3) The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

(4) The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the local agency with certificate of completion. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.090 Landscape design plan.
(A) For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria and specifications shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package:

(1) Plant Material.

(a) Any plant may be selected from the City of Palmdale approved plant list for the landscape providing the estimated applied total water use recommended for the project site in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

(i) Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation;

(ii) Selection of water conserving plant species, tree and turf species, especially local native plants;

(iii) Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance;

(iv) Selection of trees based on the City of Palmdale approved tree list, applicable local tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area;

(v) Selection of plants from local and regional landscape program plant lists; and

(vi) Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines.

(b) Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in PMC 14.05.100(A)(2)(d).

(c) Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

(i) Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System (which lists the City of Palmdale as Zone 11) which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;

(ii) Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and

(iii) Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

(d) There will be no turf permitted in any single-family residential front yard. There will be no turf permitted in that portion of street side yards located between the back of curb and any perimeter fence, wall or structure, and visible from the right-of-way of single-family residences, whether new construction or rehabilitated landscaping.

(e) No turf permitted on any multifamily project, except for designated active recreational areas.

(f) No turf permitted on any commercial or industrial project, unless specifically approved by the Director of Planning and/or City Engineer on designated recreational areas only.

(g) Turf areas shall be sized and shaped to minimize irrigation overspray and runoff.

(h) Installation of turf on slopes greater than 4:1 (horizontal to vertical) shall not be permitted.

(i) Installation of long, narrow, or irregularly shaped turf areas less than eight feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other low volume irrigation technology.

(j) Irrigated areas (including turf) within 24 inches of nonpermeable hardscape shall be irrigated with drip irrigation or subsurface irrigation technology unless waived by the Public Works Director, Director of Planning, or City Engineer.

(k) High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.

(l) A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to the local fuel modification plan guidelines.

(m) The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged. Invasive species of plants shall be avoided especially near parks, buffers, greenbelts, water bodies, and open spaces because of their potential to cause harm in sensitive areas.

(n) The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low water use plants as a group.

(2) Water Features.

(a) Recirculating water systems shall be used for decorative water features.

(b) Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

(c) Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. The evaporation rate for all water features shall be equivalent to the evapotranspiration rate of a high water use plant.

(3) Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments.

(a) Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.

(b) Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see PMC 14.05.080).

(c) For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per 1,000 square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.

(d) A minimum of three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. In mulched planting areas, the use of drip irrigation is highly recommended. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.

(e) Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards.

(f) The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

(g) Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer products shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.

(B) The landscape design plan shall be drawn on project base sheets at a scale that accurately and clearly identifies the following specifications, where applicable, at a minimum:

(1) Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

(2) Indicate the square footage of each hydrozone;

(3) Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

(4) Identify recreational areas;

(5) Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

(6) Identify any other pertinent factors (e.g., sun exposure, microclimate, etc.);

(7) Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

(8) Identify type of mulch and application depth;

(9) Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

(10) Identify type and surface area of water features;

(11) Identify hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious);

(12) Identify location, installation details, and 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples are provided in PMC 14.05.200;

(13) Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in PMC 14.05.200 and their 24-hour retention or infiltration capacity;

(14) Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;

(15) Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”;

(16) Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape (see Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, and 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code);

(17) Location map with north arrow, scale, and legal description of the property;

(18) Project name;

(19) Title block with name, license number, mailing address, email address, and telephone number of licensed landscape architect;

(20) Total landscape area (square feet);

(21) Benchmark name, elevation, and location;

(22) Topography with proposed contour lines and elevations;

(23) Property lines and setbacks;

(24) Street names;

(25) Location of all utilities (e.g., telephone, electrical, gas, sewer, drainage, etc.). The use of this information is limited to the landscape design and installation;

(26) Location and details of existing and proposed public improvements within right-of-way (e.g., curb, gutter, sidewalk, street light, fire hydrants, driveways, or approaches, etc.);

(27) Location of all plant material (e.g., turf, annuals, perennials, groundcovers, shrubs, trees, and other vegetation, etc.);

(28) Detailed legend explaining all the symbols used in the landscape design plan including botanical names, common names, quantity, container size, etc.;

(29) Mulch types and depths (inches);

(30) Design elements: water features, hardscapes (pervious and nonpervious), existing natural features including, but not limited to, rock outcropping, creeks or streams, wetlands, and plant materials that will remain;

(31) Installation details for the landscape including soil preparation, plant material installation, tree planting and staking, and any other applicable details;

(32) Location and installation details of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Examples include, but are not limited to:

(a) Infiltration beds, swales, and basins that allow water to collect and soak into the ground.

(b) Constructed wetlands and retention ponds that retain water, handle excess flows and filter pollutants.

(c) Pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete, etc.) that minimize runoff (volume and velocity).

(d) Each sheet of the landscape design plan shall contain the following statement along with a licensed landscape architect’s or licensed landscape contractor’s stamp and signature: “I have agreed to comply with the criteria and specifications of the ordinance and I have applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan.” (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.100 Irrigation design plan.
This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all irrigation design criteria and specifications, manufacturer’s specification, any City of Palmdale code requirements, the requirements listed in this section, and the manufacturer’s recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria and specifications shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package:

(A) Criteria.

(1) System.

(a) Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private sub-meter, shall be installed for all nonresidential irrigated landscapes of 1,000 square feet but not more than 5,000 square feet (the level at which Water Code 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of 5,000 square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:

(i) A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or

(ii) A privately owned meter or sub-meter.

(b) Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing nonvolatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

(c) If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

(i) If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

(ii) Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

(d) Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.) either integral or auxiliary that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

(e) Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

(f) Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.

(g) Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all nonresidential landscapes and residential landscapes of 5,000 square feet or larger.

(h) Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shutdown features.

(i) The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto nontargeted areas, such as adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

(j) Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

(k) The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

(l) The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in PMC 14.05.070 regarding the maximum applied water allowance.

(m) All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agriculture and Biological Engineers’/International Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

(n) It is highly recommended that the project applicant or local agency inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.

(o) In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

(p) Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

(q) Head-to-head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

(r) Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turfgrass.

(s) Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.

(t) Areas less than eight feet in width in any direction or irregularly shaped areas shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.

(u) Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within 24 inches of any nonpermeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from nonpermeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow nonspray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

(i) The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

(ii) The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

(iii) The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in subsection (A)(1)(i) of this section. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

(v) Slopes greater than 25 percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specified an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

(2) Hydrozone.

(a) Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

(b) Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

(c) Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for the tree.

(d) Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

(i) Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

(ii) The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

(e) Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

(f) On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table (see City of Palmdale Engineering Design Standards, Section IV). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller.

(B) The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

(1) Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

(2) Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

(3) Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

(4) Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

(5) Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in PMC 14.05.180;

(6) The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

(7) The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system (see Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701 and 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code).

(C) Site.

(1) Location map with north arrow, scale, and legal description of the property;

(2) Project name;

(3) Title block with name, license/certificate number, mailing address, email address, and phone number of licensed landscape architect or certified irrigation designer, etc.;

(4) Benchmark name, elevation, and location;

(5) Topography with proposed contour lines and elevations;

(6) Property lines and setbacks;

(7) Street names;

(8) Location of all utilities (e.g., telephone, electrical, gas, sewer, drainage, etc.). The use of this information is limited to the landscape design and installation;

(9) Location and details of existing and proposed public improvements within right-of-way (e.g., curb, gutter, sidewalk, streetlight, fire hydrants, driveways, or approaches, etc.).

(D) Irrigation System.

(1) Layout of the irrigation system and all related components;

(2) Detailed legend explaining all the symbols used in the irrigation design plan;

(3) Location, manufacturer, model, type and size of all components of the irrigation system such as:

(a) Water meters;

(b) Controllers;

(c) Valves;

(d) Check valves;

(e) Main lines and lateral lines (indicate depth);

(f) Swing joints or other riser-protection components;

(g) Sprinkler heads, drip emitters and other emission devices;

(h) Sensors (e.g., rain, freeze, wind, etc.);

(i) Soil moisture sensors;

(j) Pressure regulators;

(k) Pumps;

(l) Backflow prevention devices;

(m) Quick couplers;

(n) Other related components. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.110 Grading design plan.
(A) For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading design plan meeting the following design criteria and specifications shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan with permits prepared by a civil engineer satisfies this requirement.

(1) The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:

(a) Height of graded slopes;

(b) Drainage patterns;

(c) Pad elevations;

(d) Finish grade; and

(e) Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

(2) To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:

(a) Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain onto nonpermeable hardscapes;

(b) Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and

(c) Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.

(3) The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.120 Certificate of completion.
(A) The certificate of completion (see City of Palmdale Engineering Standards Section VI for a sample certificate) shall include the following six elements:

(1) Project information sheet that contains:

(a) Date;

(b) Project name;

(c) Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address;

(d) Project address and location; and

(e) Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;

(2) Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package;

(a) Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these “as-built” or record drawings shall be included with the certification;

(b) A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes;

(3) Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see PMC 14.05.140);

(4) Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see PMC 14.05.150);

(5) Irrigation audit report (see PMC 14.05.160); and

(6) Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see PMC 14.05.080).

(B) The project applicant shall:

(1) Submit the signed certificate of completion to the City for review;

(2) Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or his or her designee.

(C) The City shall:

(1) Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant;

(2) Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the City shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.130 Waivers and variances.
The City may administratively waive or modify one or more requirements of the ordinance when unusual difficulties make their strict application impossible, and upon determination that the waiver or variance is consistent with the purpose and intent of the ordinance. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.140 Irrigation scheduling.
(A) For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

(1) Irrigation scheduling shall incorporate the use of evapotranspiration data such as those from the California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS) weather stations or other validated weather data or soil moisture monitoring systems to apply the appropriate levels of water for different climates. CIMIS data for Palmdale is available in the Engineering Design Standards for Landscape and Irrigation, Section VI.

(2) Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. Exceptions for large projects are subject to approval by the Director of Public Works, City Engineer, Director of Planning, or the local water purveyor.

(3) For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

(4) Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

(a) The plant establishment period;

(b) The established landscape; and

(c) Temporarily irrigated areas.

(5) Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

(a) Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);

(b) Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);

(c) Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;

(d) Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;

(e) Application rate setting;

(f) Root depth setting;

(g) Plant type setting;

(h) Soil type;

(i) Slope factor setting;

(j) Shade factor setting; and

(k) Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.150 Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.
(A) Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.

(B) A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; conducting water audits; prescribing the amount of water applied per landscaped acre; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas; and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

(C) Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally specified installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency.

(D) A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable or environmentally friendly best practices for all landscape maintenance activities. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.160 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
(A) All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a local agency landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.

(B) In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately 15 percent will satisfy this requirement.

(C) For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed (subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter) after December 1, 2015, as described in PMC 14.05.030:

(1) The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the City that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming;

(2) The local agency shall administer programs that may include, but is not limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.170 Irrigation efficiency.
For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.180 Recycled water.
(A) The installation of recycled water irrigation systems (i.e., dual distribution systems) shall (be required to) allow for the current and future use of recycled water (unless a written exemption has been granted).

(B) All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all City of Palmdale and State codes.

(C) Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (nonrehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0.

(D) Irrigation systems shall make use of recycled water unless a written exemption has been granted by the local water agency, stating that recycled water meeting all public health codes and standards is not available and will not be available in the foreseeable future.

(E) If the irrigation water (recycled water or blended water) has electrical conductivity equal to or greater than three deciSeimens per meter (dS/m) or three millimhos per centimeter (mmh/cm) or 2,000 mg per liter total dissolved solids (TDS), a leaching fraction of up to 10 percent may be included in the MAWA calculation. The leaching fraction shall not exceed 10 percent of MAWA. For more information on recycled water, see the University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources “Landscape Plant Salt Tolerance Selection Guide for Recycled Water Irrigation (2005),” the entire document, which is hereby incorporated by reference. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.190 Graywater systems.
Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to PMC 14.05.030(C) for the applicability of this chapter to landscape areas less than 2,500 square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by graywater. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.200 Stormwater management and rainwater retention.
(A) Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize runoff and to increase on-site rainwater retention and infiltration are encouraged.

(B) Project applicants shall refer to the City or Regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater ordinances and stormwater management plans or technical requirements.

(C) All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to PMC 14.05.090(A)(3).

(D) It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either: the one-inch, 24-hour rain event or (2) the eighty-fifth percentile, 24-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, State or Federal regulation.

(E) It is recommended that stormwater projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site stormwater and dry weather runoff capture and use:

(1) Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas.

(2) Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways.

(3) Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff.

(4) Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse.

(5) Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems.

(6) Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture stormwater and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil.

(7) Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.210 Public education.
(A) Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community.

(1) The City of Palmdale shall provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget.

(B) Model Homes. All model homes shall be landscaped and use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter.

(1) Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.

(2) Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.220 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
(A) This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015, and are over one acre in size.

(1) For all landscapes in this subsection (A) that have a water meter, the City shall administer programs that may include, but are not limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62).

(2) For all landscapes in this subsection (A) that do not have a meter, the City shall administer programs that may include, but are not limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste.

(B) All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.230 Water waste prevention.
(A) The City of Palmdale shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures.

(B) Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if:

(1) The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

(2) The adjacent nonpermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping.

(C) Failure to comply with the direction of the Director of Public Works within a period of 30 days after receipt of such notice shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.240 Effective precipitation.
The City may consider effective precipitation (25 percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and may use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance: MAWA = (ETo – Eppt) (0.62) [(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas. MAWA = (ETo – Eppt) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for nonresidential areas. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.250 Reporting.
(A) Local agencies shall report on implementation and enforcement by December 31, 2015. Local agencies responsible for administering individual ordinances shall report on their updated ordinance, while those agencies developing a regional ordinance shall report in their existing ordinance. Those agencies crafting a regional ordinance shall also report on their new ordinance by March 1, 2016. Subsequently, reporting for all agencies will be due by January 31st of each year. Reports should be submitted as follows:

(B) Local agencies are to address the following:

(1) State whether you are adopting a single agency ordinance or a regional agency alliance ordinance, and the date of adoption or anticipated date of adoption.

(2) Define the reporting period. The reporting period shall commence on December 1, 2015, and end on December 28, 2015. For local agencies crafting regional ordinances with other agencies, there shall be an additional reporting period commencing on February 1, 2016, and ending on February 28, 2016. In subsequent years, all local agency reporting will be for the calendar year.

(3) State if using a locally modified water efficient landscape ordinance (WELO) or the MWELO. If using a locally modified WELO, how is it different than MWELO, is it at least as efficient as MWELO, and are there any exemptions specified?

(4) State the entity responsible for implementing the ordinance.

(5) State number and types of projects subject to the ordinance during the specified reporting period.

(6) State the total area (in square feet or acres) subject to the ordinance over the reporting period, if available.

(7) Provide the number of new housing starts, new commercial projects, and landscape retrofits during the reporting period.

(8) Describe the procedure for review of projects subject to the ordinance.

(9) Describe actions taken to verify compliance. Is a plan check performed; if so, by what entity? Is a site inspection performed; if so, by what entity? Is a post-installation audit required; if so, by whom?

(10) Describe enforcement measures.

(11) Explain challenges to implementing and enforcing the ordinance.

(12) Describe educational and other needs to properly apply the ordinance. (Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

14.05.260 Evapotranspiration (ETo) table.
Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table.

 

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Annual ETo

Palmdale

2.0

2.6

4.6

6.2

7.3

8.9

9.8

9.0

6.5

4.7

2.7

2.1

66.2

* The values in this table were derived from:

1. California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS);

2. Reference EvapoTranspiration Zones Map, UC Dept. of Land, Air and Water Resources and California Dept. of Water Resources, 1999;

3. Reference Evapotranspiration for California, University of California, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987) Bulletin, 1922; and

4. Determining Daily Reference Evapotranspiration, Cooperative Extension UC Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987), Publication Leaflet 21426.

(Ord. 1475 § 1, 2015)

Title 15
BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION*
Chapters:

15.24    Control and Abatement of Substandard Property

15.28    Floodplain Management

*    Ordinance 1147, passed July 14, 1998, repealed Chapters 15.04, 15.08, 15.12, 15.16 and 15.20 PMC and replaced them with Chapter 8.04 PMC, Adoption of Health, Safety and Technical Construction Codes.

Chapter 15.24
CONTROL AND ABATEMENT OF SUBSTANDARD PROPERTY
Sections:

15.24.010    Adopted.

15.24.020    Definitions.

15.24.010 Adopted.
(A) Except as provided in this chapter, County Substandard Property Ordinance No. 9371 in effect August 18, 1967, shall be the substandard property ordinance of the City providing regulations for the control and abatement of substandard property.

(B) Three copies of the County substandard property ordinance have been deposited in the office of the City Clerk and shall be at all times maintained by the clerk for use and examination by the public. (Ord. 112 § 1, 1967)

15.24.020 Definitions.
Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the County substandard property ordinance, each such name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

(A) “Building Rehabilitation Appeals Board” means the City Council of the City.

(B) “County” or “County of Los Angeles” means the City.

(C) “County Engineer” means the City Engineer. (Ord. 112 § 2, 1967)

Chapter 15.28
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Sections:

15.28.010    Definitions.

15.28.020    Lands to which this chapter applies.

15.28.030    Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.

15.28.040    Compliance.

15.28.050    Abrogation and greater restrictions.

15.28.060    Interpretation.

15.28.070    Warning and disclaimer of liability.

15.28.090    Establishment of development permit.

15.28.100    Designation of Floodplain Administrator.

15.28.110    Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.

15.28.120    Standards of construction.

15.28.130    Standards for utilities.

15.28.140    Standards for subdivisions.

15.28.150    Standards for manufactured homes.

15.28.155    Standards for recreational vehicles.

15.28.160    Floodways.

15.28.185    Nature of variances.

15.28.190    Appeal Board.

15.28.200    Conditions for variances.

15.28.300    Extent of provisions.

15.28.010 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted according to their common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application to further its purpose.

(A) “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

(B) “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone- or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

(C) “Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

(D) “Appeal” means a request for a review of the Floodplain Administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

(E) “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO, or AH (none in City) Zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Generally, the base flood depths of an area of shallow flooding range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate and velocity flow may be evident.

(F) “Area of special flood hazard.” See “Special flood hazard area (SFHA).”

(G) “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called “100-year flood”). “Base flood” is a term used throughout this chapter.

(H) “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides.

(I) Building. See “Structure.”

(J) “Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

(K) “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of the floodplain.

(L) “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.

(M) “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

(N) “Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:

(1) The overflow of floodwaters; or

(2) The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.

(O) “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map” (FBFM) means the official map on which the Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

(P) “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the City of Palmdale.

(Q) “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the FIRM, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

(R) “Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source.

(S) “Floodplain Administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the Floodplain Management regulations.

(T) “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources of the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

(U) “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances and other applications of the police power which controls development in flood-prone areas. The term describes such federal, state or local regulations, which provide standards for the purpose of preventing flood and reducing flood loss and damage.

(V) “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

(W) “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot; also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

(X) “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

(Y) “Fraud and victimization” as related to PMC 15.28.185 through 15.28.200 means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the City of Palmdale will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for 50 to 100 years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

(Z) “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

(AA) “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

(BB) “Hardship” as it relates to PMC 15.28.185 through 15.28.200 means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The City of Palmdale requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

(CC) “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

(DD) “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement.

(1) An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable nonelevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

(a) The wet floodproofing standard in PMC 15.28.120(C)(5);

(b) The anchoring standards in PMC 15.28.120(A);

(c) The construction materials and methods standards in PMC 15.28.120(B);

(d) The standards for utilities in PMC 15.28.130.

(2) For residential structures, all subgrade-enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements. This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

(EE) “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days.

(FF) “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

(GG) “Market value” shall be determined by estimating the cost to replace the structure in new condition and adjusting that cost figure by the amount of depreciation, which has accrued since the structure was constructed. The cost of replacement of the structure shall be based on a square foot cost factor determined by reference to a building cost estimating guide recognized by the building construction industry. The amount of depreciation shall be determined by taking into account the age and physical deterioration of the structure and functional obsolescence as approved by the Floodplain Administrator, but shall not include economic or other forms of external obsolescence. Use of replacement costs or accrued depreciation factors different from those contained in recognized building cost estimating guides may be considered only if such factors are included in a report prepared by a independent professional appraiser and supported by a written explanation of the differences.

(HH) “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on the City of Palmdale’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

(II) “New construction” means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by the City, and include any subsequent improvements to such structures.

(JJ) “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community.

(KK) “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

(LL) “One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood” means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. It is identical to the “base flood,” which will be the term used throughout this chapter.

(MM) “Public safety and nuisance” as related to PMC 15.28.185 means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

(NN) “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

(1) Built on a single chassis;

(2) Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

(3) Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and

(4) Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.

(OO) “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

(PP) “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or, if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of the chapter, or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state and federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

(QQ) “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

(RR) Sheet Flow Area. See “Area of shallow flooding.”

(SS) “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area of the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in one given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.

(TT) “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. If the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, placement or other improvement is not within 180 days of the permit date, then “start of construction” shall mean the actual start. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure.

(UU) “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home.

(VV) “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

(WW) “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure either:

(1) Before the improvement or repair is started; or

(2) If the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. The term does not, however, include either:

(a) Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or

(b) Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places.

(XX) “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

(YY) “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

(ZZ) “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified) of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

(AAA) “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. “Watercourse” includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 1299 § 6, 2007; Ord. U-1299 § 6, 2006; Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.020 Lands to which this chapter applies.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the City. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.030 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for the City of Palmdale dated March 30, 1998, and accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM), dated March 30, 1998, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This Flood Insurance Study and attendant mapping are the minimum area of applicability for this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas that allow implementation of this chapter and are recommended to the City Council by the Floodplain Administrator. The Flood Insurance Study and FIRM are on file in the office of the City Engineer. (Ord. 1267 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.040 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violations of the provisions of this chapter by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connections with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the City Council from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.050 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.060 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

(A) Considered as minimum requirements;

(B) Liberally construed in favor of protecting persons and property from flood hazards; and

(C) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted to the City under state statutes. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.070 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the City, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.090 Establishment of development permit.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazards. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the Floodplain Administrator and may include, but need not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

(A) Site plan, including but not limited to:

(1) Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures, ground elevations shown at one foot contour elevations throughout the building site; and

(2) Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer and utilities; and

(3) For foundations placed on fill, the location and height of fill, and compaction requirements (compacted to 95 percent using the Standard Proctor Test Method); and

(4) If available, the base flood elevation from the Flood Insurance Study and/or Flood Insurance Rate Maps; and

(5) All appropriate certifications listed in PMC 15.28.110(D); and

(6) Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.100 Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The City Engineer is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accordance with its provisions and is referred to in this chapter as the “Floodplain Administrator.” (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.110 Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator.
The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

(A) Permit Review. Review of all development permits to determine that:

(1) The permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

(2) All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

(3) The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

(4) The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined, but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affect” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point.

(B) Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, or the Flood Insurance Study, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer PMC 15.28.120.

(C) Notification of Other Agencies. Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:

(1) Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration;

(2) Assure that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

(D) Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed:

(1) The certification required in PMC 15.28.120(C)(1) (lowest floor elevations);

(2) The certification required in PMC 15.28.120(C)(4) (elevation of floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

(3) The certification required in PMC 15.28.120(C)(2) (elevations in areas of shallow flooding);

(4) The certification required in PMC 15.28.120(C)(5)(a) (wet floodproofing standard);

(5) The certified elevation required in PMC 15.28.140 (subdivision standards).

(E) Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in PMC 15.28.190.

(F) Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in PMC 15.28.040. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.120 Standards of construction.
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required to be met to the satisfaction of the Floodplain Administrator:

(A) Anchoring.

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;

(2) All manufactured homes shall meet the anchoring standards of PMC 15.28.150.

(B) Construction Materials and Methods.

(1) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

(2) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

(3) All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding;

(4) All new construction and substantial improvements within Zones AH or AO shall be required to have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

(C) Elevation and Floodproofing.

(1) In an AO Zone, new residential construction and substantial improvement of any residential lowest floor, including basement, elevated to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified;

(2) In an A Zone, new residential construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation;

(3) In all other zones, new residential construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation;

(4) Upon completion of the residential structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be verified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the City Building Inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator;

(5) Nonresidential construction, new or substantial improvement, shall either be elevated in conformance with subsection (C)(1), (2) or (3) of this section or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

(a) Be floodproofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water,

(b) Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy, and

(c) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certifications shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator;

(6) All new construction and substantial improvements, that have fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) and are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage that are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

(a) Have a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices; provided, that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters, or

(b) Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect to comply with a local floodproofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration;

(7) Manufactured homes shall also meet the standards in PMC 15.28.150. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.130 Standards for utilities.
(A) All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and to eliminate discharge from the systems into floodwaters.

(B) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.140 Standards for subdivisions.
Subdivisions shall meet the following requirements to the satisfaction of the Floodplain Administrator:

(A) All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify any flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

(B) All subdivision plans will provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pads. If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the lowest floor final pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the Floodplain Administrator.

(C) All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

(D) All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

(E) All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.150 Standards for manufactured homes.
(A) All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the City’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, on sites located:

(1) Outside of a manufactured homes park or subdivision;

(2) In a new manufactured home park or subdivision;

(3) In an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or

(4) In an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on a site upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.

(B) All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that is not subject to the provisions of subsection (A) of this section will be elevated so that either the:

(1) Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or

(2) The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement.

Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verification shall be provided to the Floodplain Administrator. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.155 Standards for recreational vehicles.
All recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the City’s Flood Insurance Rate Map will either:

(A) Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days, be fully licensed and ready for highway use; a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

(B) Meet the permit requirements of PMC 15.28.090 through 15.28.110 and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in PMC 15.28.150. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002)

15.28.160 Floodways.
Located within areas of special flood hazards established in PMC 15.28.030 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters, which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

(A) Encroachments into floodways shall be prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any increase in (the base) flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

(B) If subsection (A) of this section is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of PMC 15.28.120. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.185 Nature of variances.
The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

It is the duty of the Floodplain Administrator to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring structures built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood chapter are quite rare. The long-term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002)

15.28.190 Appeal Board.
(A) The City Council shall hear and decide appeals from decisions made by the Floodplain Administrator and requests for variances from the requirements of this section.

(B) The City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

(C) In passing upon such applications, the City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

(1) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

(2) The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

(3) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner and future owners of the property;

(4) The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

(5) The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

(6) The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

(7) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

(8) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

(9) The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

(10) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

(11) The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

(D) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a City official that:

(1) The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as $25.00 for $100.00 of insurance coverage; and

(2) Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the Floodplain Administrator in the office of the County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

(E) The Floodplain Administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.200 Conditions for variances.
(A) Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new developments to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation provided that the procedures of PMC 15.28.090 through 15.28.160 have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

(B) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed in the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this section.

(C) Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

(D) Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

(E) Variances shall only be issued upon:

(1) A showing of good and sufficient cause;

(2) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” as defined in PMC 15.28.010 to the applicant; and

(3) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

(F) Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections (A) through (D) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.

(G) Upon consideration of the factors of PMC 15.28.190 and the purposes of this chapter, the City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter.

(H) Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor elevation below the regulatory flood elevation and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. A copy of the notice shall be recorded by the City in the office of the Los Angeles County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. (Ord. 1169 § 1, 2002; Ord. 711 § 1, 1987)

15.28.300 Extent of provisions.
To the extent the provisions of this chapter are substantially the same as previous provisions of the Palmdale Municipal Code, these provisions shall be construed as continuations of those provisions and not as new enactments. (Ord. 1169 § 2, 2002)

Title 16
SUBDIVISIONS
Chapters:

16.00    General Provisions

16.10    Definitions

16.20    Responsibilities and Designations

16.30    Required Maps

16.40    General Tentative Map Procedures

16.50    Tentative Map Procedures for Five or More Lots

16.60    Tentative Parcel Map Procedures for Four or Fewer Lots

16.70    Final and Parcel Map Processing

16.80    Additional Final and Parcel Map Requirements

16.90    Common Interest Development Conversions

16.100    Vesting Tentative Maps

16.110    Dedications and Improvements

16.120    Reversion to Acreage

16.130    Lot Mergers/Unmergers

16.140    Corrections and Amendments of Maps

16.150    Lot Line Adjustments

16.160    Certificate of Compliance

16.165    Reimbursement Agreements

16.170    Enforcement

Chapter 16.00
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Sections:

16.00.010    Authority and purpose.

16.00.020    Scope and applicability.

16.00.030    Exemptions.

16.00.040    Exceptions.

16.00.050    Fees.

16.00.060    Hold harmless and indemnification of City.

16.00.010 Authority and purpose.
This title, which may be cited as the “City of Palmdale subdivision ordinance,” is adopted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution, and Government Code Section 66410, et seq., herein cited as the “Subdivision Map Act.” The purpose of this title, and any City standards adopted to implement this title, is to regulate and control the division of land within the City of Palmdale and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act concerning the design, improvement and survey data of subdivisions, the form and content of all required maps, and the procedure to be followed in securing the City’s official approval of all required maps. This title and all actions taken pursuant to it are necessary to preserve and protect the public health, safety and general welfare; to implement the City’s general plan and zoning ordinance, applicable specific plan, and other applicable provisions of the City’s Municipal Code pertaining to land development or development projects; to assure sufficient public infrastructure and facilities for adequate traffic circulation, water, utilities and public services, sanitary sewer facilities and storm drain facilities, and to promote orderly growth and development and proper use of land and to provide for the efficient uses and conservation of resources. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.00.020 Scope and applicability.
This title shall apply to any division of land within the City and shall control the preparation, processing and approval of all tentative maps, final maps, parcel maps, common interest subdivisions, lot line adjustments, lot mergers, reversions to acreage, exceptions and waivers.

This title shall also apply to the division of land within unincorporated territory to the extent permitted by Subdivision Map Act Section 66454. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.00.030 Exemptions.
A tentative map, parcel map or final map shall not be required as set forth in Government Code Section 66412. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.00.040 Exceptions.
(A) The Planning Commission or, on appeal, the City Council may authorize exceptions to any of the requirements or standards imposed by these regulations where not inconsistent with or prohibited by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, Municipal Code or general plan.

(B) An application for any exception shall be filed concurrently with the filing of the development application for which the exception is sought. The exception application shall state fully the grounds for the exception and the facts supporting the application. Before recommending or approving any application for exception, the Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal, shall make all the following findings:

(1) There are special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, so that the strict application of this title would deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical land use district classifications;

(2) Granting the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same vicinity and land use district and denied to property for which the exception is sought;

(3) Granting the exception will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the properties or improvements in such vicinity and land use district in which the property is located; and

(4) Granting the exception does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and land use district in which such property is located. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.00.050 Fees.
All persons submitting maps or other development applications required by this title shall pay all fees and deposits required by this title, in the amount prescribed by resolution of the City Council at the time the fees are due and payable, except as otherwise authorized by City ordinance. These fees shall include, but are not limited to, plan check fees, processing fees, inspection fees, mitigation fees and impact fees. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.00.060 Hold harmless and indemnification of City.
Pursuant to the authority of Government Code Section 66474.9, the City shall require, as a condition of approval of any tentative or parcel map or other subdivision approval, that the subdivider indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City and its elected and appointed officials, officers, agents and employees (indemnitees) from any claim, action or proceeding, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative or otherwise against the indemnitee to attack, set aside, void or annul an approval of the City or an indemnitee, concerning a subdivision, which claim, action or proceeding is brought within the time period provided for in Government Code Section 66499.37. The City shall promptly notify the subdivider of any such claim, action or proceeding and shall cooperate fully in the defense. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.10
DEFINITIONS
Sections:

16.10.010    City Council.

16.10.020    City Engineer.

16.10.030    City standards.

16.10.040    Commercially or industrially zoned land.

16.10.050    Community apartment project.

16.10.060    Composite development plan.

16.10.070    Condominium conversion.

16.10.080    Condominium conversion project.

16.10.090    Development Advisory Board.

16.10.100    Director of Planning.

16.10.110    General plan.

16.10.120    Multiple or phased final maps.

16.10.130    Orderly development.

16.10.140    Planning Commission.

16.10.150    Reviewing authority.

16.10.160    Small lot subdivisions.

16.10.170    Stock cooperative project.

16.10.180    Zoning ordinance.

16.10.010 City Council.
The term “City Council” means the City Council of the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.020 City Engineer.
The term “City Engineer” means the City Engineer of the City of Palmdale, or an authorized designee. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.030 City standards.
The term “City standards” means all those ordinances, standards, regulations, policies, resolutions and procedures that the City uses to review, process, approve or inspect applications for development, including, but not limited to, public improvements, grading and landscaping. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.040 Commercially or industrially zoned land.
The term “commercially or industrially zoned land” means any land shown on the most current City of Palmdale zoning map with any of the following zoning designations: C-1 (light commercial), C-2 (office professional), C-3 (general commercial), C-4 (commercial center), C-5 (service commercial), M-1 (light industrial), M-2 (general industrial), M-3 (airport industrial), M-4 (planned industrial), or QR (quarry and reclamation), or any approved specific plan area for which the underlying general plan designation is commercial or industrial. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.050 Community apartment project.
The term “community apartment project” means a project in which an undivided interest in land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.060 Composite development plan.
The term “composite development plan” means a plan or plans, filed at the time of filing of a final map, which shows the information required by PMC 16.80.050. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.070 Condominium conversion.
The term “condominium conversion” means the conversion or division of a single-ownership parcel of existing improved residential real property, such as an apartment project, into a condominium, community apartment project, stock cooperative or townhouse form of ownership involving separate ownership or permanent right of exclusive use of individual units. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.080 Condominium conversion project.
The term “condominium conversion project” means the entire parcel of real property to be converted or which is proposed for a change of use, including all structures thereon or appurtenant thereto. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.090 Development Advisory Board.
The term “Development Advisory Board” means those representatives of the City of Palmdale Planning Department, Public Works Department, and those representatives of local public utilities, who confer from time to time to review development applications and preliminary development proposals for conformance with City regulations, policies and standards. (Ord. 1408 § 9, 2010; Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.100 Director of Planning.
The term “Director,” “Director of Planning” or “Planning Director” means the Director of Planning of the City of Palmdale, or the Director’s authorized designee. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.110 General plan.
The term “general plan” means the general plan of the City of Palmdale, including all adopted elements and maps, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.120 Multiple or phased final maps.
The term “multiple or phased final maps” means any aggregation of final maps which are filed on property included in a single tentative map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.130 Orderly development.
The term “orderly development” means the logical and practical extension of land uses and infrastructure to previously undeveloped sites, in a manner which does not result in isolated pockets of developed land, cause a significant impact to the provision of public services or to other properties, or result in the development of vacant unimproved land before adequate services and infrastructure are available to serve the area in a cost-effective manner, as determined by the reviewing authority. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.140 Planning Commission.
The term “Planning Commission” means the Planning Commission of the City of Palmdale. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.150 Reviewing authority.
The term “reviewing authority” means the person or decision-making body (i.e., Planning Director, Planning Commission or City Council) responsible for the review and/or final action on a land use entitlement. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.160 Small lot subdivisions.
The term “small lot subdivision” means any proposed subdivision of residentially designated land which would create lots which are less than 7,000 square feet in area, and are intended for the development of attached or detached single-family residential dwellings. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.170 Stock cooperative project.
The term “stock cooperative project” means a project wherein a corporation is formed or utilized primarily for the purpose of holding title to an apartment project, if all, or substantially all, of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a dwelling unit in the apartment project, title to which is held by the corporation. The right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. For the purpose of this title, stock cooperative projects are subject to the same restrictions and conditions as condominium conversion projects. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.10.180 Zoning ordinance.
The term “zoning ordinance” means PMC Title 17, including all text and maps, as it may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.20
RESPONSIBILITIES AND DESIGNATIONS
Sections:

16.20.010    Director of Planning.

16.20.020    City Engineer.

16.20.030    Planning Commission.

16.20.040    City Council.

16.20.010 Director of Planning.
The responsibilities of the Director of Planning shall include, but are not limited to:

(A) To develop forms, procedures and policies necessary for the processing of applications for tentative and parcel maps, parcel map waivers, reversions to acreage, lot mergers and unmergers and other land use actions as provided for in this title;

(B) To review and make recommendations to the Planning Commission with respect to an application’s conformance with the general plan, zoning ordinance and any applicable specific plans, and this title;

(C) To ensure that proper environmental review procedures have been conducted, and that proper notice has been provided on all tentative subdivision applications, pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and local CEQA guidelines;

(D) To confirm that a final map, parcel map or parcel map waiver is in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map;

(E) To review and approve voluntary lot mergers and unmergers pursuant to Chapter 16.130 PMC. When necessary to carry out these responsibilities, the Planning Director may authorize a designee to act on the Planning Director’s behalf. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.20.020 City Engineer.
The responsibilities of the City Engineer shall include, but are not limited to:

(A) Developing forms, standards and procedures for final maps, parcel maps and waivers, reversions to acreage maps, amending maps, certificates of correction, notices of violation, certificates of compliance, and composite development plans, pursuant to this title;

(B) Processing lot line adjustments and to issue certificates of compliance;

(C) Developing engineering design standards, setting forth design and construction details, and improvement standards and specifications;

(D) Processing final maps, parcel maps and waivers, reversion to acreage maps, map amendments, certificates of correction, notices of violation, certificates of compliance, subdivision improvement agreements, and deferred improvement agreements and composite development plans, pursuant to this title;

(E) Reviewing tentative and final maps for technical accuracy;

(F) Providing technical inspection and approval for all required public improvements and to process notices of completion of improvements;

(G) Determining violations of the Subdivision Map Act or this title and to process notices of violation;

(H) Determining whether filings for final maps are complete and timely.

When necessary to carry out these responsibilities, the City Engineer may authorize a designee to act on the City Engineer’s behalf, in accordance with current state law. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.20.030 Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission is designated as the advisory agency regarding subdivisions, and shall have the authority as follows:

(A) To approve, conditionally approve or deny applications for tentative subdivision maps and extensions thereto, parcel map waivers, amendments of final maps pursuant to Government Code Section 66472.1, deferment of improvements, and exceptions to this title in accordance with PMC 16.00.040;

(B) To consider and act on any timely appeals of decisions of the Planning Director;

(C) To review and approve involuntary lot mergers, and to consider and act on requests for hearing on determination of status regarding the merger of parcels or lots, pursuant to Chapter 16.130 PMC;

(D) To make recommendations to the City Council regarding an application’s conformance with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and the zoning ordinance with respect to any tentative or parcel map which proposes to create subdivided lots which are less than 7,000 square feet in area, for single-family attached or detached dwellings. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.20.040 City Council.
The City Council shall have the authority to act as follows:

(A) To approve final subdivision maps, reversion to acreage maps, and subdivision improvement agreements and securities;

(B) To review and approve amended maps, pursuant to PMC 16.140.040;

(C) To accept land or improvements which are proposed for dedication upon final or parcel maps;

(D) To act as the Appeal Board for purposes of hearing and deciding timely appeals of Planning Commission actions on land use issues regulated by this title;

(E) To approve, conditionally approve or deny an application for tentative subdivision maps which propose to create subdivided lots which are less than 7,000 square feet in area, for single-family attached or detached dwellings;

(F) To approve and accept public improvements constructed as part of a final or parcel map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.30
REQUIRED MAPS
Sections:

16.30.010    Requirement for a tentative map in lieu of a parcel map.

16.30.020    Requirements for tentative maps.

16.30.030    Requirements for parcel maps.

16.30.040    Other maps.

16.30.010 Requirement for a tentative map in lieu of a parcel map.
(A) Pursuant to Government Code Section 66428, a tentative map shall be required, where a parcel map would otherwise be allowed by the Subdivision Map Act in the following circumstances:

(1) A vesting right conferred by Chapter 4.5 of the Subdivision Map Act is sought by the subdivider;

(2) Access from the public right-of-way to the proposed lots within the subdivision of commercially or industrially zoned land is provided through easements or reciprocal parking and access agreements, rather than by direct frontage to publicly dedicated and improved roadways; or

(3) The proposed lots created by the parcel map are less than 7,000 square feet in size, and the use of the site is for single-family attached or detached residences.

(B) Any required tentative map shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of PMC 16.30.020 and Chapter 16.40 PMC.

(C) A tentative map and final map will be required where successive divisions by the same or different related subdivider result in a total of five or more lots. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.30.020 Requirements for tentative maps.
(A) A tentative map and final map shall be required for all subdivisions creating five or more lots, five or more condominiums, a community apartment project containing five or more dwelling units, and for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units except where:

(1) The land before division contains less than five acres, where each lot created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the City; or

(2) Each lot created by the division has a gross area of 20 acres or more and has a City-approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or

(3) The land consists of a lot or lots of land having City-approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development, and which has the approval of the City Council as to street alignments and widths; or

(4) Each lot created by the division has a gross area of not less than 40 acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section; or

(5) Until January 1, 2003, the land being subdivided is solely for the creation of an environmental subdivision, pursuant to Government Code Section 66418.2.

(B) A parcel map shall be authorized for those subdivisions described in subsections (A)(1) through (5) of this section. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.30.030 Requirements for parcel maps.
A parcel map or a tentative parcel map as provided in PMC 16.30.010 shall be required for all subdivisions creating four or fewer lots, four or fewer condominiums, a community apartment project containing four or fewer dwelling units, and for the conversion of the dwelling to a stock cooperative containing four or fewer units, except that parcel maps shall not be required for:

(A) Subdivisions of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, as defined by Public Utilities Code Section 230, which are created by short-term leases terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ written notice; or

(B) Any interest in land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such public utility, for rights-of-way where such conveyance has been reviewed in accordance with this title, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map; or

(C) Lot line adjustments between two or more adjoining parcels, in accordance with this title; or

(D) The merger of contiguous parcels under common ownership, subject to the recordation of an instrument evidencing the merger, such instrument to be approved in accordance with this title. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.30.040 Other maps.
(A) Vesting tentative maps may be filed pursuant to Government Code Section 66452(b) and Chapter 16.100 PMC.

(B) Final maps shall be filed pursuant to Government Code Section 66457 and Chapters 16.70 and 16.80 PMC. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.40
GENERAL TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURES
Sections:

16.40.010    General.

16.40.020    Tentative map form and content.

16.40.030    Compliance with the City’s general plan and zoning ordinance.

16.40.040    Determination of application completeness.

16.40.050    Notification of affected agencies.

16.40.060    Environmental review.

16.40.070    Public hearing notice.

16.40.080    Affidavit of acceptance of conditions of approval.

16.40.090    Time frames for action on tentative maps.

16.40.100    Findings for approval of tentative maps.

16.40.110    Modifications of approved or conditionally approved tentative maps.

16.40.120    Expiration of tentative maps and timely filing of final or parcel maps.

16.40.130    Phasing.

16.40.140    Discretionary extensions of tentative maps.

16.40.150    Effect of consecutive subdivision maps.

16.40.160    Effect of annexation on tentative and final maps.

16.40.010 General.
The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to tentative maps and tentative parcel maps. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.020 Tentative map form and content.
Before any tentative map, or request for extension thereto, is accepted for filing, the subdivider shall file with the Director of Planning a completed application form, pay all applicable fees, and submit the required number of copies of the tentative map and all supporting materials and documents required on the City’s official application form. The Director of Planning and the City Engineer may, from time to time, amend the official application form and the map submittal requirements specified thereon. Tentative maps shall be prepared in a size, form, and manner acceptable to the Director of Planning and the City Engineer, and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The tentative map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet and shall contain all information required by the official application form and any requirements identified during the preliminary review of the map by the City. Vesting tentative maps shall conform with Chapter 16.100 PMC. The Director of Planning and the Development Advisory Board may modify any of the above tentative map submittal requirements through the preliminary conceptual review process, if the type of subdivision does not need to comply with these requirements, or if other circumstances justify a modification or a waiver. The Director of Planning and Development Advisory Board may require other drawings, data, reports or information deemed necessary to accomplish the purposes of the Subdivision Map Act, the California Environmental Quality Act and this title. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.030 Compliance with the City’s general plan and zoning ordinance.
All divisions of land pursuant to this title shall conform to those development standards set forth in the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the property proposed to be divided is located at the time the application for the tentative map is deemed complete. In accordance with PMC 16.40.100(A), all divisions of land pursuant to this title shall also conform with the City’s general plan, including all maps, goals, objectives, policies and implementation measures in effect at the time the tentative map is approved. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.040 Determination of application completeness.
The Planning Department shall notify the applicant of its determination of completeness of the subdivision application, as required by Government Code Section 65943. The applicant shall have the right to appeal a decision that an application is incomplete, pursuant to Government Code Section 65943(c), through the appeal process set forth in the City’s zoning ordinance, Section 20.11. The subdivider shall supply the requested plans and/or information within 60 calendar days of the notice of incomplete filing, or the provisions of Section 20.06 (Denial of Incomplete Applications) of the City’s zoning ordinance will be applied to the application. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.050 Notification of affected agencies.
Pursuant to Government Code Section 66455.7, notice of a proposed subdivision shall be provided to affected school districts within five days of the application being deemed complete. In addition, notice may also be provided to other affected agencies, which may include but shall not be limited to the County of Los Angeles, the city of Lancaster, the city of Santa Clarita, state agencies, including Caltrans and the Department of Water Resources, regional agencies, nearby town councils, transit providers, water districts, and other utilities or service providers. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.060 Environmental review.
After determination that the tentative map application is complete, the Planning Department shall comply with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), in accordance with the time periods specified in Public Resources Code Section 21151.5. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.070 Public hearing notice.
Notice of public hearing will be given pursuant to Government Code Section 65091 and Section 20.02 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.080 Affidavit of acceptance of conditions of approval.
No less than 14 days prior to the Planning Commission taking action on a proposed subdivision, the applicant shall file a statement with the Planning Department which expresses the applicant’s concurrence with, or objection to, any draft conditions of approval expected to be applied to the subdivision by the Planning Commission. An applicant’s objection to a condition or conditions of approval shall not be cause to delay the Planning Commission’s action on the application and will not limit the Planning Commission’s ability to apply any conditions deemed necessary to ensure that the proposed subdivision conforms to the criteria contained in PMC 16.40.100 and does not represent a risk to public health, safety and welfare. Failure to file such a statement may be cause to delay Planning Commission’s action on the applicant’s tentative map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.090 Time frames for action on tentative maps.
(A) The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the map, and upon making all findings required in PMC 16.40.100, shall approve or conditionally approve the tentative map, or if such findings are not made, shall deny the tentative map, within the time frames established by Public Resources Code Section 21151.5, and Government Code Section 66452.2.

(B) The time frames noted above may be extended by up to 90 days by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Director of Planning. Additional extensions may be permitted as provided by prevailing statutory law or court decisions.

(C) In the event that action on a tentative map application is not taken in a timely manner and the application is deemed approved, pursuant to Government Code Section 66452.4, then the standard conditions of approval prepared by the City, which are in effect at the time the application was deemed complete, shall automatically be applied to the tentative map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.100 Findings for approval of tentative maps.
Any tentative map shall be approved if all of the following findings are made:

(A) The proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, shall be consistent and compatible with the maps, goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan, Zoning Ordinance and any applicable specific plan;

(B) The tentative map does not propose to divide land which is subject to contract entered into pursuant to the California Land Conservation Act of 1965, or the land is subject to a land conservation act contract but the resulting parcels following division of the land will not be too small to sustain their agricultural use;

(C) The site is physically suitable for the type and proposed density of development proposed by the tentative map;

(D) The design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements, with conditions of approval, are either:

(1) Not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat, or

(2) The design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat, but an environmental impact report has been prepared and a statement of overriding considerations has been adopted, pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 21081(c), finding that specific economic, social or other considerations make it not feasible to adopt the mitigation measures or project alternatives identified in the environmental impact report;

(E) The design of the subdivision and the type of improvements are not likely to cause serious public health and safety problems;

(F) The tentative map design provides for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision to the extent feasible;

(G) The design of the subdivision and the type of improvements will not conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through or use of the private property within the proposed subdivision, or the design of the subdivision and the type of improvements will conflict with the easements acquired by the public at large for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision but alternate easements which are substantially equivalent to those previously acquired by the public will be provided; and

(H) The proposed subdivision, including any proposed phasing, represents orderly development of the project site and surrounding area. (Ord. 1521 § 4 (Exh. 1), 2019; Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.110 Modifications of approved or conditionally approved tentative maps.
Tentative maps and/or their conditions of approval may be amended upon application by the subdivider or, with consent of the subdivider, by action initiated by the Director of Planning or City Engineer, pursuant to this section.

(A) Minor modifications may be processed administratively without notice or public hearing; provided, that the proposed changes are consistent with the intent of the original map approval, and there are no resulting violations of this title or the City of Palmdale Municipal Code. The following modifications are considered minor:

(1) Modifications to less than 10 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision; provided, that there is no increase or decrease in the total number of lots within the subdivision;

(2) Modifications to the horizontal alignment of less than two feet, or vertical alignment of less than one foot, of any cul-de-sac, local or collector roadway when such modification does not affect off-site property; or

(3) Any other changes, which in the opinion of the Planning Director and/or City Engineer do not involve substantial changes to the map or the conditions of approval.

(B) Any other amendment or modification of an approved or conditionally approved map shall be processed as a major modification, following procedures set forth in this chapter for tentative map approval, except that such modification approval shall not alter the original expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.120 Expiration of tentative maps and timely filing of final or parcel maps.
(A) The initial approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall expire 36 months from its adoption by the Planning Commission or, if appealed, from the City Council’s action. Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall terminate all proceedings and no final or parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included within the tentative map shall be filed without processing a new tentative map in accordance with the provisions of this title. Once a complete and timely filing of a final map, as described in PMC 16.70.050, has been made by the subdivider to the City Engineer, the final processing, approving and recording may lawfully occur after the date of expiration of the tentative map; however, should the City Engineer determine that a complete and timely filing has not been received, the tentative map shall expire on its expiration date, unless a complete and timely filing is received prior to that date.

(B) A final map shall be deemed in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map if the Planning Director finds, in consultation with the City Engineer, that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

(1) The final map is in compliance with all conditions of approval applied to the tentative map;

(2) Less than 10 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision have been modified in their configuration, and no increase or decrease in the number of lots has occurred, and a minor modification, in accordance with PMC 16.40.110 has been previously approved;

(3) No cul-de-sac, local or collector roadway has been modified by more than two feet in horizontal alignment of more than one foot in vertical alignment and a minor modification, in accordance with PMC 16.40.110 has been previously approved;

(4) The design or location of any required infrastructure improvement, including flood control structures, open space landscape areas, utility easements, major and secondary arterial roadways and primary or secondary access roads have not been modified in such a way as to reduce their effectiveness, cause increased maintenance expense or jeopardize public health and safety, as determined by the City Engineer;

(5) The final map accurately portrays approved phasing plans;

(6) The grading concepts approved for the tentative map have not been modified in such a way as to increase the area or volume of off-site grading, substantially increase on-site slope heights, or increase the grade differential between on- and off-site pad elevations by more than 10 percent;

(7) The final map is reflective of the requirements, standards, design and intent of the approved tentative map, as determined by the Planning Director and the City Engineer.

(C) If the filing of multiple final maps is authorized under the tentative map approval, pursuant to PMC 16.40.130, and the Director of Planning and the City Engineer determine that a condition of approval of the tentative map is an expenditure in the amount specified under Government Code Section 66452.6(a), including specified adjustments for inflation, for public improvements of public rights-of-way which abut the boundary of the property to be subdivided and reasonably relate to the development of that property, then the tentative map will be extended for 36 months upon the timely filing of the first phase of the final map within the original approval period of the tentative map.

(1) Except as provided in subsection (C)(2) of this section, the timely filing of subsequent final maps authorized under the tentative map approval pursuant to this subsection shall extend the life of the tentative map for a period of 36 months from the date of the previously filed final map; provided, that such extensions shall not extend the tentative map more than 10 years. However, a tentative map on property subject to a development agreement may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement.

(2) If two or more final maps from the same tentative map are filed within any period of 12 consecutive months, the applicant shall only be entitled to one automatic extension, pursuant to Government Code Section 66452.6(a) and subsection (C) of this section.

(3) A request by a subdivider for the granting of an automatic time extension shall be processed as an administrative review of the tentative map to reflect conditions of approval, and shall be subject to any fees required by City Council resolution. (Ord. 1120 § 13, 1998; Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.130 Phasing.
(A) If the subdivider plans to file multiple or phased final maps on the tentative map, the subdivider shall so indicate, at the time the tentative map application is submitted, by submittal of a proposed phasing plan, and a description of the phasing of infrastructure and improvements. The proposed phasing shall be reviewed by the Development Advisory Board and reviewing authority and shall be made a part of the approval of the tentative map. If, after approval of an unphased tentative map, the subdivider requests to submit multiple final maps or requests to modify previously approved phase boundaries or order of development, the following procedure shall apply.

(1) The subdivider shall submit a proposed phasing plan, and a description of the phasing of infrastructure and improvements.

(2) The request will constitute a major modification of the approved tentative map and will be considered by the Planning Commission through a public hearing process. The Planning Commission may add any new conditions relating to the proposed phasing or any improvements deemed necessary to implement orderly development of the phasing. The findings for approval or denial of a major modification to show phasing on a previously approved tentative map will be those contained in PMC 16.40.100 and described below:

(a) The proposed phasing represents a logical and orderly development;

(b) The conditions surrounding the development of the tentative map have not changed in such a way as to preclude development of all necessary improvements or infrastructure on any phase of the tentative map; and

(c) The proposed phasing and the associated infrastructure improvements are not likely to cause serious public health and safety problems.

(B) If approved as described above, multiple final maps relating to an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed before the expiration of the tentative map. The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part, phase or unit of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall have the tentative map number followed by a dash and the phase number. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.140 Discretionary extensions of tentative maps.
(A) The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by filing an application for discretionary time extension with the Planning Department prior to the expiration of the tentative map. Upon the filing of the extension request, the map shall automatically be extended for 60 days or until the application is acted upon, whichever occurs first. The application for an extension of time shall be the same as the application for a tentative map as specified in PMC 16.40.020, and the subdivider shall pay all applicable fees. Environmental review shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the Public Resources Code Section 21000, et seq., and California Code of Regulations Section 15000, et seq. Notice and an opportunity to be heard on tentative map extensions shall be provided in the manner specified in PMC 16.40.070, and shall be reviewed and approved or disapproved in accordance with the provisions of PMC 16.40.100. The Commission may deny an extension if it makes a finding, supported by evidence in the record, with respect to nonvesting maps, that the extension will adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, or if any of the findings contained in PMC 16.40.100 can no longer be made with respect to the proposed subdivision or, with respect to vesting maps, the Commission may deny an extension if it makes a finding, supported by evidence in the record, that any of the findings contained in PMC 16.100.060 are applicable. The expiration date of a tentative map may be extended by the Planning Commission for a period or periods up to but not exceeding a total of five years beyond the expiration date.

(B) Extensions granted under this section shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium is in effect.

(C) The Planning Commission’s action, made pursuant to this section, to approve or disapprove an extension to the expiration date of a tentative map may be appealed to the City Council in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 20.11 of the City’s zoning ordinance. Notwithstanding any other time periods to the contrary that are set forth in zoning ordinance Section 20.11, the Planning Commission’s decision may be appealed to the City Council by the subdivider by filing a written appeal within 15 days of the Planning Commission’s decision or by another person adversely affected by the Planning Commission’s decision by filing a written appeal within 10 days of the Planning Commission’s decision. The expiration of a tentative map will not be extended by the filing of an appeal, and no final map will be accepted by the City Engineer for any tentative map which has expired while under appeal, unless and until a time extension is granted by the reviewing authority. (Ord. 1120 § 14, 1998; Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.150 Effect of consecutive subdivision maps.
(A) Pursuant to Government Code Section 66424.1, a subdivider may file more than one tentative map to subdivide a unit of land, prior to the time that the first subdivision is reflected in the County Assessor’s rolls. However, no consecutive tentative map(s) shall rely on, or reference, any previously approved tentative map for which a final map has not yet been recorded, for the following purposes:

(1) For legally describing the area to be subdivided;

(2) For determining required legal and physical access;

(3) For identifying existing or planned improvements; or

(4) For establishing conditions of approval for the consecutive tentative map.

(B) When a consecutive final map is filed on land which has been previously subdivided, the effect of the recordation of that map will be a legal merger of the separate parcels and the resubdivision of such merged parcel.

(C) When a consecutive parcel map is filed on land which has been previously subdivided or on which a tentative map has been approved, the underlying parcels will not be merged, unless said consecutive parcel map is filed pursuant to Chapter 16.120 PMC, and once recorded, the consecutive parcel map shall have the effect of creating parcels which may contain subdivided or tentatively subdivided parcels for the purpose of sale, lease or financing.

(D) Nothing in this section shall limit the City from applying reasonable conditions of approval to consecutive maps. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.40.160 Effect of annexation on tentative and final maps.
(A) When any area in a subdivision as to which a final map has been finally approved is annexed to the City, then, pursuant to Government Code Section 66413, the final map shall continue to govern the subdivision.

(B) When any area in a subdivision or proposed subdivision as to which a tentative parcel map, tentative map or vesting tentative map has been filed but a final map has not been finally approved, or as to which a parcel map is required by this title but the final act required to make the parcel map effective has not been taken, is annexed to the City, the subdivider of the parcel map, tentative map or vesting tentative map shall process all necessary applications and revise any portion of the map which is not in conformance with the City standards which were in effect as of the effective date of the annexation within 24 months of the effective date of the annexation, prior to expiration of the tentative map, or prior to complete and timely filing of a final map or parcel map, whichever occurs first. The City may request that the subdivider attend a preapplication conference, pursuant to Section 20.03 of the City’s zoning ordinance, to determine the extent of any required modifications. Any tentative map which is not brought into conformance with the City’s policies, rules and regulations which were in effect as of the effective date of the annexation in accordance with the time frame specified above, will be considered expired, and no final map shall be processed by the City. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.50
TENTATIVE MAP PROCEDURES FOR FIVE OR MORE LOTS
Sections:

16.50.010    General.

16.50.020    Approval or disapproval of tentative maps which would create small lot subdivisions.

16.50.030    Approval or disapproval of all other tentative maps.

16.50.010 General.
The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to tentative maps, and tentative parcel maps creating five or more parcels in accordance with PMC 16.30.020 and Chapter 16.40 PMC. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.50.020 Approval or disapproval of tentative maps which would create small lot subdivisions.
(A) The Planning Commission shall consider all tentative maps which would create small lot subdivisions and shall make a recommendation to the City Council with respect to the application’s compliance with the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and the zoning ordinance.

(B) The City Council may approve, or conditionally approve a tentative map which would create a small lot subdivision if it can make the findings listed in PMC 16.40.100. The City Council may prohibit or limit filing of multiple final maps or place reasonable conditions on filing of multiple final maps. In making its findings in support of the approval or disapproval, the City Council shall apply all ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the application was deemed complete; provided, however, that such other ordinance, policies and standards which may be applicable under the provisions of Government Code Section 66474.2(b) and (c) shall also be applied.

(C) The tentative map may be denied by the City Council on any of the grounds provided by the Subdivision Map Act and this title. The City Council shall deny approval of the tentative map if it cannot make all of the findings listed in PMC 16.40.100. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.50.030 Approval or disapproval of all other tentative maps.
(A) The Planning Commission may approve or conditionally approve any tentative map, except those creating small lot subdivisions, if it can make the findings listed in PMC 16.40.100. The Planning Commission may prohibit or limit filing of multiple final or parcel maps or place reasonable conditions on filing of multiple final or parcel maps. In making its findings in support of the approval or disapproval, the Planning Commission shall apply all City standards in effect at the time the application was deemed complete; provided, however, that such other City standards which may be applicable under the provisions of Government Code Section 66474.2(b) and (c) shall also be applied.

(B) The tentative map may be denied by the Planning Commission on any of the grounds provided by the Subdivision Map Act and this title. The Planning Commission shall deny approval of the tentative map if it cannot make all of the findings listed in PMC 16.40.100.

(C) Any action taken by the Planning Commission on an application for a tentative map may be appealed to the City Council, pursuant to City zoning ordinance Section 20.11. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.60
TENTATIVE PARCEL MAP PROCEDURES FOR FOUR OR FEWER LOTS
Sections:

16.60.010    General.

16.60.020    Approval or disapproval of tentative parcel maps.

16.60.030    Expiration and extensions of tentative parcel maps.

16.60.040    Parcel map waivers.

16.60.010 General.
The procedures set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to tentative parcel maps for four or fewer parcels, except as modified in Government Code Section 66426. The procedures set forth in Chapter 16.40 PMC shall also be applicable. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.60.020 Approval or disapproval of tentative parcel maps.
Upon deeming an application complete pursuant to PMC 16.40.040, and upon completion of environmental review as provided in PMC 16.40.060, the Planning Director shall set the matter for public hearing and give notice as provided in PMC 16.40.070. The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative parcel map, pursuant to the provisions and findings set forth in PMC 16.40.100. The Planning Commission may prohibit or limit filing of multiple parcel maps, or place reasonable conditions on the filing of multiple parcel maps. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.60.030 Expiration and extensions of tentative parcel maps.
(A) The initial approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map shall expire 36 months from its approval, unless this time period is extended. The subdivider may request an extension of the expiration date in accordance with the provisions of PMC 16.40.140. Upon the timely filing of an extension request, the map shall automatically be extended for 60 days or until the application is acted on, whichever occurs first.

(B) The Planning Commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny the request for an extension in accordance with the provisions of PMC 16.40.140 after making findings mandated in PMC 16.40.100. The actions of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council under the provisions of zoning ordinance Section 20.11; provided, that pursuant to Government Code Section 66463.5(c), the appeal period for the subdivider will be 15 days from the date of approval or disapproval of the time extension application by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1120 § 15, 1998; Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.60.040 Parcel map waivers.
(A) The requirements for a parcel map may be waived by the Planning Commission for the following divisions of land upon making the findings set forth in subsection (C) of this section:

(1) Division of real property or interests therein created by probate, eminent domain procedures, partition or other civil judgments or decrees;

(2) Division of property which has been merged pursuant to this title, the Subdivision Map Act or any prior ordinance of the City; or

(3) Any other division of property which would otherwise require a parcel map.

(B) In order for the requirement for a parcel map to be waived, a written request for such a waiver must be submitted to the Director of Planning as part of the tentative parcel map application.

(C) No waiver to the requirement for processing a parcel map shall be approved unless the Planning Commission finds that all of the following criteria are satisfied:

(1) That all parcels created front on existing maintained public roads, improved in accordance with current City standards;

(2) That all parcels created are serviced by sanitary sewer facilities, in accordance with current City standards;

(3) That adequate water supply is available to all parcels;

(4) That the proposed land division will not have an adverse impact on the environment or on surrounding properties;

(5) That the proposed land division will not have an adverse impact on existing drainage facilities;

(6) That all lots created by the proposed subdivision, and any remainder parcels, comply with all requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, the zoning ordinance and this title;

(7) That no dedications, easements, restrictions or fee title in off-site property interests are being granted to the City or any public agency as a function of the subdivision;

(8) That no agreements involving the City, or any maintenance entities are required as part of the conditions of approval of the subdivision;

(9) That no mitigation measures are required as part of the conditions of approval of the subdivision;

(10) That four or fewer lots are created by the subdivision; and

(11) That no public improvements are required as part of the subdivision.

(D) A waiver by the Planning Commission may be conditioned to provide for payment by the subdivider of applicable fees.

(E) The parcel map waiver request shall be approved, conditionally approved or denied within the time frames set forth in PMC 16.40.090.

(F) Upon the Planning Commission’s approval of a waiver of the parcel map pursuant to this section, the City Engineer shall file with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder a certificate of compliance, or conditional certificate of compliance, for the land to be divided and a plat map showing the division. The certificate shall include a certificate by the County Tax Collector in accordance with Article 8 of Chapter 4 of the Subdivision Map Act.

(G) Actions by the Planning Commission approving or disapproving parcel map waivers may be appealed to the City Council under the provisions of Section 20.11 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.70
FINAL AND PARCEL MAP PROCESSING
Sections:

16.70.010    General.

16.70.020    Accompanying data and additional information.

16.70.030    Final and parcel map form and content.

16.70.040    Submittal to and review by the City Engineer.

16.70.050    Complete and timely final map filing with the City Engineer.

16.70.060    Final map approval by City Council.

16.70.070    Limitation on final map denial by City Council.

16.70.080    Filing with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.

16.70.090    Approval of parcel maps by City Engineer.

16.70.010 General.
The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of the final or parcel map shall conform to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. The final or parcel map and any accompanying data or additional information shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor authorized to practice in the state of California. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.70.020 Accompanying data and additional information.
The filing of accompanying data and additional information shall be required with the filing of the final or parcel map, in accordance with Chapter 16.80 PMC. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.70.030 Final and parcel map form and content.
The form and content of the final or parcel map shall conform to the Subdivision Map Act, City standards, this title, and applicable standards imposed by the County of Los Angeles for maps filed with the office of the Registrar/Recorder. The final form and content of the final or parcel map shall be to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.70.040 Submittal to and review by the City Engineer.
Final and parcel map submittal and review procedures shall be pursuant to this chapter and applicable City standards. The City Engineer shall review all final and parcel map submittals for conformance with the provisions of this title, and may deem them incomplete and return all or portions of a submittal for reasons which include, but are not limited to the following: incomplete submittal or filing; untimely submittal or filing; nonconformance with the tentative map; nonconformance with the conditions of approval applied to the tentative map; nonconformance with this title; nonconformance with City standards; errors on the final or parcel map, on any accompanying data, or on any additional information; or omissions on the final or parcel map, on any accompanying data, or on any additional information. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.70.050 Complete and timely final map filing with the City Engineer.
(A) The City Engineer shall determine that a complete and timely final map filing has been made if he or she determines that, at a minimum, the following items have been received, prior to the expiration of the tentative map:

(1) Improvement plans approved by the City Engineer;

(2) Complete and accepted public improvements or acceptable subdivision improvement agreement(s) and securities;

(3) Proof of payment of all applicable fees;

(4) Will serve letters from all applicable utilities and agencies;

(5) Noninterference letters from all applicable easements or title interest holders;

(6) Original and copies of all sheets of the final map in their required form and content;

(7) Proof of ownership of all affected properties;

(8) Subdivision guarantee from a title company, less than 60 days old;

(9) Letter from all affected property owners requesting approval of the final map;

(10) Small scale map of the proposed subdivision;

(11) Written clearance from all affected City departments;

(12) Written clearance from all affected public agencies;

(13) Proof of payment of all delinquent assessments;

(14) All applicable agreements or documents to be approved by the City Council, or filed or recorded concurrently with the map; and

(15) All additional requirements of Chapter 16.80 PMC have been satisfied.

(B) Upon finding all statements and submittals complete and satisfactory in accordance with this title, the City Engineer shall sign the appropriate statements and transmit the original map, and any other items requiring City Council approval, to the City Clerk within 20 days of receipt of a complete filing, with a recommendation of map approval. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.70.060 Final map approval by City Council.
The date the final or parcel map shall be deemed filed with the City Council shall be the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council following the date on which the City Clerk receives the recommendation for map approval from the City Engineer. The City Council shall consider approval of the subdivision improvement agreement and improvement security, and any other required agreements, in conjunction with the approval of the final or parcel map. If any of the items requiring City Council approval are deemed unacceptable by the City Council, the City Council shall instruct the City Engineer to secure corrections, according to their direction.

The City Council shall approve or disapprove the subdivision improvement agreement, improvement security and final or parcel map at the meeting at which it receives the map or, at the next regular meeting following the meeting at which it received the map. If the City Council does not approve or disapprove the map within this time period, or any authorized extension thereof, and the map conforms to all requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved. The clerk of the legislative body shall certify or state its approval thereon.

The City Council shall not postpone or refuse approval of a final or parcel map because the subdivider has failed to meet a tentative map condition requiring construction or installation of off-site improvements on land which neither the subdivider nor the City has sufficient title or interest to permit the improvements to be made. However in such case, prior to final map approval, the subdivider shall be required to enter into an agreement with the City to complete such improvements, pursuant to Government Code Section 66462, upon acquisition of said title and interest by the City. Upon entering into such agreement, the City shall acquire the subject property interests in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 66462.5. Failure of the subdivider to execute such an agreement shall be cause for the City Council to postpone or refuse approval of the final or parcel map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.70.070 Limitation on final map denial by City Council.
The City Council shall not deny approval of a final or parcel map if the City has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if the City Council finds that the final or parcel map is in compliance with the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and the approved tentative map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.70.080 Filing with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.
(A) Upon approval of the final or parcel map and subdivision improvement agreement by the City Council, the City Clerk shall execute the appropriate statement on the statement sheet and shall, subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 66464, transmit the map, or have the City Engineer transmit the map, to the County of Los Angeles Public Works Department land development division for final review, and then to the County of Los Angeles office of the Registrar/Recorder for filing. The final or parcel map (with composite development plan, if applicable) and any separate documents (if required) shall be filed concurrently.

(B) If for any cause of the subdivider, the final or parcel map is not recorded by the office of the County Registrar/Recorder within 180 days from the date the City Council approved the final or parcel map, then the City Council’s approval of the final map shall be automatically rescinded, and all bonds or sureties will be returned to the subdivider. If the tentative map has expired, the unit of land previously affected by the final or parcel map will automatically revert to its pre-map configuration. If the tentative map has not yet expired, then the tentative map will be considered in effect, except that such action shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.70.090 Approval of parcel maps by City Engineer.
(A) The City Engineer is authorized to approve and file parcel maps with the County, without City Council approval, when the City Engineer can make the following findings:

(1) No dedications, easements, restrictions or fee title is being granted to the City or any public agency as a function of the parcel map;

(2) No agreements involving the City, CC&R’s, or maintenance entities are required as part of the conditions or approval of the parcel map;

(3) No mitigation measures are required as part of the conditions of approval of the parcel map;

(4) Four or fewer parcels are created by the parcel map;

(5) No public improvements are required as part of the subdivision; and

(6) It has been determined to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that sufficient monumentation of the parcels exist so as not to justify an additional land survey.

(B) The City Engineer may decline to approve the parcel map, and instead process it in accordance with PMC 16.70.060.

(C) The limitations on denial of a final map by the City Council as set forth in PMC 16.70.070, shall apply to the City Engineer when approving a parcel map in accordance with this section.

(D) Any parcel map approved by the City Engineer in accordance with this section shall be subject to the procedures and requirements set forth in PMC 16.70.080. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.80
ADDITIONAL FINAL AND PARCEL MAP REQUIREMENTS
Sections:

16.80.010    Survey and monuments required.

16.80.020    Geotechnical, geologic, and soils reports.

16.80.030    Energy conservation.

16.80.040    Flood management.

16.80.050    Composite development plan.

16.80.010 Survey and monuments required.
(A) An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor authorized to practice land surveying by the state of California, pursuant to the requirements of the City Engineer. All information required by City standards shall be incorporated into the survey.

(B) At the time of making the survey for the final or parcel map, or within two years from the complete and timely filing of the final or parcel map, whichever occurs first, the civil engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with the standards of the Subdivision Map Act and City standards.

(C) The City Engineer may waive the requirements in subsections (A) and (B) of this section for parcel maps at his or her discretion. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.80.020 Geotechnical, geologic, and soils reports.
(A) Soils Report. A preliminary soils report, based upon adequate subsurface exploration, test borings and laboratory tests, shall be required for every subdivision for which a final or parcel map is required, prior to approval of the tentative or parcel map. In the event the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of collapsible or expansive soils, liquefaction or other soil problems, which if not corrected could result in structural defects, a geotechnical investigation of each lot or parcel in the subdivision shall be undertaken, and a report shall be submitted to the City Engineer recommending corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problems exist. The subdivision or any portion thereof where such soil problems exist may be approved if it is determined that the recommended corrective action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed and that the issuance of any building permit shall be conditioned to include this recommended corrective action with the construction of each affected structure. The report may be waived if, in the exercise of his or her professional judgment, the City Engineer finds that sufficient knowledge exists as to the qualities of the soils within the proposed subdivision.

(B) Geologic Report. Geologic and geotechnical reports shall be required, prior to approval of the tentative or parcel map, when a subdivision involves any of the following:

(1) The subdivision is within any zone requiring special study by the State Geologist or the City Engineer;

(2) The subdivision proposes to dispose surface water through the use of drywells or other subsurface facilities;

(3) The site of the subdivision contains hillside areas where the existing gradient equals or exceeds 10 percent; or

(4) The development of the subdivision requires excavation into bedrock.

(C) Geotechnical, geologic and soils reports, as required herein, shall be prepared by an engineer or geologist, as applicable, who is authorized to practice and prepare said reports by the state of California. Said reports shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer. If public improvement plans or grading plans are required as part of the map approval process, the review and approval of the geotechnical, geologic or soils reports shall be required prior to approval of public improvement plans or grading plans. The City Engineer may waive these requirements for parcel maps at his or her discretion, in the exercise of his or her professional judgment. The City Engineer shall make a copy of all approved reports available to the public. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.80.030 Energy conservation.
The design of a subdivision shall be in conformance with Government Code Section 66473.1, with respect to passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivision. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.80.040 Flood management.
Prior to approval of any tentative map or parcel map, the subdivider shall demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the City Engineer, that the design of the subdivision is such that it conforms with Chapter 15.28 PMC. The City Engineer may require studies, mapping, easements, design and construction as part of the final or parcel map processing to ensure that this requirement is met. Unless otherwise permitted by this title, no final map shall be recorded if additional studies, engineering design, acquisition of easements or construction of flood control facilities are required for issuance of any building permit for the subdivision. The City Engineer shall make a copy of all approved studies available to the public. Such studies shall be prepared under the direction of a registered civil engineer. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.80.050 Composite development plan.
(A) The Planning Commission may require the filing of additional information in the form of a composite development plan (CDP), as part of the filing of a final or parcel map.

(B) The content and form of composite development plans shall be governed by the provisions of this section and composite development plan standards established by the City Engineer. The composite development plan shall be prepared under the direction of a registered civil engineer or land surveyor and shall be in the form of an additional sheet or sheets adequately representing the streets, boundaries and lots or parcels of the final or parcel map to which it is attached and shall include the following provisions.

(1) All composite development plan sheets shall be prominently labeled, with the words “COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN,” and immediately below that shall be prominently labeled the words “For Informational Purposes Only.”

(2) The plan shall contain a section titled “Composite Development Plan Notes.” This section shall list any conditions or mitigation measures stipulated in the project approval for the development of the subject property. Any explanatory notes related to criteria delineated on the map shall also be listed within this section. In addition, any related reports regarding development criteria shall be listed, including the following information: title and date of report; name and credentials of person or firm preparing report; and, the location where the reports are on file. The plan shall delineate and note, at a minimum, the following information: general zoning and land use information (e.g., building setback lines and restricted use areas); geological and seismic information (e.g., fault zones, setback lines, and special foundation and restriction areas); grading information (e.g., top and toe of slope, slope heights and steepness and restriction areas); flood hazard and flood control information (e.g., flood hazard areas and depths, any requirements to ensure conformance with Chapter 15.28 PMC, and major flood control facilities); access limitations; and all easements and ground leases, with record data, not plotted elsewhere on the final or parcel map. In addition, the City Engineer, in consultation with the Director of Planning, may require that additional information be shown on the CDP, including but not limited to: incorporation of any special map requirements; and environmental information (e.g., wetland areas, ecologically sensitive areas, and areas restricted from development). The following statement shall be prominently displayed on each map sheet:

COMPOSITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN

NOTES ON THIS PLAN ARE FOR INFORMATIONAL PURPOSES, TO INDICATE CONDITIONS AND CRITERIA THAT EXIST ON THIS PROPERTY THAT WERE KNOWN AND IDENTIFIED AS OF THE DATE THIS PLAN WAS FILED. THIS INFORMATION IS DERIVED FROM PUBLIC RECORDS OR REPORTS AND IS NOT INTENDED TO AFFECT RECORD TITLE INTEREST. THE CORRECTNESS OR SUFFICIENCY OF THESE PUBLIC RECORDS OR REPORTS IS NEITHER STATED NOR IMPLIED.

(C) Should any correction and amendment to a final or parcel map be made that affects the composite development plan, then the applicant shall file with the City Engineer a corrected copy of the composite development plan. The City Engineer is authorized to approve amended composite development plans when they do not adversely impact the conditions of approval and the amendment is in substantial compliance with the conditions of approval of the tentative or parcel map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.90
COMMON INTEREST DEVELOPMENT CONVERSIONS
Sections:

16.90.010    Applicability.

16.90.020    Development review required.

16.90.030    Application requirements.

16.90.040    Physical standards for condominium conversions.

16.90.050    Tenant provisions.

16.90.060    Notice to new tenants.

16.90.070    Effect of conversion on the City’s very low, low and moderate income housing supply.

16.90.080    Findings.

16.90.010 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all conversions of existing residential real property to condominium, community apartments or stock cooperative projects or any other form of ownership except conversion projects for which a final or parcel map has been approved by the City Council prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or where the conversion involves a limited equity housing cooperative, as defined in Section 33007.5 of the Health and Safety Code. All provisions, conditions and further definitions of condominium development as included in the California Civil Code, Government Code, Revenue and Taxation Code, and Business and Professions Code shall apply to the divisions of real property as permitted herein. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.90.020 Development review required.
In addition to the limitations and restrictions contained within this chapter, the California Subdivision Map Act and applicable building and fire regulations of PMC Title 15, no residential apartment unit shall be converted for sale, transfer, or conveyance as a community apartment project, stock cooperative project or condominium, without concurrently obtaining approval of a conditional use permit or a major modification to a previously approved conditional use permit. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.90.030 Application requirements.
In addition to such other application requirements as are deemed necessary by the City, an application for conversion of a residential apartment unit shall not be accepted or considered complete unless the application includes all of the following information in a form acceptable to the Director of Planning, except where such requirement is waived or modified by the Director of Planning:

(A) Physical Elements Report. A report prepared by a registered engineer or architect or licensed qualified contractor describing the physical elements of all structures and facilities, sound transmission levels between units, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances.

Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built; the condition of each element; when said element was replaced; the approximate date upon which said element will require replacement; the cost of replacing said element; and any variation or noncompliance of said element from the zoning ordinance in effect at the time the application is filed with the City and building code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed;

(B) A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the City, on each structure and each unit within the structure;

(C) A report on soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, groundwater and landslides in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soils problems relating to the structures. Reference shall be made to any previous soils reports for the site and a copy submitted with said report;

(D) A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to refurbish and restore the project to achieve a level of appearance and safety consistent with applicable codes and ordinances, as specified in subsection (A) of this section;

(E) A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions in draft or outline form which would be applied to any and all owners of condominium units within the project. The declaration shall include, but not be limited to: the conveyance of units; the assignment of parking; an agreement for common area maintenance, including facilities and landscaping, together with an estimate of any initial assessment fees anticipated for such maintenance; description of a provision for maintenance of all vehicular access areas within the project; an indication of appropriate responsibilities for maintenance of all utility lines and services for each unit; and a plan for equitable sharing of communal water metering;

(F) Specific information concerning the demographic characteristics of the project, including, but not limited to, the following:

(1) Square footage and number of rooms in each unit,

(2) Rental rate history for each unit for previous five years,

(3) Monthly vacancy rate for each month during preceding two years,

(4) Makeup of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants, and whether receiving federal or state rent subsidies,

(5) Proposed sale price of each unit,

(6) Proposed homeowners’ association fee,

(7) Financing available, and

(8) Names and addresses of all tenants.

When the subdivider can demonstrate that such information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the Director of Planning;

(G) Signed copies from each tenant of notice of intent to convert, as specified in PMC 16.90.050. The subdivider shall submit evidence that a letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of said notice is not submitted. This requirement shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail;

(H) Any other information which, in the opinion of the Planning Director, will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter;

(I) Submittal of Budget. The subdivider shall provide the City with a copy of the proposed budget for maintenance and operation of common facilities, including needed reserves, with the tentative map application. The budget shall show estimated monthly costs to the owner of each unit, projected over a five-year period, or such time as is required by the Department of Real Estate. Such budget shall be prepared or reviewed and approved by a professional management firm experienced with management of condominium complexes. The management firm shall submit a statement of professional qualifications;

(J) Copy to Buyers. The developer shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all submittals (in their final acceptable form) required by subsections (A) through (E), (H) and (I) of this section prior to said purchaser executing any purchase agreement or other contract to purchase a unit within the project, and the developer shall give the purchaser sufficient time to review said information. Copies of the submittals shall be made available at all times at the sales office and a notice indicating that such reports are available shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the City, at the project site. Copies shall be provided to the homeowners’ association upon its formation;

(K) Final Information Submitted. Prior to entering into escrow on the first unit, the subdivider shall submit the following information to the Planning Department:

(1) Name, address and phone number of homeowners’ association;

(2) Actual sale price of units;

(3) Actual homeowners’ association fee;

(4) Number of prior tenants who intend to purchase units; and

(5) Number of units purchased with intent to be used as rentals.

The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the City. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the Planning Department for review by any interested persons until the conclusion of the conversion process. The report shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the Planning Commission. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.90.040 Physical standards for condominium conversions.
(A) Adequate Physical Condition. To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the Planning Commission shall require that all condominium conversions conform to the Palmdale Municipal Code, including the zoning ordinance, in effect at the time of tentative map approval except as otherwise provided in this chapter. In making the determination that the project is in conformance with the Municipal Code, the following will be required:

(1) Prior to scheduling the tentative map for a public hearing, an inspection shall be conducted by the code enforcement division to determine project-wide conformance with the zoning ordinance and other applicable chapters of the Municipal Code. A report of any violations shall be included in the staff report to the Planning Commission. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of any fees related to the inspection of the project.

(2) Prior to the approval of the final map, a physical inspection of the project site, including each individual unit, shall be made by the City of Palmdale Division of Building and Safety and Planning Department. Such inspection shall be made to ensure compliance with all applicable conditions of approval as specified in the tentative map and conditional use permit approval. All such corrections shall be made prior to the approval of the final or parcel map. The subdivider shall be responsible for the payment of any fees related to the inspection of the project.

(B) Specific Physical Standards. The Planning Commission shall require conformance with the standards of this subsection in approving the map:

(1) Building Regulations. The project shall conform to the applicable standards of PMC Title 15 (Building and Construction) in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure or structures except as herein provided.

(2) Health and Safety. Each bathroom in each living unit shall be provided with ground fault circuit interrupters.

(3) Fire Prevention.

(a) Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat conforming to the latest code standards as adopted by the City.

(b) Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers, and other fire protective appliances shall be properly installed and maintained in an operable condition at all times.

(4) Parking. Each unit shall be provided parking in accordance with the zoning ordinance, Section 86 (Off-Street Parking).

(5) Sound Transmission.

(a) Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All permanent mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps and compactors which is determined by the City to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise shall be shock mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the Building Official.

(b) Noise Standards. The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sound transmission standards of PMC Title 15 (Buildings and Construction). In such cases where present standards cannot reasonably be met, the Planning Commission may require the applicant to notify potential buyers of the noise deficiency currently existing within these units.

(6) Utility Metering. Each dwelling unit shall be separately metered for water, gas and electricity, and each unit shall have a separate lateral connection to a trunk sanitary sewer. Alternatively, a plan for equitable sharing of these utilities shall be developed prior to final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions.

(7) Private Storage Space. Each unit shall have at least 150 cubic feet of enclosed weather-proofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the Planning Commission, but shall not be divided into two or more locations.

(8) Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit; or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and one dryer of equivalent capacity for every five units with two or more bedrooms; and every seven units with one bedroom.

(9) Landscape Maintenance. All landscaping shall be restored as necessary and maintained in accordance with approved landscape plans. If a significant amount of new landscaping is required, revised/new landscape plans shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Department as part of the conditional use permit application. Such plans shall be subject to all applicable City ordinances including, but not limited to, Chapter 14.05 PMC (Water Conservation in Landscaping).

(10) Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The developer shall provide a warranty to the buyer of each unit at the close of escrow that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks and air conditioners that are provided have a useful life of at least one year. At such time as the developer relinquishes control over management of the development, pursuant to the covenants, conditions and restrictions, the developer shall provide a warranty to the association that any pool and pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator) and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association have a useful life of one year. Prior to final map approval, the developer shall provide the City with a copy of warranty insurance covering equipment and appliances pursuant to this subsection.

(11) Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, and additional elements as required by the Planning Department shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve a degree of appearance, quality and safety consistent with applicable City standards. The developer shall provide to the homeowners’ association and/or purchaser a one-year warranty on all physical improvements required under this subsection. If substantial restoration is required, the design plans shall be subject to Commission approval.

(12) Long-Term Reserves. Prior to approval of the final map, the developer shall provide satisfactory evidence to the City that a long-term reserve fund for replacement and repair has been established in the name of the homeowners’ association. Such fund shall equal at least two times the estimated monthly homeowner’s assessment for each dwelling unit, or an amount as otherwise required by law.

(13) Any request for modification from these standards shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and shall be approved only if the Planning Commission determines, based on evidence in the public hearing record, that adequate and equitable access to all facilities, utilities, amenities, safety measures and reserves will be provided to the owner of each dwelling unit, and that there will be no detrimental impacts on any homeowner or resident of the project by the granting of such modifications. (Ord. 1408 § 8, 2010; Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.90.050 Tenant provisions.
(A) Notice of Intent. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(a), a notice of intent to convert shall be delivered by the subdivider to each tenant at least 60 days prior to submitting an application for the tentative map and conditional use permit. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. The form of the notice shall be in the form outlined in Government Code Section 66452.9 and approved by the Planning Department and shall inform the tenants of all rights provided under this chapter and state law.

(B) Notice of Public Report. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(a), each tenant shall receive 10 days’ written notice that an application for a public report will be or has been submitted to the Department of Real Estate, and that such report will be available on request from the Planning Department. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.

(C) Notice of Final Map Approval. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(b), each tenant shall receive written notification within 10 days of approval of a final map for the proposed conversion. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.

(D) Tenant’s Right to Purchase. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(d), any present tenant shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit and upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than 90 days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail.

(E) Vacation of Units. Each tenant not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he occupies his unit, shall be given 180 days’ written notice of the anticipated date required to vacate the unit and when the 180-day period will begin. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements of service by mail.

(F) Rent Increases. As to nonpurchasing residents who are lower income households, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, the monthly rent, including any applicable fees or charges for use of any pre-conversion amenities, may increase from the pre-conversion rent by an amount equal to the average monthly increase in rent in the four years immediately preceding the conversion, except that in no event shall the monthly rent be increased by an amount greater than the average monthly percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index for the most recently reported period. This provision shall become effective upon application acceptance and remain valid until the unit is sold or until the subdivision is denied, withdrawn or reverted to acreage. Units which have been vacated shall not be subject to control provided that potential tenants have been informed, in writing, that the unit is being considered for conversion. The property owner may seek additional rent adjustments by application to the City Council in the event the property owner believes that the adjustment provided above does not permit a fair return on investment.

(G) Relocation Assistance. The subdivider shall provide relocation assistance equal to the reasonable cost of relocation to any tenant household living in any unit at any time prior to the tentative map approval, provided such tenant is not otherwise in default of the rental agreement or lease or that notice of intent to move has been given prior to receipt of notification from the developer of his intent to convert. The reasonable cost of relocation shall be determined by the Planning Commission and shall be based on the cost of physically moving the tenant’s property and belongings to a comparable apartment within the immediate vicinity, payment for first and last month’s rent and any security deposit at the new location, and a lump sum payment based on consideration of any differential between rental rates from the present location to the comparable apartment unit. If the tenant elects to purchase the unit, such relocation assistance may be applied as a credit to the cost of the unit. A tenant moving in after tentative map approval will not be required to be provided with moving expenses; provided, that the potential tenant, prior to signing an agreement or lease, has signed the notice as described in PMC 16.90.060. The developer shall also provide each tenant with a current list of other comparable rental properties available in the Antelope Valley portion of North Los Angeles County, and shall periodically update such list as required by the Planning Director.

(H) The developer shall provide suitable alternate housing to tenant households, at no additional cost to the tenant, whose unit undergoes substantial remodeling or rehabilitation during conversion, if the unit being remodeled or rehabilitated is not habitable. The final determination of habitability and suitability shall be made by the City of Palmdale Division of Building and Safety. (Ord. 1408 § 8, 2010; Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.90.060 Notice to new tenants.
After submittal of the tentative map and conditional use permit applications to the City, any prospective tenants shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit. The form of the notice shall be as follows:

To the prospective occupant(s) of __________ (Address)

The owner(s) of this building/project, at (address), has/have filed an application for a Tentative Map and Conditional Use Permit with the City of Palmdale to convert this building to a (condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project). No units may be sold in this building unless and until the conversion is approved by the City and subsequently a public report is issued by the State Department of Real Estate. If you become a tenant of this building, you shall be given notice of each hearing for which a notice is required pursuant to Sections 66451.3 and 66452.5 of the Government Code, and you have the right to appear and the right to be heard at such hearing.

______________________________
(Signature of owner or owner’s agent)

    ____________
(Dated)

I have received this notice on ______________ (date)

_________________________________
Prospective tenant or tenants’ signature(s)

(Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.90.070 Effect of conversion on the City’s very low, low and moderate income housing supply.
In order to reduce the effect of conversions on the City’s housing supply and to minimize the displacement of tenants, the number of conversions shall be limited to no more than five percent of the City’s potentially convertible rental stock in any one calendar year.

Conversion applications will be processed in the order that submitted applications are deemed completed. A proposed project that is larger than the permitted number of units in a given year, if approved, will be considered to have used the permitted number for as many future years as necessary.

The potentially convertible rental stock will be defined as follows: the number of rental units in buildings of three or more units, as determined by the most recent United States census, plus any new rental units constructed since the census, minus any units which have been demolished or which have received tentative map approval to convert since the census.

Once the yearly limit has been reached, a project may be approved for conversion only if the Planning Commission makes one or more of the following findings:

(A) The developer will provide for a significant increase in housing for low and moderate income households or senior citizen households over and above the provisions of this chapter;

(B) The developer will provide for the construction of new rental housing;

(C) The developer will donate an acceptable site or acceptable amount of funds to the City for construction of new rental or senior citizen housing;

(D) The need and demand for low cost home ownership to be provided for by this project will outweigh the detrimental effects caused by further reduction of the rental stock of low to moderate income housing. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.90.080 Findings.
Prior to approval of the tentative map and conditional use permit, the Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given in accordance with Government Code Section 65090, Section 20.02 of the City’s zoning ordinance and any other applicable City ordinance and policy. A copy of any staff report shall be served by the developer on each tenant of the subject property at least three days prior to the hearing, either by personal service or by posting the report on the front door of the unit and mailing it to the tenant. The Planning Commission shall not approve a tentative map for conversion of apartment units unless the Planning Commission finds that:

(A) All provisions of this chapter are met;

(B) The proposed conversion is consistent with the goals, objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the Palmdale general plan including the housing element, and with any applicable specific plan;

(C) The proposed conversion will conform to the Palmdale Municipal Code in effect at the time of tentative map and conditional use permit approval, except as otherwise provided in this chapter;

(D) The overall design, physical condition and amenities of the condominium conversion are consistent with those associated with condominium developments throughout the City and such elements achieve a high degree of appearance, quality and safety;

(E) The proposed project will not convert, during the current calendar year, more than five percent of the potentially convertible rental units in Palmdale for the current calendar year except as otherwise provided in this chapter; and

(F) There is no evidence in the public hearing record to indicate that vacancies in the project were intentionally increased for the purposes of preparing the project for conversion; and

(G) There is no evidence in the public hearing record to indicate that tenants have been coerced to publicly support or approve the conversion, or to refrain from publicly opposing it, or to forgo any assistance to which they may be entitled. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.100
VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Sections:

16.100.010    Purpose and intent.

16.100.020    Consistency requirements.

16.100.030    Application.

16.100.040    Filing and processing.

16.100.050    Applications inconsistent with City standards.

16.100.060    Expiration.

16.100.070    Vested rights created by approval of vesting tentative map.

16.100.080    Modifications to vesting tentative maps.

16.100.090    Subsequent permits, licenses and other entitlements for use.

16.100.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for the implementation of Government Code provisions relating to vesting tentative maps. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to the filing, processing and review of vesting tentative maps as the term is defined in Sections 66424.5 and 66452 of the Government Code and the provisions of this title. To accomplish this purpose, the regulations outlined in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare and the promotion of orderly growth and development. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.100.020 Consistency requirements.
The approval of a vesting tentative map shall be consistent with the Palmdale zoning ordinance, the City of Palmdale general plan, any applicable specific plan, and any other applicable City standards in effect at the time the vesting map application was deemed complete. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.100.030 Application.
This chapter shall be applicable to all vesting subdivisions. Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act or this title requires the filing of a tentative map for a subdivision, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.100.040 Filing and processing.
A vesting tentative map shall be filed on the same form, have the same contents, and provide the same information and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map, except as hereinafter provided:

(A) At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face, the words “Vesting Tentative Map.”

(B) The application for a vesting tentative map shall contain all information, materials, and reports required under PMC 16.40.020 and the information stated below:

(1) Intended size, location and use of all buildings;

(2) Grading plans;

(3) Plan and profile geometrics for proposed roadways;

(4) Locations and design of sanitary sewer, water and storm drain facilities; and

(5) Pursuant to PMC 16.110.020(A), proof that all off-site easements required for the project have been acquired.

The City Engineer may request additional studies necessary to conclude that infrastructure improvements are adequate to serve the proposed subdivision and will be compatible with future development of the surrounding area. If the subdivision is proposed to be phased, then a phasing plan detailing infrastructure improvements to be installed with each phase, together with interim facilities to be utilized, will be required.

(C) A vesting tentative map shall not be accepted for filing unless all other discretionary land use approvals required for the proposed development, including site plan review applications, conditional use permits and variances, have been obtained, or applications for any such required entitlements are filed concurrently with the vesting tentative map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.100.050 Applications inconsistent with City standards.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, if a subdivider files a vesting tentative map for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with City standards in effect at the time the application is deemed complete, the City may deny such a vesting tentative map or approve it conditioned on the subdivider, or his or her designee, obtaining the necessary change in the zoning ordinance to eliminate the inconsistency. If the change in the zoning ordinance is obtained, the approved or conditionally approved vesting map shall, notwithstanding PMC 16.100.070, confer the vested right to proceed with the development in substantial compliance with the change in the zoning ordinance and the map as approved. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.100.060 Expiration.
The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall be subject to the provisions of PMC 16.50.030 and shall lapse in accordance with the provisions set forth in PMC 16.40.120. A vesting tentative map may be extended under the provisions of PMC 16.40.140. The time extension for a vesting map will be reviewed for conformance with the City standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map application was deemed complete. The Planning Commission may deny a time extension for a vesting map if it finds that:

(A) Failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety; or

(B) The denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.100.070 Vested rights created by approval of vesting tentative map.
(A) Subject to the time limits established by subsection (C) of this section, the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the City standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map application is deemed to be complete.

(B) Notwithstanding subsection (A) of this section, a permit, approval, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied, even though such action may be contrary to the City standards described in subsection (A) of this section, if any one of the following are determined by the reviewing authority:

(1) A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both.

(2) The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

(C) The rights referred to in subsection (A) of this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in this title. If the final map is timely approved, such rights shall exist for the following periods of time:

(1) An initial period of one year after the recording of the final map. Where multiple final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

(2) The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for grading permit approval, if such processing exceeds 30 days from the date an application is accepted as complete.

(3) The subdivider may apply to the Planning Commission for a one-year extension at any time before the expiration of the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the City Council within 15 days thereafter.

(4) If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subsections (C)(1) through (3) of this section, the rights referred to herein shall continue to exist until the expiration of such permit, or any extension thereof. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.100.080 Modifications to vesting tentative maps.
At any time prior to the expiration of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider, his or her successor, or his or her assignee, may apply for a modification to such map. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Commission on any amendment involving a modification to the vesting tentative map or development related thereto, following procedures set forth for the modification of tentative maps in PMC 16.40.110(B). Approval of a modification to a vesting tentative map or development related thereto, shall not alter the expiration date of the vesting tentative map. Any modification to a vesting map, proposed by the subdivider, will be evaluated for compliance with those City regulations, standards and policies in effect at the time the request for modification is deemed complete. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.100.090 Subsequent permits, licenses and other entitlements for use.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to prevent the City from conditionally approving or denying any permit, license or other entitlement for use which is applied for by the subdivider after the approval of a vesting tentative map, provided such conditional approval or denial is made in accordance with the City standards described in this chapter. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.110
DEDICATIONS AND IMPROVEMENTS
Sections:

16.110.010    General.

16.110.020    Off-site improvements required.

16.110.030    Deferred improvements.

16.110.040    Improvement plans and standards.

16.110.050    Subdivision improvement agreements and improvement security.

16.110.060    Completion of improvements.

16.110.070    Dedications.

16.110.010 General.
(A) The subdivider shall construct all required improvements, both on-site and off-site, in accordance with the standards approved by City Council ordinance and applicable City standards as provided by this title. Except as provided herein, the subdivider shall be required to install all improvements that are required as conditions of approval to the tentative map, and to install all improvements that are required by City ordinance or resolution.

(B) The applicant shall pay all impact fees, pursuant to the applicable impact fee ordinances, in the amount that is in effect at the time such fees are due. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.110.020 Off-site improvements required.
(A) If the subdivider of a vesting tentative map is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the City has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, then the subdivider shall provide written evidence, prior to the application for the vesting tentative map being deemed complete, that all off-site interests in property required for the project have been acquired, unless the City Engineer finds, based on substantial evidence, that the subdivision design incorporates an alternative that would comply with City standards in the absence of the off-site improvement.

(B) If the subdivider is required to construct off-site improvements on land in which neither the subdivider nor the City has sufficient title or interest to allow construction, the subdivider shall provide written evidence that a good faith effort has been made to acquire the title or interest in the land to construct required off-site improvements, in accordance with City standards. If the subdivider, after a good faith effort, is unable to acquire the property, the City shall, within 120 days of filing the final map, acquire by negotiation or commence condemnation of the land, in substantial compliance with the procedures set forth in Government Code Section 7260, or the City shall waive the condition for the off-site construction. Prior to approval of the final map, the City shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement to complete the off-site improvements at the time that title or an interest in the land is acquired. The subdivider shall pay the cost of acquiring off-site land, or an interest in the land required to construct the off-site improvements, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs, prior to initiation of acquisition proceedings by the City. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.110.030 Deferred improvements.
(A) Any request for deferred construction of on-site and off-site improvements for tentative or parcel maps shall be approved by the Planning Commission at the time of approval of the tentative map or parcel map waiver. Any improvements which are deferred by the Planning Commission shall be noted on the final or parcel map and a deferred improvement agreement shall be filed with the City Engineer prior to or concurrent with the filing of the parcel map.

(B) The City Attorney shall approve the form and content of all deferred improvement agreements. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.110.040 Improvement plans and standards.
(A) Standards for design and construction of subdivision improvements shall be in accordance with the applicable City standards, the conditions of approval of the tentative map, and the requirements established by the City Engineer.

(B) Public improvement plans shall be acted on by the City Engineer within the time frame set forth in Government Code Section 66456.2.

(C) Public improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of a registered civil engineer and shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, if he or she can make the following findings:

(1) The plans are signed and stamped by a registered civil engineer;

(2) The plan designs are consistent with the tentative map, the conditions of approval and applicable City standards, with the exception of minor errors or incompleteness which do not materially affect the design or the plan constructability thereof;

(3) All reports and studies required to evaluate the facility design and the completeness of the plans have been prepared by a registered civil engineer and have been reviewed and approved by the City Engineer;

(4) All conditions of approval relative to public improvement requirements have been addressed to the satisfaction of the reviewing authority and the City Engineer;

(5) All title and interest has been obtained by the subdivider for off-site property interests;

(6) All cost estimates have been approved by the City Engineer, and payment of all applicable fees has been received; and

(7) Approval of designs and plans has been obtained from all other applicable agencies, as required by the City Engineer, including but not limited to: Los Angeles County Department of Public Works, Los Angeles County Fire Department, County of Los Angeles sanitation districts, city of Lancaster department of public works, Palmdale water district, state of California Transportation Department, state of California Department of Water Resources, and United States Army Corps of Engineers.

(D) All improvement plans shall be prepared in accordance with the City standards in effect at the time the tentative map is deemed complete. However, the City Engineer may modify those City standards under the following conditions:

(1) When necessary to protect public health, safety and welfare;

(2) When needed to comply with state or federal laws; and

(3) When, in the opinion of the City Engineer, with the consent of the subdivider, a new standard or requirement is needed which will not materially affect the intent of the subdivider or the conditions of approval. This shall include the adoption of other agency standards for use by the City Engineer.

(E) The City Engineer’s approval of any public improvement plans, or any grading plans that are required as part of the approval of the final or parcel map, shall expire upon the expiration of any applicable subdivision improvement agreement, or two years from the date the City Engineer approves the plans, whichever is later. Upon expiration of those plans, new approvals from the City Engineer, together with the payment of new plan review fees, shall be required for any portions of the subdivision for which grading and improvements have not been completed. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.110.050 Subdivision improvement agreements and improvement security.
Pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, if any public improvement required as part of the approval of the subdivision will not be completed and accepted in accordance with PMC 16.110.060 prior to approval of the final map, then prior to a determination of a complete and timely filing of the final map by the City Engineer, the subdivider, at his expense, shall be required to enter into a subdivision improvement agreement with the City to complete said public improvements in accordance with PMC 16.110.060. Performance of said agreement shall be guaranteed by the security specified in this section.

(A) Subdivision Improvement Agreements. The form and content shall be approved by the City Attorney. The agreement shall include, but not be limited to, the following minimum terms and conditions:

(1) Construction of all improvements as set forth in the approved plans and specifications;

(2) The maximum period within which all improvements shall be completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer;

(3) Provisions for inspection of all improvements by the City Engineer and payment of fees by the subdivider for the cost of such inspection and all other incidental costs incurred by the City in enforcing the agreement;

(4) A provision that, if the subdivider fails to complete the work within the specified period of time, or any extended period of time that may have lawfully been granted to the subdivider, the City may, at its option, complete the required improvement work and the subdivider and his surety shall be firmly bound, under a continuing obligation, for payment of the full cost and expense incurred or expended by the City in completing such work, including interest from the date of notice of said cost and expense until paid;

(5) A provision that, in the event of litigation occasioned by a default of the owner or subdivider, his successors or assignees, the owner or subdivider, his successors or assignees will pay all costs involved, including reasonable attorney’s fees, and that the same may be recovered as part of a lien against the real property; and

(6) Additional terms or provisions, as may be necessary, pertaining to the forfeiture, collection, and disposition of improvement security upon the failure of the contracting party to comply with the terms and provisions thereof or with the terms and provisions of this title.

(B) Implementation of Subdivision Improvement Agreements. Subdivision improvement agreements shall be valid for a period specified in the agreement, but not to exceed two years from the effective date of the agreement. The agreement shall not bind only the present subdivider, but also his heirs, successors, executors, administrators, and assignees so that the obligation runs with the real property. All agreements shall be executed by all those parties executing the final or parcel map, with all signatures acknowledged before a notary public, and shall be transmitted by the City Clerk to the office of the County Registrar/Recorder concurrently with the final map. Said agreement shall be recorded upon the title of said real property, in the office of the County Registrar/Recorder, at the expense of the subdivider.

(C) Improvement Security. Improvement securities shall be required to be posted as a guarantee of the performance of any act, improvement, or obligation required as a condition of approval of any final map, parcel map waiver, lot line adjustment, or lot merger. Unless otherwise provided herein, all such improvement securities shall be provided in one of the following forms, subject to the approval of the City Engineer and City Attorney:

(1) A bond or bonds by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties substantially in the form prescribed in the Subdivision Map Act and subject to the approval and acceptance of the City Attorney and City Council; or

(2) A deposit with the City of cash, negotiable bonds or a letter of credit; or

(3) Any other form of security, including a lien or other security interests in real property, which the City Engineer and the City Attorney shall determine to be equivalent to the foregoing forms of security.

Any written contract or document creating security interest established pursuant to subsection (C)(3) of this section shall be recorded in the office of the County Registrar/Recorder. From the time of recordation, a lien shall attach to the real property described therein, which lien shall have the priority of a judgment lien in the amounts specified.

(D) Amount of Security. The subdivider shall provide as security to the City:

(1) For performance and guarantee: an amount determined by the City Engineer equal to 120 percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement to be performed, including grading monumentation. The amount of security provides for a 10 percent contingency and a 10 percent increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated mid-point of construction;

(2) For payment: an amount determined by the City Engineer equal to 50 percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement to be performed, excluding grading and monumentation.

(E) Improvement Security Release. Improvement security may be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work by the City Council; provided, however, such release shall not apply to the amount of security deemed necessary by the City Engineer for the guarantee and warranty period, nor to costs and reasonable expense fees, including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred by the City in enforcing any improvement agreement. The subdivider shall not be entitled to any reduction in security until all improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

(F) Forfeiture. In addition to any other remedy provided by law, upon the failure of the subdivider to complete any improvement, act or obligations within the time specified in the improvement agreement, or upon failure of the subdivider to faithfully comply with the terms and provisions of this section or any improvement security given thereby, the City Council may, upon notice in writing of not less than 10 days served upon the person responsible for the performance thereof or upon notice in writing of not less than 20 days, served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of such person, determine that the foregoing have not been complied with or said work has not been completed, and may cause to be forfeited to the City such portion of said improvement security given for the performance of the foregoing. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.110.060 Completion of improvements.
(A) Public improvements required as a condition of approval shall be completed in accordance with this title, unless they are deferred by the Planning Commission pursuant to PMC 16.110.030. The City Engineer shall review and approve any improvement agreement, conduct an inspection, and approve any constructed public improvement necessary to satisfy this provision, with the City Council providing final approval of any agreement or acceptance of any completed public improvement.

(B) Once begun, public improvements for a final map, or a parcel map when required, shall be constructed to completion without interruption. The subdivider shall exercise due diligence to ensure that this provision is met to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. Construction and inspection of public improvements shall be governed by City standards and the requirements of any applicable permit.

(C) At such time as the City Engineer determines that any public improvement is complete enough to reasonably allow the release of 90 percent of the applicable securities, said public improvement shall be considered to have entered the warranty period. The warranty period shall be a minimum of one year; however, it may be extended as long as necessary to ensure that the public improvements are suitable for public ownership and maintenance responsibility, as determined by the City Engineer and accepted by the City Council.

(D) Notwithstanding any applicable agreement, the ownership of and responsibility for the construction and maintenance of any public improvement is held by the subdivider and shall remain so until such time as the City Council accepts the completed public improvements.

(E) Upon acceptance of a public improvement, the City Council shall provide a notice of completion for that public improvement, and it shall authorize the City Engineer to release applicable securities for that public improvement. This action shall serve to transfer ownership and maintenance responsibility of the public improvement from the subdivider to the City, and to provide full acceptance of the applicable dedication or easement, which acceptance had been contingent upon completion and acceptance of public improvements within said dedication or easement, subject to the terms of any applicable agreement. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.110.070 Dedications.
(A) Dedication for Bicycle Paths. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66475.1, the subdivider of any map which contains 200 or more parcels shall dedicate such additional land as may be necessary to construct any bicycle paths, as shown in the City’s parks, recreation and trails element or as required by the Planning Commission as a condition of approval of the tentative map, which are within or adjacent to the unit of land to be subdivided.

(B) Dedication of Land or Payment of Fees in Lieu of Dedication for Parks. Dedication of parkland, or payment of fees in lieu of dedication of parkland, will be required pursuant to Chapter 3.34 PMC.

(C) Right-of-Way Dedications and Grants of Easements. Right-of-way dedications and grants of easements required upon a final or parcel map shall either be accepted, accepted subject to improvement, or rejected by the City Engineer on behalf of the City, at the time the final or parcel map is approved. Acceptance of the dedication or easement shall serve to transfer the appropriate interest to the City, subject to the terms of the offer and the acceptance certificate. Rejection of the dedication or easement shall reserve the City’s ability to accept all or part of the dedication or easement in accordance with state law. The City Engineer shall determine whether to accept, accept subject to improvement or reject the dedication or easement, pursuant to City standards and the following criteria:

(1) Dedications or easements may be accepted without condition when it is for an arterial street designated on the circulation element map of the general plan, or for a drainage or flood control facility depicted in the master plan of drainage. Dedications or easements may be accepted subject to improvement when applicable public improvements are required as part of the dedications or easements. Dedications or easements which are accepted subject to improvement shall be considered public access and utility easements, without any responsibility or liability to the City, until such time as the improvements are accepted by the City Council as specified in this title.

(2) Dedications or easements may be rejected when no public improvements are required within the dedication or easement, or when the City would be exposed to unnecessary liability by an acceptance, as determined by the City Engineer, in consultation with the City Attorney.

(D) Fee title shall be granted by the subdivider when, in the opinion of the City Council in consultation with the City Engineer, it is necessary to carry out policies and requirements of the general plan and any City ordinance, resolution or standard.

(E) The types of dedications, easements or grants of fee title that a subdivision may be subject to shall include, but shall not be limited to: streets, alleys, access rights, drainage, public utility, landscape, slope and sewer. (Ord. 1311 § 1, 2007; Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.120
REVERSION TO ACREAGE
Sections:

16.120.010    General.

16.120.020    Initiation of proceedings.

16.120.030    Contents of petition.

16.120.040    Submittal of petition to the City Engineer.

16.120.050    Conditions of reversion.

16.120.060    City Council approval.

16.120.070    Filing with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.

16.120.010 General.
Any subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this chapter. Subdivisions also may be merged and resubdivided without reverting to acreage, under the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.120.020 Initiation of proceedings.
(A) By Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition, in a form prescribed by the City Engineer, of all the owners of record of the property.

(B) By City Council. The City Council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The City Council shall direct the City Engineer to initiate and conduct the proceedings and to notify all property owners affected. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.120.030 Contents of petition.
The petition shall contain, but not be limited to, the following:

(A) Evidence of title to the real property;

(B) Evidence of the consent of all of the owners of an interest in the property;

(C) Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for recordation, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later;

(D) A final or parcel map, in the form prescribed by this title, delineating dedications that will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the following statement: “The Purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage.” (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.120.040 Submittal of petition to the City Engineer.
The final or parcel map for the reversion, together with all other data as required by the City Engineer, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review. Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the City Engineer shall submit the final or parcel map, together with a report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the City Council for its consideration. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.120.050 Conditions of reversion.
The City Council may require as conditions of the reversion:

(A) That owners dedicate or offer to dedicate streets, public rights-of-way or easements, including easements or fee interest for flood control facilities;

(B) That all or a portion of previously paid fees, deposits or improvement securities be retained if the same are necessary to accomplish any of the purposes or provisions of this title, the City’s zoning ordinance, and other provisions of the Municipal Code;

(C) Payment of any additional fees necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter; or

(D) Such other conditions of reversion as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of this title or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.120.060 City Council approval.
A public hearing shall be held by the City Council on all proposed reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in the City zoning ordinance. The City Council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds that:

(A) Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or future public purposes; and

(B) Either:

(1) All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to reversion, or

(2) None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was recorded, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later, or

(3) No lots shown on the final or parcel map or portion thereof have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.120.070 Filing with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.
Upon approval of the reversion to acreage, the City Clerk or City Engineer shall transmit the final or parcel map, together with the City Council resolution approving the reversion, to the office of the County Registrar/Recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the filing of the final map with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder. Upon filing, all public dedications and offers of dedication for public purposes not shown on the final or parcel map shall be of no further force and effect. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.130
LOT MERGERS/UNMERGERS
Sections:

16.130.010    Voluntary mergers.

16.130.020    Involuntary mergers.

16.130.030    Unmerger of parcels.

16.130.010 Voluntary mergers.
(A) Any contiguous parcels or units of land held under common ownership may be merged at the request of the property owner(s), pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.203/4 and this chapter. Except as provided in PMC 16.40.140, approval and recordation of a final or parcel map over previously subdivided property shall be deemed to have merged those properties, and this chapter shall have no force or effect.

(B) Record owner(s) of contiguous lots may file a request with the Planning Director to merge said contiguous parcels. The request for merger shall be made on a form prescribed by the Planning Director, and accompanied by a fee as established by City Council resolution.

(C) The Planning Director, in consultation with the City Engineer, may approve a voluntary lot merger only if the Planning Director finds that:

(1) Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the lot merger are unnecessary for present or future public purposes, or that any dedications or offers of dedication which are necessary for present or future public purposes are preserved on the merged parcels; and

(2) All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to the lot merger.

(D) The Planning Director may require as conditions of the lot merger:

(1) That all or a portion of previously paid subdivision fees, deposits or improvement securities be retained if they are necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter;

(2) Payment of any additional fees necessary to accomplish any of the provisions of this chapter; and

(3) Such other conditions as are necessary to accomplish the purposes or provisions of this title or necessary to protect the public health, safety or welfare.

(E) A voluntary parcel merger shall become effective when the Planning Director causes a notice of merger to be filed with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.130.020 Involuntary mergers.
(A) Criteria. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.10 et seq., the City may initiate the merger of a parcel of land with a contiguous parcel held by the same owner(s), if the Planning Commission determines that all of the following requirements are satisfied:

(1) The affected parcels are held by the same owner(s) as of the date the notice of intention is recorded, as required by Government Code Section 66451.13;

(2) One of the affected parcels does not conform to the standards for minimum parcel size under the applicable zoning;

(3) One of the affected parcels is either: (a) undeveloped by a structure; (b) developed only with an accessory structure; or (c) developed with a single structure (other than an accessory structure) that is partially sited on the contiguous parcel with which it is proposed to be merged; and

(4) With respect to each affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions is met:

(a) The parcel comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time the merger is determined,

(b) The parcel was not created in compliance with applicable laws or ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

(c) The parcel does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply,

(d) The parcel does not meet slope stability standards in that soils investigation indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects,

(e) The parcel does not have legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability to satisfy the requirements relating to the design and specifications for local streets or private roads, as the case may be, and does not have the approval of the Los Angeles County Fire Department as meeting its standards for access and maneuverability for fire equipment,

(f) The parcel does not have sufficient dimensions to allow development that conforms to zoning ordinance development standards, or the proposed development is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards, or

(g) The parcel, if developed, would create one or more of the following health or safety hazards:

(i) Construction is likely to adversely impact adjoining property, or interfere with an existing drainage course, or is in an area determined to be subject to geological hazard,

(ii) Surface waters occurring on the affected parcel or flowing onto or through it cannot be conveyed, without damage to an improvement, building or dwelling, to a natural water course or to an existing adequate storm drainage facility,

(iii) The site available for development does not provide an appropriate buildable site in consideration of the site’s constraints, including slopes, soil characteristics and seismic factors,

(iv) Development of the site is likely to cause environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure wildlife or their habitat, or

(v) The type of improvements proposed for the site will conflict with easements acquired by the public at large for access through a use of the site.

(B) Notice of Intention to Determine Status. Pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.13, the Director of Planning shall mail, by certified mail, a notice of intention to determine the status of the affected parcels to the then current owner(s) of record. The notice shall advise the owner(s) that the affected parcels may be merged under the standards specified in this chapter, and it shall advise the owner(s) of the opportunity to request a hearing of the determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the affected parcels do not meet the criteria for merger. The Planning Director shall cause the notice of intention to determine status to be filed for recordation with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder on the date that the notice is mailed to the property owner(s).

(C) Hearing. If the property owner files with the Planning Director, a request for a hearing on determination of status within 30 days after recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the Planning Director shall establish a hearing date for the Planning Commission to consider the merger. The Planning Director shall notify the property owner(s) of the hearing by certified mail. The Planning Commission shall conduct a hearing not more than 60 days following receipt of the property owner’s request for the hearing. The hearing date may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the Planning Commission and property owner(s).

(D) Determination of Status Following Hearing. At the hearing, the property owner(s) may present evidence that the affected parcels do not meet the standards for merger specified in this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged, and shall notify the owner of its determination.

(E) Recordation of Notice of Merger. At the direction of the Planning Commission, the Planning Director shall cause a notice of merger, specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property, to be recorded within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing.

(F) Determination Not to Merge. If the Planning Commission determines that the affected parcels are not to be merged, the Director of Planning shall cause to be recorded a release of notice of intention to determine status, and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner(s) of record.

(G) Determination of Merger Where No Hearing Is Requested. If, within 30 days after recordation of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected parcels does not file a request for a hearing, the Planning Commission may at any time thereafter make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. At the direction of the Planning Commission, a notice of merger shall be recorded not later than 90 days after the date when the Director of Planning mailed the notice of intention to determine status.

(H) Appeal. The decision of the Planning Commission made under this chapter may be appealed, pursuant to zoning ordinance Section 20.11. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.130.030 Unmerger of parcels.
Any unmerger of parcels shall be conducted pursuant to Government Code Section 66451.30 et seq. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.140
CORRECTIONS AND AMENDMENTS OF MAPS
Sections:

16.140.010    Requirements.

16.140.020    Form and content of amendments.

16.140.030    Submittal and approval by City Engineer.

16.140.040    City Council approval required.

16.140.050    Filing with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.

16.140.010 Requirements.
After a final or parcel map is filed for record in the office of the County Registrar/Recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map for any of the following purposes:

(A) To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon;

(B) To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom;

(C) To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map;

(D) To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, retirement from practice, or replacement of the engineer or surveyor charged with the responsibilities for setting monuments;

(E) To show the proper location or character of any monument that has been changed in location or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; or

(F) To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the City Engineer, which does not affect any property right. Such errors and omissions may include, but are not limited to, lot numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. For purposes of this section, an “error” does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the data shown on the final or parcel map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.140.020 Form and content of amendments.
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared in a manner approved by the City Engineer, and the form and content shall conform to the applicable requirements of Government Code Section 66470. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.140.030 Submittal and approval by City Engineer.
(A) The amending map or certificate of correction, completed as to final form, shall be submitted to the City Engineer for examination. If the only changes made are those set forth in PMC 16.140.010, then the City Engineer shall certify to this fact on the amending map or certificate of correction, within the time period specified in Government Code Section 66471.

(B) If the City Engineer determines that proposed changes are beyond the scope of the changes listed in PMC 16.140.010, the amending map or certificate of correction must be submitted to the City Council for review and approval, pursuant to Government Code Section 55472.1 and PMC 16.140.040. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.140.040 City Council approval required.
A certificate of correction or an amending map may be used to make modifications to a final or parcel map filed with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder when there are changes, which are beyond the scope of the changes listed in PMC 16.140.010, that make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary, when the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and when the modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modifications shall be set for public hearing by the City Council, who shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification and issues related thereto. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.140.050 Filing with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.
The amending map or certificate of correction, certified by the City Engineer or approved by the City Council, shall be filed by the City Engineer or City Clerk in the office of the County Registrar/Recorder. Thereupon, the original map shall be deemed to have corrected, and thereafter shall impart all corrections in the same manner as though set forth on the original map. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.150
LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Sections:

16.150.010    General.

16.150.020    Filing with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.

16.150.010 General.
(A) A lot line adjustment may be approved between two or more adjoining parcels, where a greater or lesser number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created, in accordance with the following provisions:

(1) Applications for lot line adjustment shall be filed with the City Engineer on the forms prescribed, and shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer, in consultation with the Director of Planning.

(2) Review by the City Engineer and the Planning Director shall be limited to whether or not the parcels resulting from the proposed lot line adjustment will comply with the zoning ordinance and building code.

(3) Conditions of approval and exactions shall be limited to those required to facilitate conformance with the Palmdale general plan, zoning ordinance, building code or the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure or easements.

(4) No record of survey shall be required, unless required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code.

(B) The City Engineer shall approve or disapprove the lot line adjustment within the time frames established by Public Resources Code Section 21151.5, and Government Code Section 66452.2. The City Engineer shall comply with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, to the extent required, if any conditions of the lot line adjustment are likely to have a potential impact on the environment, and shall comply with applicable notice and hearing requirements, if the adjustment or the conditions of approval may affect the interests of surrounding property owners. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.150.020 Filing with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.
Upon approval of the lot line adjustment pursuant to this section, the City Engineer shall file with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance of the affected parcels and a plat map showing the revised lot lines. The certificate shall include a certificate by the County Tax Collector in accordance with Division 8 of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.160
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
Sections:

16.160.010    General.

16.160.020    Review by City Engineer.

16.160.030    Official maps constitute a certificate of compliance.

16.160.010 General.
Any person owning real property may request the City Engineer, in consultation with the Director of Planning, to determine whether the lot or parcel was lawfully created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act or predecessor law and this title, as of the date the lot or parcel was created. A written application for a certificate of compliance shall be accompanied by the applicable fee and a preliminary title report not more than six months old that shows the legal owners of the property. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.160.020 Review by City Engineer.
(A) If the City Engineer determines that the real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title, the City Engineer shall file a certificate of compliance for record with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division thereof complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

(B) If the City Engineer determines that the lot or parcel does not comply with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title at the time the owner acquired his or her interest in the property, the City Engineer may, as a condition of granting the certificate of compliance, impose conditions to bring the lot or parcel into compliance with the City’s standards that were in effect at the time of the property owner’s acquisition of the property.

(C) If the City Engineer determines that the lot or parcel was created in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, and the current owner was the owner at the time of the illegal subdivision, the City Engineer may, as a condition of granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions that would be applicable to a current division of property.

(D) Prior to issuing a conditional certificate of compliance, the City Engineer shall comply with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act, to the extent required, if the conditions of the certificate are likely to have a potential impact on the environment, and shall comply with applicable notice and hearing requirements, if the decision may affect the interests of surrounding property owners.

(E) Upon the City Engineer’s making such a determination and establishing such conditions, the Engineer shall file a conditional certificate of compliance for record with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder. Such certificates shall serve as notice to the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of such conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of this property. Compliance with such conditions shall not be required until such time as a permit or other grant of approval for development of such property is issued by the City. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.160.030 Official maps constitute a certificate of compliance.
(A) A recorded final map or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein.

(B) Subject to the provisions of Government Code Section 66499.35(e), an official map prepared pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.52(b) shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Chapter 16.165
REIMBURSEMENT AGREEMENTS
Sections:

16.165.010    Reimbursement agreements – Subdivisions.

16.165.020    Reimbursement agreements – Development projects other than subdivisions.

16.165.030    Bidding procedures and award of contract.

16.165.040    Payment of costs required by reimbursement agreement.

16.165.010 Reimbursement agreements – Subdivisions.
In connection with the approval of development projects involving subdivisions, the City may, pursuant to Government Code Section 66485, require that improvements installed by a subdivider for the benefit of a subdivision contain supplemental size, capacity, number or length for the benefit of property not within the subdivision, and that those improvements be dedicated to the public. If such improvements are required by the City, the City Council, upon recommendation of the City Engineer, shall authorize an agreement with the subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of the improvements, including an amount attributable to interest, in excess of the construction required for the subdivision. (Ord. 1376 § 3, 2009; Ord. 836 § 2, 1989. Formerly 13.12.010)

16.165.020 Reimbursement agreements – Development projects other than subdivisions.
In connection with the approval of development projects other than subdivisions, the City Engineer may recommend that the City Council, by the adoption of a resolution or the approval of an agreement, authorize reimbursement to a developer, including a school district, special assessment district, or other person or entity, either by direct payment or deferred reimbursement, for a portion of the cost of constructing facilities which will directly benefit properties in an area outside the area to be served by the subject development project, and the facilities, when completed, will be dedicated or conveyed to the City or to another public entity designated by the City. Such authorization action shall conform to the requirements of the applicable state laws and may include the establishment of a reimbursement district, local benefit district, or an area of benefit and the rates, fees or charges to be applied, whether actual or estimated. (Ord. 1376 § 3, 2009; Ord. 836 § 2, 1989. Formerly 13.12.020)

16.165.030 Bidding procedures and award of contract.
(A) The procedure for the receipt of bids and the award of contract for improvements or facilities subject to a reimbursement agreement and which are to be constructed by a special assessment district or any public agency directly controlled by state law shall be as required by the particular laws applicable.

(B) The procedure for the receipt of bids and the award of contract for improvements or facilities subject to a reimbursement agreement and which are to be constructed pursuant to private contract let by a subdivider or developer which is an independent contractor, and neither a public agency, nor an agent of the City, shall be subject to review by the City Engineer in order to ensure that actual total cost of construction is fair, reasonable and consistent with estimated costs which are to be allocated or apportioned to properties within the area of benefit. Such review authority shall not be construed as the exercise of direction, supervision or control by the City over the construction, pursuant to private contract, of the subject improvement or facilities. The procedure subject to review by the City Engineer may include or require the following:

(1) Submittal of bid documents to the City Engineer for review and comment before being transmitted to prospective bidders;

(2) To the extent practicable, obtaining sealed bids from at least three bidders. Prospective bidders may be prequalified in accordance with guidelines submitted by the subdivider or developer and approved by the City Engineer. Prequalification guidelines shall be designed to ensure that bidders possess the requisite experience, skill, safety record, resources and financial capability, and the ready access to materials and labor, to assure timely and satisfactory completion of the improvements or facilities in accordance with the bid documents and to optimize economic benefits to the affected property owners;

(3) Advance notice to the City Engineer of the time and place for the opening of bids as to afford a reasonable opportunity to attend such opening;

(4) The opportunity for the City Engineer to review all bids submitted and to determine whether the successful bidder, as designated by the subdivider or developer, has submitted a bid which is fair, reasonable and consistent with the estimated costs which are to be allocated or apportioned to properties within the area of benefit in accordance with the terms and provisions of the reimbursement agreement. If such a determination cannot be made by the City Engineer, reimbursement of actual total costs incurred in constructing the improvements or facilities shall be subject to appropriate reduction. (Ord. 1376 § 3, 2009; Ord. 836 § 2, 1989. Formerly 13.12.030)

16.165.040 Payment of costs required by reimbursement agreement.
In order to pay the costs as required by any reimbursement agreement authorized pursuant to this chapter, the City may:

(A) Collect from other persons, including public agencies, using such improvements or facilities for the benefit of real property not within the subdivision or other development project area, a reasonable charge for such use;

(B) Contribute to the subdivider or developer that part of the cost of the improvements or facilities that is attributable to the benefit of real property outside the subdivision or other development project area and levy a charge upon the real property benefited to reimburse the City for such cost, together with interest thereon, if any, paid to the subdivider or developer;

(C) Establish and maintain reimbursement districts, local benefit districts, or areas of benefit for the levy and collection of such charge or costs from the property benefited. (Ord. 1376 § 3, 2009; Ord. 836 § 2, 1989. Formerly 13.12.040)

Chapter 16.170
ENFORCEMENT
Sections:

16.170.010    Prohibition.

16.170.020    Remedies.

16.170.030    Notice of violation.

16.170.010 Prohibition.
(A) No person shall sell, lease or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease or financing thereon, except for model homes, for which a final or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title, until such map, in full compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title, has been filed for record with the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.

(B) Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall not be made by parcel or block number, letter or other designation, unless and until such map has been filed for record by the office of the County Registrar/Recorder.

(C) This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels or a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law, including this title, regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established.

(D) Nothing contained in subsection (A) of this section shall be deemed to prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease or finance real property or to construct improvements thereon where such sale, lease or financing, or the commencement of such construction, is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final map or parcel map, as required under the Subdivision Map Act or this title. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.170.020 Remedies.
(A) Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell real property which has been prepared in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title is voidable at the sole option of the buyer, or any personal representative, within one year after the date of discovery of such violation. The deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the buyer and upon the grantor.

(B) The City shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, if it finds that development of such real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny or approve such a permit shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of record at the time of such violation, with or without actual knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of an interest in such real property.

If the City issues a permit or grants approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, the City may impose any additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the City may impose conditions applicable to a current division of property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record in accordance with the provisions of this title, only those conditions or stipulations in that certificate shall be applicable. In such circumstances, a property owner may first apply for and obtain a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

16.170.030 Notice of violation.
If the City Engineer has knowledge that real property has been subdivided in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be mailed by the Engineering Department, by certified mail, to the current owner of record, pursuant to Government Code Section 66499.36, and the process and review of a notice of violation will be conducted as set forth in that section. (Ord. 1091 § 5, 1996)

Title 17
ZONING
Chapters:

Division 1. General Provisions

17.10    Introductory Provisions

17.11    Scope

17.12    Delegation of Authority

17.13    Designation of Zones and Districts

17.14    Maps

17.15    Terminology

17.16    Definitions

Division 2. Review Procedures

17.20    General Review Procedures

17.21    Site Plan Review

17.22    Conditional Use Permits

17.23    Variances and Minor Exceptions

17.24    Zoning Administration

17.25    Processing of Agreements

17.26    Miscellaneous Administrative Approvals

17.27    Temporary Uses

17.28    Comprehensive Development Plans

17.29    Non-Conforming Uses and Structures

Division 3. Agricultural Zones

17.30    Light Agriculture (A-1)

Division 4. Residential Zones

17.40    Residential Zones

17.41    Single Family Residential (R-1)

17.42    Medium Residential (R-2)

17.43    Multiple Residential (R-3)

17.44    High Density Residential (Zone R-4)

Division 5. Commercial Zones

17.50    Commercial Zones

17.51    Light Commercial (Zone C-1)

17.52    Office Commercial (Zone C-2)

17.53    General Commercial (Zone C-3)

17.54    Commercial Center (Zone C-4)

17.55    Service Commercial (Zone C-5)

Division 6. Industrial Zones

17.60    Industrial Zones

17.61    Light Industrial (Zone M-1)

17.62    General Industrial (Zone M-2)

17.63    Airport Industrial (Zone M-3)

17.64    Planned Industrial (Zone M-4)

Division 7. Special Purpose Zones

17.71    Public Facilities (Zone PF)

17.72    Quarry and Reclamation (Zone QR)

17.73    Mixed Use Overlay (Zone MX)

17.74    Open Space and Recreational (Zone OR)

17.75    Downtown Commercial (Zone C-D)

17.76    Land Use Matrix

Division 8. General Standards of Development

17.80    Development Standards

17.81    Parcel Requirements

17.82    Yards and Location of Buildings

17.83    Transition Between Land Uses and Zones

17.84    Performance Standards

17.85    Trash and Recycling Storages

17.86    Landscaping, Lighting, Screening and Walls Standards

17.87    Off-Street Parking

17.88    Signs

17.89    Animal Keeping

Division 9. Special Regulations

17.90    General Provisions

17.91    Residential Uses

17.92    Commercial Uses

17.93    Industrial Uses

17.94    Public and Institutional Facilities

17.95    Communications and Utilities

17.96    Hazardous Waste Facilities

17.97    Recycling Facilities

17.98    Other Uses

17.99    Renewable Energy

Division 10. Environmental Management

17.100    Hillside Management

17.101    Transportation Demand Management

17.102    Surface Mining and Reclamation

 

CHAPTER 17.10
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
17.10.010 Authority for this Ordinance
This Ordinance is adopted under the authority granted to the City of Palmdale by Article 11, Section 7 of the California Constitution and in accordance with the requirements of California Government Code Sections 65800 et. seq. and 66410 et. seq.

17.10.020 Short Title
This Ordinance shall be known as the “Palmdale Zoning Ordinance.”

17.10.030 Replacement of Previous Ordinances
The provisions of this Ordinance insofar as they are substantially the same as the provisions of any ordinance or portions of any ordinance repealed by this Ordinance shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof, and not as new enactment’s.

17.10.040 Purpose
The purpose of this Zoning Ordinance is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to preserve and enhance the quality of life within the City by establishing regulations to ensure that an appropriate mix of land uses is developed in an orderly manner. To achieve this purpose, the City desires to achieve a pattern and distribution of land uses which generally meets the following objectives:

A.    To implement the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan;

B.    To retain and enhance established residential neighborhoods, commercial and industrial districts, public facilities, recreation, open space and other amenities;

C.    To allow for the infill and redevelopment of areas at similar scale and character;

D.    To accommodate expansion of development into vacant and under-utilized lands, while considering environmental and infrastructural constraints;

E.    To provide a diversity of areas throughout the community characterized by differing land use activity, scale and intensity;

F.    To maintain and enhance significant environmental and visual resources;

G.    To provide opportunities for economic development, including business creation and expansion in a variety of manufacturing, service and marketing industries; and

H.    To establish Palmdale as a distinctive community with a high quality of life and a visually pleasing, secure environment for the City’s residents and businesses.

17.10.050 Prohibitions
A.    General prohibitions

1.    No structure shall be moved into an area, erected, reconstructed, added to, enlarged, advertised on or structurally altered or maintained, and no structure or land shall be used for any purpose, except as specifically provided and allowed by this Zoning Ordinance and any other applicable codes, ordinances and resolutions.

2.    No person shall use or permit to be used any structure or land, nor shall any person erect, structurally alter or enlarge any structure or advertise on any structure except in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and any other applicable codes, ordinances and resolutions.

3.    No permit or entitlement may be issued or renewed for any use, construction, improvement or other purpose unless specifically provided for, or permitted by, this Zoning Ordinance, and any other applicable codes, ordinances and resolutions.

4.    Parolee homes of two or more parolees unrelated by blood, marriage or legal adoption are prohibited. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

5.    Sex offender homes or Probationer homes of two or more unrelated sex offenders and/or two or more individuals on probation are prohibited. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

B.    Violations

Any person violating any provision of this Zoning Ordinance, or any amendment thereto, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each violation is a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of time during which the violation is committed and is subject to the penalties specified in Chapter 1.12 PMC.

C.    Public nuisance

Any use of property contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance is illegal and is deemed to be a public nuisance. The authorized legal representative of the City may commence actions and proceedings for the abatement thereof, in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps and may apply to any court having jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such use, and restrain and enjoin any person from using any property contrary to the provisions of this Section.

D.    Injunctions

The provisions of this Section may also be enforced by injunction issued by any court having jurisdiction over the owner or occupant of any real property affected by such violation or prospective violation.

E.    Enforcement

The Director of Planning, Senior Code Enforcement Officer, or any representative thereof designated by the Director, is hereby authorized to notify, cite and take legal action against any person who is in violation of the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

17.10.060 General Plan Consistency
The Zoning Ordinance is the primary tool for implementing the goals, objectives and policies of the Palmdale General Plan, pursuant to the mandates of State law. All development proposals within the incorporated area of the City shall be found to be consistent with the General Plan, prior to approval.

No land shall be developed nor shall any use be initiated which is not found to be in conformance with the General Plan, applicable Specific Plan, Zoning Ordinance or other applicable provisions of the City of Palmdale Municipal Code.

Chapter 17.11
SCOPE
17.11.010 Minimum Requirements of this Ordinance
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, morals and general welfare.

17.11.020 Replacement of Other Ordinances
The provisions of this Ordinance shall not be deemed or construed to repeal, amend, modify, alter or change any other ordinance or any part thereof not specifically repealed, amended, modified, altered or changed herein, except in such particulars or matters as this Ordinance is more restrictive than such other ordinance, or part thereof; and that in all particulars wherein this Ordinance is not more restrictive, each such other ordinance shall remain in full force and effect.

17.11.030 Compliance with Other Ordinances and Laws
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed to authorize the use of any lot or parcel of land in violation of this Ordinance or any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation.

17.11.040 Reference to any Portion of this Ordinance
Whenever reference is made to any portion of this Ordinance, or of any other law or ordinance, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.

17.11.050 Severability of any Portion of this Ordinance
Provisions of this Title are declared to be severable. If any provision, clause, sentence, section, or any part thereof is held to be unconstitutional, invalid, or inapplicable to any person or circumstance by a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity, or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, sections, or parts of this Title or their applicability to other persons or circumstances.

17.11.060 Continuation of Previously Granted Variances
All exceptions and variances heretofore granted pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. 140 shall be deemed to exist hereafter as variances pursuant to Chapter 17.23 PMC (Variances), and shall be subject to all the conditions and provisions governing such variances upon the effective date of this Ordinance.

17.11.070 Continuation of Previously Granted Permits
All permitted uses heretofore lawfully existing under Ordinance No. 140 shall continue in effect until revoked or terminated and shall be continued under this Ordinance and shall be subject to all conditions governing such permit.

17.11.080 Continuation of Previously Adopted Development Agreements
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to supersede the provisions of a development agreement which was adopted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and which is still in effect. However, in any instance where a development agreement is silent on standards, requirements or other provisions as contained in this Ordinance, and such provisions are not in conflict with that development agreement, the Zoning Ordinance shall apply.

17.11.090 Continuation of Existing Nonconforming Uses
Any use established or conducted, or any building or improvement lawfully existing as a nonconforming use prior to the effective date of this Ordinance pursuant to Ordinance No. 140 shall be deemed to be continued under this Ordinance, and in determination of the termination date established by this Ordinance, shall be computed from the original date it became nonconforming under said Ordinance No. 140.

17.11.100 Lawfully Established Uses Made Nonconforming Because of Changes in Standards of Development
A use which was lawfully established but was made nonconforming (as defined in PMC 17.16.140) because of changes in standards of development may be changed or expanded as provided in Chapter 17.29 PMC (Nonconforming Uses and Structures) subject to all other provisions of this Ordinance or any other ordinance or law.

17.11.110 Procedures Regarding Pending Proceedings
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this Section, after the effective date of this Ordinance, any pending application or project which has not been deemed complete shall be subject to the applicable provisions of this Ordinance. Any pending application, project or proceeding which has been deemed complete shall be subject to the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Palmdale which were in effect on the date such proceeding was deemed complete.

B.    The Planning Director may determine that the approval of a Subdivision Development Plan (SDP) pursuant to PMC 17.26.020 is subject to the side yard setback provisions in effect as of the effective date of the tentative tract approval in which the lot is located, provided that evidence submitted by the developer substantiates that the project met any one of the following criteria on the effective date of this Ordinance, and that said criterion is still met on the date of SDP submittal for each lot on which the exemption is sought.

1.    The lot is in a recorded tract in which the shape or dimension of the lot, or infrastructure or improvements have been constructed which would preclude adherence to PMC 17.41.090(D) without substantial expense on the part of the builder or developer. Such improvements could include, but are not limited to, utility stub-outs, individual lot grading, curb cuts or driveways. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    The lot is part of an approved tentative tract map within which at least one phase has been recorded and in which construction is underway, based on building plans or model homes with five (5) foot setbacks on each side; provided, however, that if the lot is in a phase of said map which is proposed for development with a different product type than those depicted in the originally approved building plans or model homes, then the lot shall adhere to all applicable provisions of this Ordinance.

17.11.120 License Approval Continued
The rights given by any permit, license or other approval under any ordinance repealed by this Ordinance, shall not be affected by such repeal, but such rights shall hereafter be exercised in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

17.11.130 Violation of Previous Ordinance
Any use established or conducted, or any building or improvement existing in violation of the Zoning Ordinance upon the effective date of this Ordinance, shall not be deemed to have acquired the status of a nonconforming use by reason of the adoption of this Ordinance, or any provision thereof. To the extent that such use, building or improvement was a violation of any ordinance, statute or law, or is a violation of this Ordinance, it shall be deemed a continuing violation.

17.11.140 Conviction of Crime Continued
Any conviction for a crime under any ordinance which is repealed by this Ordinance, which crime is continued as a public offense by this Ordinance, constitutes a conviction under this Ordinance for any purpose for which it constituted a conviction under such repealed ordinance.

17.11.150 Private Agreements
The provisions of this Zoning Ordinance are not intended to abrogate any easements, covenants, conditions and restrictions or other existing private agreements which are more restrictive than the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.

17.11.160 Interpretation of Language
In the event the Zoning Ordinance requires interpretation, the Planning Director may make the interpretation or may refer the matter to the Planning Commission for action. The Planning Commission shall be the final authority unless the matter is appealed to the City Council, pursuant to PMC 17.20.110.

17.11.170 Similar Use Determination
The Planning Director may authorize a use not listed within a zoning district if the Planning Director makes a determination that the use is similar to, and no more objectionable than other uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the zoning district, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120, Determination on Unlisted Uses.

17.11.180 Repeals
This Ordinance supersedes Ordinance No. 140, and all subsequent amendments thereto.

CHAPTER 17.12
DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY
17.12.010 Planning Commission
A.    Administration and Enforcement

The Planning Commission is hereby vested with the duty of administering and the power of enforcing this Ordinance.

B.    Powers and Duties

The Planning Commission shall have all of the powers and all of the duties conferred upon it by the Palmdale Municipal Code and this Ordinance, or by amendment of the Palmdale Municipal Code or this Ordinance, and no other.

17.12.020 Regulation of Power or Duty by the Commission
Whenever by ordinance an administrative power is granted to or an administrative duty imposed upon the Commission, the Commission may authorize or instruct the Director to exercise such administrative power, or perform such administrative duty. The Director shall exercise all such powers and perform all such duties as instructed by the Commission.

17.12.030 Assumption of Power or Duty of Public Officer
Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty imposed upon a public officer by this Ordinance, the power may be exercised, or the duty may be performed by the Commission, a deputy of the public officer, or a person authorized, pursuant to law or ordinance, by said officer, unless this Ordinance expressly provides otherwise.

CHAPTER 17.13
DESIGNATION OF ZONES AND DISTRICTS
17.13.010 List of Zones
The following zones are established in order to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance:

A-1    (Light Agriculture)

R-1    (Single Family Residential)

R-2    (Medium Residential)

R-3    (Multiple Residential)

C-1    (Light Commercial)

C-2    (Office Commercial)

C-3    (General Commercial)

C-4    (Commercial Center)

C-5    (Service Commercial)

C-D    (Downtown Commercial) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

M-1    (Light Industrial)

M-2    (General Industrial)

M-3    (Airport Industrial)

M-4    (Planned Industrial)

PF    (Public Facilities)

QR    (Quarry and Reclamation)

MX    (Mixed Use Transitional)

OR    (Open Space and Recreation)

17.13.020 Suffixes to Symbols
The following additional symbols are established in order to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance:

A.    Units per acre of net area

The letter “U” in combination with a numeral shall specify the density per net acre when used as a suffix to a zoning symbol. In no case shall a density figure be rounded up.

B.    Minimum lot size

1.    A numeral following the zone designation shall specify the minimum lot size permitted. Where this numeral is over one thousand (1,000), the designated lot size shall signify square feet. Where less than one thousand (1,000), the designated lot size shall signify acres.

2.    In all cases, the minimum lot size specified by the zoning designation shall mean net lot area, excluding dedications for right-of-way and easements.

C.    Notwithstanding any provision contained in this Section, in no case shall the density allowed on any lot exceed that permitted by the underlying General Plan designation for the property.

CHAPTER 17.14
MAPS
17.14.010 Zoning Maps
There is hereby adopted the “Official Zoning Map of the City of Palmdale” as attached hereto and set forth herein. All property within the City is hereby placed in such zones as indicated on said map, and no property shall be used except in accordance with the zoning designations on said map and the provisions of this Ordinance. Said map shall be maintained in the City offices by the City Clerk and duly certified by him or her. All amendments to the Official Zoning Map shall be noted thereon with the date of the amendment and references to the amending ordinance. Said Official Zoning Map is hereby made a part of this Ordinance and may be amended by reference thereto and to this Section.

17.14.020 Uncertainty of Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any zone shown upon the zoning map, or any part thereof, the following provisions shall apply:

A.    Where a boundary follows a public or private street or alley, the centerline of the street or alley shall be the boundary.

B.    In the case where a zone boundary divides a lot or parcel, the location of such boundaries, unless said boundary is indicated by dimensions or legal description, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on said zoning map.

C.    Where a public highway, street or alley, or any portion thereof is officially vacated or abandoned, the area comprising such vacated highway, street or alley shall acquire the zone classification of the property to which it reverts. Where the centerline of the vacated right-of-way forms a zoning boundary, the zoning boundary shall remain.

D.    Areas in dedicated highways, streets or alleys, aqueducts, flood control channels or similar water features, or in railroad rights-of-way, other than as are designated on the zoning map as being classified in one of the zones provided in this Ordinance, shall be deemed to be in Zone PF (Public Facilities), and in the case of highways, streets or alleys permitted to be used only for purposes lawfully allowed, and in the case of railroad rights-of-way be permitted to be used solely for the purpose of accommodating tracks, signals, other operative devices and the movement of rolling stock. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

CHAPTER 17.15
TERMINOLOGY
17.15.010 Gender
When consistent with the context, words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter genders.

17.15.020 May
“May” is permissive.

17.15.030 Oath
“Oath” includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, lent to the words “affirm” and “affirmed.”

17.15.040 Plural
When consistent with the context, words in plural include the singular.

17.15.050 Shall and Must
“Shall” and “must” are each mandatory.

17.15.060 Singular
When consistent with the context, words in the singular number shall include the plural.

17.15.070 Tenses
When consistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses; and words in the future tense include the present tense.

CHAPTER 17.16
DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of carrying out the intent of this Ordinance, the words, phrases and terms included herein shall be deemed to have the meaning ascribed to them in this Chapter.

17.16.010 (A)
Abandon shall mean to cease or suspend from developing or maintaining a building or use for a stated period of time.

Abandoned Activity shall mean a business or activity with no reported sales or activity for a period of at least one hundred eighty (180) days. Exceptions are temporary closures for repairs, alterations or other similar situations.

ABC License shall mean a license issued by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Abut or Abutting shall mean the same as Adjacent.

Access shall mean the place or way by which pedestrians and/or vehicles shall have safe, adequate and usable ingress and egress to a property or use as required by this Ordinance.

Accessory shall mean a use or structure customarily incidental to a building, part of a building or structure, which is subordinate to and the use of which is incidental to and detached from the main building, structure or use on the same lot. If a structure is attached to the main building by a common wall, or by a continuation of the roof of the main building, such structure shall be considered a part of the main building.

Accessory Dwelling Unit shall mean an attached or detached residential dwelling unit that is accessory to an existing legally established primary single-family residential dwelling, which provides complete independent living facilities for one (1) or more persons and provides permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

Accessory Equipment shall mean any equipment associated with the installation of a communication facility, including but not limited to cabling, generators, fans, air conditioning units, electrical panels, equipment shelters, equipment cabinets, equipment buildings, pedestals, meters, vaults, splice boxes, and surface location markers. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Action shall mean a decision made by the reviewing authority on a land use application, by a process as specified in this Ordinance.

Addition shall mean any construction which increases the size of a building, dwelling or facility in terms of site coverage, height, length, width, or gross floor area, occurring after completion of the original structure or facility.

Adjacent shall mean two (2) or more lots or parcels of land separated only by an alley, street, highway or recorded easement, or sharing a common boundary of at least one point.

Adult-Oriented Businesses are defined in PMC 17.92.050(B). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-4 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

Agent shall mean any person showing written verification that he or she is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner.

Agreement, Billboard Relocation shall mean an agreement entered into between the City and a billboard owner resulting in removal of an existing outdoor advertising sign structure, reconstruction of the outdoor advertising sign structure on its existing site or relocation of the outdoor advertising structure to another parcel of property within the City, subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Agriculture shall mean the cultivation of row, field or tree crops, floricultural specialties, or the raising of animals, on a large-scale basis, for commercial purposes.

Aircraft shall mean any device used, or designed for flight in the air, and capable of conveying persons or goods.

Airport shall mean any area of land or water which is used or intended to be used for the landing and taking off of aircraft regulated by the FAA and any appurtenant areas used or intended to be used for airport buildings or other airport facilities or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities located thereon.

Alcohol & Drug Free Residential Recovery Home non-licensed – See Sober Living Home. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Alcohol & Drug Treatment Facility means any premises, place or building that provides 24-hour residential non-medical services (as defined in the California Community Care Facilities Act) to seven or more persons, unrelated by blood, marriage or legal adoption, in exchange for monetary or non-monetary consideration, who are recovering from problems related to alcohol or drug misuse or abuse, and who need drug or alcohol recovery treatment or detoxification services. A license from the State of California is required and the facility must comply with the provisions of PMC 17.91.140 herein. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment shall mean any or all of the following: a bona fide restaurant, an Incidental Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment; an Incidental On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment; a Primary Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Primary On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, and Other Alcoholic Beverage Establishment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Existing Non-CUP shall mean an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment that was lawfully operating without a Conditional Use Permit on August 10, 2005. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Incidental shall mean Incidental Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments and Incidental On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Incidental Off-Sale shall mean those establishments that both: (1) sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises; and (2) utilize no more than the square footage provided in the table below for the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises.

Size of Outlet

Maximum square footage of gross floor area and shelf area for sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages.

0-100,000 gross square feet of total floor area

Up to 10% or 5,000 square feet, whichever is less.

Greater than 100,000 gross square feet of total floor area

Up to 5% or 7,500 square feet, whichever is less.

(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Incidental On-Sale shall mean those establishments that both: (1) sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; and (2) utilize ten (10%) percent or less of the gross floor areas for the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Without limitation, this definition includes a hotel that maintains only a Type 70 Alcoholic Beverage License, and banquet facilities. For purposes of this Chapter, a bona fide restaurant shall not be considered an Incidental On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Off-Sale shall mean Incidental Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments and Primary Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, On-Sale shall mean Incidental On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments and Primary On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Other shall mean those establishments that are authorized by State law to (1) sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; and/or (2) sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. For purposes of this Chapter, this definition includes a microbrewery (ABC Type 23) and a veteran’s club (ABC Type 52). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Primary shall mean Primary Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments and Primary On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Primary Off-Sale shall mean those establishments that both: (1) sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises; and (2) utilize more than ten (10%) percent of the gross floor area or the shelf area for the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. Without limitation, this definition includes a Liquor Store. For purposes of this Chapter, a Convenience Store that sells alcoholic beverages shall be considered a Primary Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment regardless of the amount of gross floor area or shelf area utilized for the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Primary On-Sale shall mean those establishments that both: (1) sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises; and (2) utilize more than ten (10%) percent of the gross floor area or shelf area for the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. Without limitation, this definition includes an eating establishment or restaurant that sells alcoholic beverages and does not qualify as a Bona Fide Restaurant and Incidental On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment. For purposes of this Chapter, if any sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is involved, the following uses shall be considered a Primary On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment regardless of the amount of gross floor area or shelf area utilized for the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises: Adult Cabaret; Bar or Night Club; Billiards and Pool Hall; and a bowling alley (except where alcohol is served within a bona fide restaurant). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, Over Intensification shall be determined by the Population Density Method or by the Retail Density Method at the discretion of the Planning Manager.

1.    Population Density Method

Over Intensification of Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments shall occur where the ratio of the resident population to the number of permitted Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments (as defined by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control) within the census tract or census division exceeds the ratio of population to Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments for the City.

Over Intensification of On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments shall occur where the ratio of the resident population to the number of permitted On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments (as defined by the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control) within the census tract or census division exceeds the ratio of population to On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments for the City.

2.    Retail Density Method

Over Intensification of Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments shall occur where the number of Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments within a radius of two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any location in question exceeds the average of the numbers of Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments drawn at random from the City’s commercially zoned areas.

Over Intensification of On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments shall occur where the number of On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments within a radius of two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of any location in question exceeds the average of the number of On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments within a radius of two thousand five hundred (2,500) feet of a sample of twenty (20) On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments drawn at random from the City’s commercially zoned areas. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Alcoholism or Drug Abuse Recovery or Treatment Facility means any premises, place, or building that provides 24-hour residential non-medical services to six or fewer adults who are recovering from problems related to alcohol, drug, or alcohol and drug misuse or abuse, and who need alcohol, drug, or alcohol and drug recovery treatment or detoxification services and is licensed by the state to provide such treatment or services. These facilities are treated as small residential care facilities and are not subject to the provisions of PMC 17.91.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Alcohol-Related Establishments shall mean those establishments which are required to obtain a State Alcoholic Beverage Control License type 20 (off-sale beer and wine), type 21 (off-sale general), type 40 (on-sale beer), type 41 (on-sale beer and wine eating place), type 42 (on-sale beer and wine, public premises), type 47 (on-sale general eating place), type 48 (on-sale general bar), type 52 (veteran club) or type 63 (beer and wine hospital), or comparable license type, and which sell or serve alcoholic beverages for on-site or off-site consumption either as a primary or accessory use. Bona fide restaurants, drug stores and food markets which allocate less than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area for alcohol sales, are not included within this definition. For definitions of other terms pertaining to alcohol-related establishments, see PMC 17.92.070. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

Alley shall mean any public thoroughfare, having a width of not more than thirty (30) feet, which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property.

Alteration shall mean any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a building or structure, or change in the appearance of any building or structure.

Alternate Section shall mean a method of delineating the required front yard area on single family residential lots, which allows the required building setback to be measured from back of sidewalk rather than from the public right-of-way. This method was utilized on certain subdivision maps within the City of Palmdale before 1988, and is no longer in use on new development.

Alternative Transportation shall mean the use of modes of transportation other than single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking, bicycling, or other modes approved by the Director. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Amendment shall mean a change in the wording, context or substance of this Ordinance, or a change in the zoning maps, which are part of this Ordinance when adopted by ordinance by the City Council in the manner prescribed by law.

Amusement Arcade shall mean any establishment, room or place where more than four (4) amusement machines are available for public use.

Amusement Machine shall mean any device, whether mechanical, electrical or electronic, or similar object, which by payment of a fee, or insertion of a coin or token, may be operated for the primary purpose of amusement. The term amusement machine does not include any device or object the primary purpose of which is to play music.

Animal Enclosure shall mean any pen, corral or fenced area intended for confinement of animals.

Animal Hospital shall mean a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment.

Animals, Domesticated Pets, shall mean any animal customarily kept as a household pet, not including wild or exotic animals.

Animals, Farm, shall mean any animal customarily raised for agricultural purposes, not including wild or exotic animals.

Animals, Wild or Exotic, shall mean any warm or cold-blooded animal not normally maintained in a dwelling unit with people, not considered domesticated within California or requiring a permit from the State of California Department of Fish and Game.

Antenna shall mean that part of a communication facility designed to radiate or receive radio frequency signals. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna, Amateur Radio shall mean any antenna that is used for the purpose of transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur radio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. The term Amateur Radio Antenna is interchangeable with the term Ham Radio Antenna. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna, Compact Horizontal shall mean a horizontal antenna the longest dimension (boom or element) of which does not exceed ten (10) feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna, Ground-mounted means mounted to a telecommunications tower. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna, Horizontal or Horizontal Array shall mean an antenna with horizontally oriented radiating element(s) and/or boom other than a compact horizontal antenna. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna, Nested Position shall mean the position in which a retractable antenna/antenna structure is fully retracted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna, Single Element Wire shall mean an antenna consisting of a single wire typically made of fourteen (14) or twelve (12) gauge copper clad wire attached and suspended between supports. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna Structure shall mean the supporting mast, pole or tower of one (1) or more antenna(s). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna Structure, Retractable shall mean an antenna structure that is designed to be adjusted in height in order to be extended while the antenna is in use, but lowered in a retracted position when the antenna is not in use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna, Vertical or Whip shall mean an antenna that extends vertically, directly up from its base or structural support. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna/Antenna Structure shall mean collectively the antenna and its supporting structure, if any. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antenna/Antenna Structure Height shall mean the distance from the highest point of the antenna/antenna structure to the natural grade at the point the structure touches, or, if extended, would touch the ground. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Antique or Collectible Store, shall mean a store which sells or consigns to sell items which are by their style, design or use commonly considered to be of another era or age, a collectible, or of heirloom quality. These items shall be in proper working order or restoreable to working condition. Secondhand or thrift items are not considered antiques. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010.)

Apartment shall mean a room or group of two (2) or more rooms within a building containing separate living facilities for four (4) or more families, which is constructed, designed, intended for or actually used by a single family for living and sleeping purposes for periods of thirty (30) consecutive days or longer.

Apartment Building shall mean a building, or a portion of a building, designed or used for occupancy by four (4) or more families, living independently of each other and containing four (4) or more dwelling units.

Applicable Development shall mean any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in PMC 17.101.030, Development Standards. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Applicant shall mean owner(s) or lessee(s) of property or their agent(s), or person(s) who have contracted to purchase property contingent upon their ability to acquire the necessary permits under this Ordinance, or the agent(s) of such persons.

Application shall mean the form and information submitted by an applicant, which is used by the City to determine whether to approve or deny permits or other entitlements for use.

Approval shall mean the action taken by the Reviewing Authority pursuant to this Ordinance to approve or conditionally approve an application for a land use entitlement and related permits.

Area as used in this Ordinance shall mean net area unless otherwise specified.

Area, Gross, shall mean that area of a lot or parcel of land inclusive of the following, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.81 PMC (Lot Area):

1.    Public alleys, highways or streets; or

2.    Proposed public facilities such as alleys, highways, streets or other necessary public sites when included within a proposed development project; or

3.    Other public or private easements where the owner of the property does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land.

Area, Net, shall mean that area of a lot or parcel of land exclusive of the following, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.81 PMC (Lot Area):

1.    Public alleys, highways or streets, except as provided in PMC 17.81.010; or

2.    Proposed public facilities such as alleys, highways, streets or other necessary public sites when included within a proposed development project; or

3.    Other public or private easements where the owner of the property does not have the right to use the entire surface of the land.

Arterial, Major, shall mean an arterial shown as such on the Circulation Map of the City of Palmdale General Plan.

Arterial, Regional, shall mean an arterial shown as such on the Circulation Map of the City of Palmdale General Plan.

Arterial, Secondary, shall mean an arterial shown as such on the Circulation Map of the City of Palmdale General Plan.

Assessor shall mean the Assessor of the County of Los Angeles.

Assisted Living Facility also known as a Large Residential Care Facility, shall mean a residential care facility as defined herein, licensed by the State of California to house seven or more individuals in accordance with the Community Care Facilities Act and which provides institutional housing and personal care services on a 24-hour basis to seven (7) or more adults who require some form of personal assistance due to a handicap or illness. The services provided by these facilities include on-site assistance with personal care such as housekeeping, bathing, meals, shopping, and transportation, the administering of medication, and other similar services that meet the personal needs of the residents, excluding on-site physicians. These facilities also provide congregate dining, living, social and recreational areas. An Assisted Living Facility must be licensed by the State as a Large Residential Care Facility and must comply with the requirements and provisions of PMC 17.91.110 herein. This term does not include senior apartments, nursing homes, convalescent homes, substance abuse recovery facilities, alcohol and drug residential recovery homes, sober living homes, alcohol and drug treatment facilities, transitional housing, or hospitals. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Attached shall mean any structure that has an interior wall or roof in common with another structure.

Auction sales shall mean a sale open to the public where property or goods are sold to the highest bidder. Auction sales shall not include one-time bankruptcy or asset liquidation auctions. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010.)

Automobile Dismantling Yard shall mean the same as Wrecking Yard. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Automobile Impound Yard shall mean facilities designated or maintained by a governmental agency for the temporary storage of vehicles legally removed or impounded by a peace officer from public or private property as prescribed by law.

Automobile Repair, General shall mean establishments engaged in general automotive repair, including but not limited to regular maintenance services, engine repair, transmission repair, radiator repair, exhaust system repair, brake relining, and wheel alignment.

Automobile Repair, Heavy shall mean establishments engaged in major auto repair, including but not limited to body and fender repair, body painting, reupholstery, and engine replacement.

Automobile Repair, Light shall mean establishments engaged in minor auto repair, including but not limited to lubrication, engine tuning, smog check stations, minor tire repair, and minor parts replacement.

Automobile Sales Lot shall mean an open area used for display, sale and/or rental of new or used automobiles

Automobile Service Station shall mean an establishment primarily engaged in selling gasoline and other automotive fuels, lubricating oils and performing minor repair work, and which does not fall within the definition of a Convenience Store as defined in PMC 17.16.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

Awning shall mean a shelter projecting from and supported by an exterior wall of a building and constructed of nonridged materials on a supporting framework.

17.16.020 (B)
Banquet Facility shall mean an establishment that provides a gathering place restricted to guests attending a particular event and that does not impose an admission fee on such persons. Such facilities typically include dance floors and live entertainment for events such as weddings and celebrations. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Bar or Night Club shall mean an establishment that sells alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and that also does any of the following:

1.    Promotes the sale of alcoholic beverages through manufacturer displays, discounted prices or special events intended to encourage alcoholic beverage consumption independent of food consumption;

2.    Provides a patron dancing area on the premises that exceeds thirty (30%) percent of the floor area; or

3.    Provides food service as an accessory use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Basement shall mean any floor level (story) which is partly or completely below grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement where any portion of a basement has more than one-half (1/2) of its height above grade.

Bed and Breakfast shall mean a transient lodging establishment, typically limited to twenty (20) or less rooms with a common dining area, primarily engaged in providing overnight or otherwise temporary lodging for the general public, which is inhabited as a primary residence by the owners or operators, and which may provide meals to the extent permitted by law.

Berm shall mean a mound or embankment of earth.

BIA refers to the Building Industry Association, Antelope Valley Chapter.

Billiards and Pool Hall shall mean an establishment that provides billiard tables for entertainment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Biosolid Material shall have the same meaning as Sludge. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1 adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.)

Boarding House means the rental of a residence/dwelling, other than a hotel or motel, wherein a room or rooms, with or without individual or group cooking facilities, are occupied by or rented to five or more individuals under separate rental agreements or leases, either written or oral, or implied, with an owner; an owner’s agent, representative or manager; a tenant; resident; or occupant; whether or not an owner, an owner’s agent, representative or manager, or family thereof is in residence. For example, a residence occupied by the owner and four or more roommates, each separately obligated to pay rent to the owner, constitutes a boarding house and must comply with the zoning and regulations for boarding houses. The definition does not include Assisted Living Facilities, licensed Residential Care Facilities, Sober Living Homes established in accordance with PMC 17.91.130, licensed Alcohol & Drug Treatment Facilities established in accordance with PMC 17.91.140 or Alcoholism or Drug Abuse Recovery or Treatment Facilities or employee housing for six or fewer persons. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

Body Piercing shall mean the creation of an opening in the body of a human being for the purpose of inserting jewelry or other decoration, including, but not limited to, the piercing of a lip, tongue, nose, or eyebrow. “Body piercing” does not include the piercing of an ear with a disposable single-use, presterilized stud or clasp or solid needle that is applied using a mechanical device to force the needle or stud through the ear. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Bona Fide Restaurant shall mean a place which is regularly and in a bona fide manner used and kept open for the serving of meals to guests for compensation and which has suitable kitchen facilities connected therewith, containing conveniences for cooking an assortment of foods which may be required for ordinary meals, the kitchen of which must be kept in a sanitary condition with the proper amount of refrigeration for keeping of food on said premises and must comply with all the regulations of the local department of health. For purposes of this Chapter, a restaurant will be considered a Bona Fide Restaurant if the following criteria are satisfied:

1.    A Bona Fide Restaurant shall have an on-site operational kitchen from which a substantial portion of the menu items are prepared.

2.    A Bona Fide Restaurant shall keep its kitchen open and operational and shall provide food service until one-half (1/2) hour before the establishment closes.

3.    No more than ten (10%) percent of the gross floor area is used for the sale, display and storage of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises.

4.    Alcoholic beverages are sold only for consumption on the Bona Fide Restaurant premises.

5.    The primary use is sit-down dining.

6.    Any take-out food service is incidental to the primary use.

7.    If a dance floor is provided, less than thirty (30%) percent of the floor area is utilized for dancing.

8.    The establishment does not conduct a Bar or Nightclub on the premises.

9.    Service is not provided at counters or tables where patrons are standing.

10.    Alcoholic beverages are not served in conjunction with any recreational activity, game of skill or chance, athletic event or adult entertainment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Borrow Pit shall mean the same as Quarry.

Break in Service shall mean the closure of an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Buildable Area shall mean the portion of the lot remaining after deducting all required setbacks and easements from the gross area of the lot.

Building shall mean any structure for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal, article or chattel and when any portion thereof is completely separated from every other portion thereof by a division wall or fire wall, without openings, each such portion shall be a separate building. A building shall include any structure requiring a building permit. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Building, Accessory. See Accessory.

Building Coverage shall mean the percent of lot area which may be covered by all buildings or roofed structures. This includes all accessory buildings or structures, balconies, covered patios, covered entryways and any similar structures that reduce the amount of lot area open to the sky.

Building Distance, Minimum, shall mean the shortest distance measured from any point between buildings, exclusive of any permitted projections which are regulated separately.

Building Envelopes, Horizontal and Vertical shall mean the maximum width and height of a structure based on minimum setback requirements and maximum building height limitations for the zone within which the project is located. These envelopes may be utilized to evaluate visual impacts when specific architectural plans are not provided for subdivision review. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Building Facade shall mean that portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending vertically from grade to top of a parapet wall or eaves, and horizontally across the entire width of the building elevation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Building Frontage shall mean the length of a building wall as measured continuously in one (1) plane for the entire length of the subject building, excluding eaves or roof overhangs. Where a building is visible from more than one (1) street or parking area the building frontage of the main public entry shall be designated as the primary building frontage with all other such frontages designated as secondary. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Building Height shall mean the vertical distance measured from the average level of the highest and lowest point of that portion of the lot covered by the building to a point midway between the highest and lowest point on the roof; provided that chimneys, spires, towers, tanks and similar projections shall not be included in the height.

Building, Principal, shall mean one (1) or more buildings on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted.

Building Setback Line shall mean that line parallel to the street right-of-way line at a distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning district in which the lot is located.

Building Site shall mean the ground area of:

1.    All or a portion of a lot or parcel of land, or

2.    All or a portion of two (2) or more lots or parcels of land, when used in combination for a building or group of buildings, together with all yards and open spaces required by this Chapter.

Business Office shall mean an office which has as its main function the arrangement of business transactions, the holding of sales meetings and administrative conferences, the receiving of client payments, and the keeping of records and accounts pertaining to a business.

Business or Commerce shall mean the purchase, sale or other transaction involving the handling or disposition of any article, substance or commodity or service for profit or livelihood, and shall include office buildings, offices, recreational or amusement enterprises.

Business or Trade Association shall mean a not-for-profit and tax-exempt voluntary membership organization duly qualified as such by the United States Internal Revenue Service and the California Tax Franchise Board that represents a group of companies having a business or trade in common. Activities include promoting business for the industry, encouraging ethical practices in the industry, setting of industry standards, conducting research, cooperating with other organizations, and holding conventions. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Buspool shall mean a vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route, according to a fixed schedule. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.16.030 (C)
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) shall mean the statute found in Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. that requires all jurisdictions in the State of California to evaluate the extent of environmental degradation posed by proposed development. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Care Facility, Residential. See Residential Care Facility and Assisted Living Facility. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Caretaker’s Unit shall mean a dwelling unit accessory to a principal use on a site and intended for occupancy on the same site by a caretaker, security guard, servant, or similar position requiring residence on the site, exclusive of a hotel/motel manager’s unit.

Carpool shall mean a vehicle carrying two (2) to six (6) persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Carport shall mean a permanent roofed structure not completely enclosed, used or intended to be used for vehicle parking.

Car Washes, Automated shall mean a mechanized facility where vehicles move along self-propelled wash racks through a series of stages such as rinsing, washing and drying. Customers do not provide any labor and typically stay inside the car while the vehicle is being washed. Automated car washes are typically used in conjunction with gas stations. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

Car Washes, Express shall mean a stand alone establishment where vehicles move along self-propelled wash racks through a series of stages that include washing, rinsing, and mechanical drying. Customers stay inside the vehicle through the entire wash operation, however, the establishment provides facilities that allow for customers to vacuum the interior of their own vehicle prior to leaving the car wash facility. The establishment also provides staff for facility maintenance and to assist customers with their purchase options and pre-wash operations. Express car wash facilities are stand alone primary uses and not an accessory use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-001, adopted by City Council May 2, 2012.)

Car Washes, Full Service shall mean an establishment where cars are washed by hand and/or through a mechanized facility where vehicles move along self-propelled wash racks. Customers typically leave their vehicles before it is washed and provides no labor. Towel drying services are provided. Detailing services such as cleaning of upholstery and floor mats, vacuuming, waxing, buffing, and engine steam cleaning may be offered. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

Car Washes, Self Service shall mean a facility typically consisting of stalls with coin operated water hoses and other cleaning devices, and where the customer provides the labor of washing and cleaning their own vehicle. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

Cellar shall mean the same as Basement.

Cellular shall mean an analog or digital wireless telecommunications technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Cemetery shall mean land used or intended to be used for the burial or interment of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes. Cemetery includes columbaria, crematories and mausoleums, and may include chapels when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery.

Certificate of Occupancy shall mean a document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure, building or development conforms with all the applicable municipal codes, ordinances and conditions of approval.

Charitable Organization shall mean an organization, association, corporation, or other legal entity duly qualified for tax-exempt status by the United States Internal Revenue Service and the California Tax Franchise Board. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Churches See Religious Assembly Use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

City shall mean the City of Palmdale, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the City of Palmdale, California, and such territory outside of the City of Palmdale, California, over which the City of Palmdale, California, has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision.

City Council shall mean the City Council of the City of Palmdale. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Civic Associations See Professional Membership Organization. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Club, Country, shall mean a private club organized and operated for social purposes and possessing outdoor recreational facilities, such as golf courses, tennis courts or polo grounds.

Clubhouse shall mean any building used by an association of persons, organized for some common purpose, but not including a group organized solely or primarily to render service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.

Club (fraternal) or lodge shall mean a private or not-for-profit tax exempt organization providing meeting, recreational, or social facilities restricted to enrolled members and their guests and organized for a purpose to pursue common goals, activities or interests, usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees or dues, regular meetings and a constitution or by-laws. A building or area used by such a group shall be considered a club. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Code shall mean a code adopted by Ordinance of the City of Palmdale.

Co-located Small Wind Energy System (CSWES) shall mean a wind energy conversion system that is located on a pole with site lighting below the turbine, which has a rated capacity of eight (8) kW or less. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Co-located Wind Energy System Height shall mean the vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator blade when it is at its highest point. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Collocation shall mean the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communication purposes. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Commission shall mean the Planning Commission of the City of Palmdale.

Communication Facility, Facility or Facilities or Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall mean any facility or facilities that transmits and/or receives electromagnetic waves. It includes, but is not limited to, antennas and/or other types of equipment for the transmission or receipt of such signals, telecommunications towers or similar structures supporting such equipment, related accessory equipment, equipment buildings, parking areas, and other accessory development. The term “communication facility” does not apply to the following:

1.    Government-owned and government-operated telecommunications facilities.

2.    Emergency medical care provider-owned and emergency medical care provider-operated telecommunications facilities.

3.    Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature.

4.    Any wireless telecommunications facilities exempted from this Code by Federal law or State law. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Major Communication Facility shall mean a communication facility that, due to size, scale, location, or other characteristics, is likely to have some detectable impact on adjacent uses or on the environment, including aesthetic or visual impacts, or that may have a cumulative impact City-wide or on the regional environment due to the number of sites included or in combination with other projects. This definition includes freestanding antenna structures, including monopoles and towers, or the placement of a network of wireless communication facilities throughout an area onto existing structures, or other facilities which, as determined by the Planning Director, warrant this classification. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

Minor Communication Facility shall mean a communication facility which by its size, scale, location, design, or combination of such measures, allows the facility to be aesthetically integrated into the surrounding environment so as not to be readily seen or recognized as a communication facility and is not likely to have some detectable impact on adjacent uses or on the environment. Such a facility is commonly referred to as a “Stealth Facility”. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

Composting Facility shall mean a facility which causes, under controlled conditions, the biological degradation of yard waste materials, including leaves, grass clippings, garden waste, brush and branches and Christmas trees. The term “composting facility” shall not include compost bins or piles on developed residential property for the exclusive use of the residents of said property. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.)

Conditional Use Permit shall mean a discretionary entitlement which may be granted under the provisions of this Ordinance which when granted authorizes a specific use to be made of a specific property, subject to compliance with conditions of approval imposed on the entitlement.

Condominium shall mean a development of an undivided interest in common for a portion of a parcel coupled with a separate interest in space in a residential or commercial building on the parcel.

Conference and meeting facilities shall mean a building or group of buildings in which space can be leased by private groups or the public at large for private or public live meetings, videoconferencing or teleconferencing and where ancillary retail sales and food sales may take place but the primary use of the site is for the lease of space for gatherings. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Congregate Meal Facility shall mean a facility that provides scheduled meals on a daily basis for families or individuals who are homeless or low income. This term does not include homeless shelters or transitional housing. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Construction shall mean any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action conducted on public or private property.

Construction Commencement shall mean the start of construction of substantial on-and-off-site and structural improvements after a building permit or grading permit has been issued.

Consultant shall mean an individual or an entity, or any individual employed by that entity, selected by the City to assist in the facility application review process. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Contiguous shall mean the same as Adjacent.

Contour Grading shall mean a grading technique which utilizes curvilinear, horizontal, and vertical undulations in order to simulate the characteristics of natural topography.

Convalescent Facility shall mean a use which provides in-patient services for persons requiring regular medical attention or for aged or infirm persons who are unable to care for themselves, excluding surgical or emergency medical services.

Convenience Store shall mean a retail establishment which contains less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of gross floor area utilized in whole or in part for the retail sale of a variety of frequently needed personal convenience items such as groceries, delicatessen items, staples, dairy products, pre-packaged foods, sundry items and/or alcoholic beverages, and which may include the sale of automotive gasoline and related products. This definition is typified by the quick-sale retail store of which there are several national and many regional chains. This definition does not include specialty food stores such as meat markets, health food stores, or ethnic food stores carrying solely those items which are the customary fare of a particular culture without other non-ethnic items, or a full service food market containing less than five thousand 5,000 square feet of gross floor area wherein at least ten (10) percent of the gross floor area is utilized for the sale of fresh meat, seafood, and fresh produce.

Convents and monasteries shall mean a religious community of friars, monks, or nuns or a group of buildings occupied by such a community. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Corporate Massage means any massage of the neck, arms, shoulders and back area above the waist where the client is fully clothed and in a sitting position, where the massage is (i) administered by a licensed and permitted technician; (ii) approved as an accessory use in a permitted location as authorized by PMC 17.92.140; and (iii) is limited to the upper body and conducted without the uses of supplementary aids, such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in this practice. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

Cottage Food Operation. An enterprise located within a residential unit where the cottage food operator resides and where non-potentially hazardous food products are prepared or packaged for direct and/or indirect sale to consumers, pursuant to Section 113758 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-002, adopted by City Council May 1, 2013.)

Counseling Shall mean the application of mental health, psychological, or human development principles, through cognitive, affective, behavioral or systemic intervention strategies, that address wellness, personal growth, or career development as well as pathology. Counseling and mental health services are activities that focus on cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and social needs of individuals, groups, and families. They are designed to prevent and address problems, facilitate positive learning and behavior, and enhance healthy development. Counseling includes individual counseling, small group counseling, classroom guidance, prevention, and crisis response. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Council shall mean the City Council of the City of Palmdale, California. “All its members” or “all councilmembers” means the total number of councilmembers holding office.

County shall mean the County of Los Angeles.

Court shall mean an open, unoccupied space other than a yard, unobstructed from ground to sky, bounded on two (2) or more sides by the walls of a building. An inner court is a court entirely enclosed within the exterior walls of a building. All other courts are outer courts.

COW shall mean a “cell on wheels,” which is a communication facility temporarily rolled in or temporarily installed. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Cross Lot Drainage shall mean a drainage system that conveys site run-off towards the rear or side lot line where it is captured in a drainage channel, pipe, or similar structure and directed across lot lines to an approved point of discharge, or detention or retention.

Cultural heritage area Shall mean an area, building or group of buildings using local history as a framework for education and promotion and may incorporate traditional parks, historic sites, public buildings and restored or replicated buildings or neighborhoods. The use may follow a central theme, such as “natural environment,” “local history” or “colonial times”. These cultural attributes are interpreted and promoted and may include programs such as ethnic festivals, theater, interactive exhibits, and walking tours. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Custom Home shall mean a detached single-family dwelling which is individually designed and constructed to fit the unique requirements of both the site and the intended owner.

Custom Home Subdivision shall mean the division of land into lots which are improved but not developed, intended for sale to purchasers who thereafter will construct custom homes on an individual basis, without development sequencing or phasing by a single builder.

17.16.040 (D)
Day Care, Commercial, shall mean a facility which is licensed and utilized to provide daily non-medical care and supervision to thirteen (13) or more children under eighteen (18) years of age, or to any number of adults with physical or mental health conditions or disabilities who require non-medical supervision, for periods of less than 24-hours per day. This term includes nursery schools and preschools. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Day Care, Family, shall mean a single-family residential facility, occupied by the operator, which is licensed and utilized for the purpose of providing daily non-medical care and supervision to fourteen (14) or fewer children under eighteen (18) years of age. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

Day Care, Large Family, shall mean a Family Day Care facility in which seven (7) to twelve (12) children under the age of eighteen (18) are cared for, plus up to two (2) additional school age children in accordance with State Department of Social Services regulations. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

Day Care, Small Family, shall mean a Family Day Care facility in which one (1) to six (6) children under the age of eighteen (18) are cared for, plus up to two (2) additional school age children in accordance with State Department of Social Services regulations. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

Daylight Grading shall mean a grading technique which designates an existing natural contour as the transition line between a manufactured pad for development and an adjacent natural slope face and which eliminates the need for fill slopes along the exposed edges of the development pad.

Days shall always be consecutive calendar days unless otherwise stated.

Decision, Discretionary, shall mean decisions that require the exercise of judgment, deliberation, or decision on the part of the reviewing authority in the process of approving or disapproving a particular activity, as distinguished from ministerial decisions in which the reviewing authority’s determination is limited to finding whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, ordinances, or regulations.

Decision, Ministerial, shall mean decisions that are approved by a reviewing authority based upon a given set of facts in a prescribed manner in obedience to the mandate of legal authority.

Dedication shall mean the donation to a public agency of land or the right to utilize land, for a specific public use.

Density shall mean the number of dwelling units per gross acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses.

Density Bonus shall mean an increase above the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the General Plan (the base density). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Density Transfer shall mean an increase in density on one portion of a property to a level that may exceed the underlying General Plan designation of that portion of the property while maintaining a gross density over the entire property that is consistent with the underlying General Plan designation.

Department shall mean the City of Palmdale Planning Department, unless otherwise stated.

Design shall include the planning and engineering of the following: street alignments, grades and widths; drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignment and grades thereof; location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; fire roads and fire breaks; lot size and configuration; traffic access; grading; land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes; location and size of all proposed buildings and structures; and any other such specific physical improvements.

Detached shall mean any building or structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with any other building or structure.

Developer shall mean the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter as determined by the property owner. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Development shall mean the placement or erection of any solid material or structure; discharge or disposal of any dredged material or any gaseous liquid, solid or thermal waste; grading, removing, dredging, mining or extraction of any soil or materials; change in the density or intensity of use of land, including, but not limited to, subdivision pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act (commencing with Section 66410 of the Government Code), and any other division of land, including lot splits, except where the land division is brought about in connection with the purchase of such land by a public agency for public recreational use; change in the intensity of use of water, or of access thereto; construction, reconstruction, demolition, or alteration of the size of any structure including any facility of any private, public or municipal utility; and the removal of any major vegetation. As used in this Ordinance, “structure” includes but is not limited to any building, road, pipe, flume, conduit, siphon, aqueduct, telephone line, and electrical power transmission and distribution line. A “project,” as defined in Government Code Section 65931, is included with this definition.

Development Proposal shall mean an application for approval of a specific plan, a subdivision, conditional use permit, tentative tract map, parcel map or any other development permit or entitlement application which has been filed with and is pending for consideration by the City.

Director shall mean the Director of Economic and Community Development, or his or her designee, unless the entire application is for a ministerial wireless telecommunications facility permit, in which case “Director” means the Director of Public Works, or his or her designee, in reference to Chapter 17.95 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Discontinue (Discontinuance) shall mean the cessation or removal of a use for a specified period of time or permanently.

District, Zone. See Zone.

Dormitory shall mean a structure intended principally for sleeping accommodations, and where no individual kitchen facilities are provided, where such structure is related to an educational or public institution or is maintained and operated by a recognized non-profit welfare organization.

Drainage Facilities shall mean improvements constructed for the storage or conveyance of storm runoff in drainage channels, including channels, culverts, ponds, storm drains, drop-inlets, outfalls, basins, pumps, gutter inlets, manholes, and conduits.

Driveway shall mean a permanently surfaced area providing direct access for vehicles between a street and a permitted off-street parking or loading area.

Duplex shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by two (2) families and containing two (2) dwelling units.

Dwelling shall mean a structure or portion thereof designed for residential occupancy, not including hotels or motels.

Dwelling, Multiple, shall mean a building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy by two (2) or more families, living independently of each other and containing two (2) or more dwelling units.

Dwelling, Primary, shall mean the principal single-family dwelling unit located on a lot where a second or dependent dwelling unit is existing or proposed.

Dwelling, Single Family, shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one (1) family and containing one (1) dwelling unit.

Dwelling, Three Family (Triplex), shall mean a building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by three (3) families and containing three (3) dwelling units.

Dwelling Unit shall mean one (1) or more rooms in a building or portion thereof, designed, intended to be used or used for occupancy by one (1) family for living and sleeping quarters, and containing only one (1) kitchen, not including hotels or motels.

17.16.050 (E)
Easement shall mean the grant of one or more property rights by the property owner for use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.

Eave shall mean the projecting lower edge of a roof overhanging the wall of a building.

Educational Services shall mean establishments that provide instruction and training in a wide variety of subjects. Specialized establishments, such as schools, colleges, universities, and training centers, provide this instruction and training. These establishments may be privately owned and operated for profit or not for profit, or they may be publicly owned and operated. They may also offer food and accommodation services to their students. Educational services are usually delivered by teachers or instructors that explain, tell, demonstrate, supervise, and direct learning. Instruction is imparted in diverse settings, such as educational institutions, the workplace, or the home through correspondence, television, or other means. It can be adapted to the particular needs of the students, for example sign language can replace verbal language for teaching students with hearing impairments. All industries in the sector share this commonality of process, namely, labor inputs of instructors with the requisite subject matter expertise and teaching ability. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Efficiency Apartment shall mean a dwelling unit that combines kitchen, living and sleeping facilities into one (1) room in an apartment or multiple dwelling.

Electric Distribution Substation shall mean an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the distribution of electric power where electric energy is received at a sub- transmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage for distribution for general consumer use.

Elevation shall mean:

1.    A vertical distance above or below a fixed reference level; or

2.    A flat scale drawing of the front, rear or side of a building or structure.

Emergency shall mean a sudden, unexpected occurrence demanding immediate action to prevent or mitigate loss of or damage to life, health, property or public services.

Employee Parking Area shall mean the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Enclosed shall mean a covered space fully surrounded by walls, including windows, doors, and similar openings or architectural features.

Engineer, City shall mean the City Engineer of the City of Palmdale.

Entertainment, Live, shall mean any act, play, revue, pantomime, scene, dance act, musical performance, performance art, or song and dance act, or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or more persons whether or not they are compensated for the performance.

Exotic Animal shall mean any warm or cold-blooded animal not normally maintained in a dwelling unit with people, not considered domesticated within California, or requiring a permit from the State of California Department of Fish and Game.

Explosives shall mean any explosive substance, having a power equal to or greater than that of ordinary black powder, including but not limited to blasting caps, detonating, fulminating or electric caps, gunpowder and dynamite, but shall not include fixed ammunition for small arms.

Extraction shall mean the removal from the earth of oil, water, gas, gravel, mineral or geothermal resources by drilling, pumping or other means, whether for exploration or production purposes.

17.16.060 (F)
Fair Market Value shall mean the amount to be determined pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 5412. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Family Entertainment Center shall mean an establishment engaged in providing a range of entertainment activities to a variety of age groups including children. Such activities may include but not be limited to batting cages, go-cart tracks, miniature golf courses, play areas, amusement machines and limited food service, provided that any facility having more than four (4) amusement machines shall also be classified as an Amusement Arcade.

Farmer’s Market shall mean any location or activity where a variety of agricultural products, including but not limited to fruits, vegetables, meats, nuts and flowers, are offered for sale to the general public by farmers and produce growers who are certified by a farmer’s market association, and is limited to no more than two (2) days of operation in a one (1) week period. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Feasible means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, legal, social, and technological factors. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Fence shall mean an artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.

Fence, Open, shall mean a fence that permits at least fifty (50) percent open visibility through the fence.

Fill shall mean any material or substance which is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled or transported or moved to a new location and the conditions resulting therefrom. Fill also includes pilings placed for the purpose of erecting structures thereon when located in a submerged area. Examples of fill material include, but are not limited to, earth, excavated or dredged materials, sand, gravel, rock, riprap, and concrete.

Flag shall mean a piece of fabric, plastic or other flexible material that is designed to hang from a pole, flex in the wind, and be used to display a symbol of a nation, government entity, religious entity or other organization, or be used to signal or attract attention. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Floodplain shall mean the relatively flat areas of low lands adjoining, and including, the channel of a river, stream, water course, bay or other body of water which is subject to inundation by the flood water of a one hundred (100) year frequency flood as identified on maps provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).

Floor Area, Habitable, shall mean the total horizontal area of all the floors of a building measured from the exterior surface of the outside walls including all floors below ground level but exclusive of vent shafts, courts and garages.

Floor Area Ratio (FAR) shall mean the numerical value obtained through dividing the floor area of a building or buildings, excluding below grade floor area, by the total area of the lot or parcel of land on which such building or buildings are located.

Freeway shall mean a highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California.

Frontage shall mean that side or sides of a lot abutting a street.

Front Wall shall mean the nearest wall of a structure to the street upon which the structure faces, excluding cornices, canopies, eaves and any other architectural embellishments.

17.16.070 (G)
Gable shall mean the vertical triangular end of a building from cornice or eaves to ridge.

Garage, Private, shall mean an accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building, designed and used primarily for the shelter or storage of vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building.

Garage, Public, shall mean a building other than a private garage used for the parking and storage of vehicles that is available to the general public.

Garage Sale shall mean the sale from the residence or residential lot of a vendor of his personal property which has been used in his home and which personal property was not purchased, acquired, or solicited by the vendor for the purpose of resale. A yard or patio sale is included within the definition of garage sale.

Gas Station shall mean an establishment primarily engaged in the sale of gasoline and oil only. A gas station may have employees on site, or be unmanned and activated by cards or codes. No repair work (even minor repair) shall be conducted on site. See Automobile Service Station or Convenience Store for other similar uses. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

General Plan shall mean the comprehensive, long-term General Plan for the physical development of the City of Palmdale, as adopted by the City Council and as hereafter amended.

Glare shall mean the effect produced by brightness sufficient to cause annoyance, discomfort, or loss in visual performance and ability.

Government Code shall mean the State of California Government Code.

Grade shall mean the vertical location of the ground surface.

Grade, Finished, shall mean the final grade of the site which conforms to approval plans.

Grade, Natural, shall mean the elevation of the ground surface in its natural state, before manmade alterations.

Gradient shall mean the rate of vertical change of a ground surface expressed as a percentage figure and determined by dividing the vertical distance by the horizontal distance. (Also see Slope and Slope Steepness.)

Grading shall mean any excavation, filling, or movement of earth material by mechanical means, including but not limited to rock processing, dredging, blasting, bulldozing, and digging.

Grading, Mass, shall mean a grading technique in which all lots, building pads and streets are graded over the entire site area resulting in the disruption of the majority of the on-site natural grade and vegetation, and often resulting in, but not required to result in, a successive pad/terrace configuration.

Gross Leasable Area (GLA) shall mean the total floor area designed for tenant occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any; expressed in square feet and measured from the center line of joint partitions and from outside wall faces.

Guest House shall mean living quarters located within an accessory building located on the same premises with a main building and occupied solely by members of the family, temporary guests or persons regularly employed on the premises. Such quarters shall have no kitchen and shall not be rented or otherwise used as a separate dwelling unit.

17.16.080 (H)
Habitable Structure. A structure that is suitable for human occupancy for purposes of employment, habitation or other purpose.

Hardscape shall mean any inorganic decorative landscape materials, including but not limited to, stones, boulders, cobbles, pavers, decorative concrete and/or mulch, incorporated into an overall landscape design. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

Hazardous Material shall mean a material that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics poses a significant hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the work place or the environment, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25501(j). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste shall mean a waste or combination of wastes that poses a threat to human health or to the environment, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25117, or that is defined as a hazardous waste on the basis of criteria and guidelines developed pursuant to California State Health and Safety Code Section 25141. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Acutely shall mean any hazardous waste classified as acutely hazardous by the State Department of Health Services as based on California State Health and Safety Code Section 25110.02. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Applicant shall mean the individual or entity submitting an application for a hazardous waste facility to the City. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Auto Shredder (Metal Shredder Waste) shall mean the shredding of automobiles and major household appliances in a process where materials are ground into fist-size pieces resulting in a mixture of ferrous metal, nonferrous metal and shredder waste called automotive shredder residue or automobile shredder residue or auto shredder residue (ASR). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Auto Shredder Residue (Metal Shredder Residue) shall mean the portion of the metal shredder aggregate that remains after ferrous metals and nonferrous metals have been separated, and before chemical stabilization occurs. Also known as: metal shredder waste, auto shredder waste, shredder residue, fluff, auto shredder fluff, recycling residue, and chemically treated metal shredder residue. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Extremely shall mean any hazardous waste, or combination of wastes, that upon human exposure poses a substantial risk of death, disabling personal injury or serious illness, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25115. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Facility shall mean a hazardous waste facility, including all contiguous land and structures used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal, or recycling of hazardous waste as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25117.1. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Facility Agreement shall mean a binding legal document serving as an attachment to the Conditional Use Permit approved for a facility, which may be attached as a condition to the Conditional Use Permit, and which includes the terms, provisions, and conditions necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare, to protect the environment of the City, and to provide special benefits and remuneration to the City for the local costs associated with the operation of a facility. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Infectious shall mean any of the wastes listed in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25117.5. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Land Use Decision shall mean a discretionary decision of the City Council, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(e). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Off-Site Facility shall mean a facility which provides treatment, storage or disposal service to producers of hazardous waste other than those located at the site of the off-site facility, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(m). Generally, any facility which serves more than one producer of hazardous waste is an off-site facility. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, On-Site Facility shall mean a facility which is located on the site of a producer of hazardous waste and that is used only by that producer, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25117.12. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Processed shall mean any activity which alters the chemical or physical properties, or composition of a hazardous waste or material. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Recycling Facility shall mean a facility that reclaims hazardous wastes for reuse. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Residual Repository shall mean a land disposal facility that accepts only the solid residues resulting from the treatment of hazardous wastes in accordance with standards established pursuant to California State Health and Safety Code Section 25179.6, or that accepts hazardous organic waste that is stabilized, solidified or encapsulated. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste, Storage Facility shall mean a facility which may legally store hazardous waste for specified time periods, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25123.3(a), (b) and (d). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste Facility shall mean an on-site or off-site hazardous waste facility as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25117.1. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste 30 Year Post-Closure Period shall mean the thirty (30) year period, starting with the certification of the closure of the hazardous waste facility by the appropriate State and Federal regulatory agencies, during which the facility owner must continue to maintain and monitor the hazardous waste facility site in compliance with the post-closure plan required by California State Health and Safety Code Section 25246. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste Transfer Station shall mean an off-site facility designed for the handling and storage of hazardous waste in order to facilitate transportation of the waste, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25123.3(c). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hazardous Waste Treatment Facility shall mean a hazardous waste facility that uses processes designed to alter the physical, chemical or biological character or composition of a hazardous waste, as set forth in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25123.5, except that the definition used in this Chapter excludes thermal treatment combustion processes. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Health Club shall mean an establishment providing exercise and other health fitness conditioning, including gymnasiums, aerobic dance and exercise classes, reducing salons, spas, and similar fitness facilities.

Health Department shall mean the County of Los Angeles Department of Health Services/Public Programs.

Health Facilities, Mobile shall mean mobile facilities providing health services, such as bloodmobiles; health, hearing, or vision screening; and health fairs.

Height. See Building Height.

Heliport shall mean a landing area used by helicopters, including all necessary passenger and cargo facilities, maintenance and overhaul, fueling, service, storage, tie-down areas, hangers, and other necessary buildings and open spaces.

Helistop shall mean any helicopter landing area used, designed or intended to be used for the receiving or discharging of passengers and cargo but shall not include other appurtenant facilities permitted at a heliport other than a shelter for passengers.

High Crime Areas shall mean a crime-reporting district that has more than one hundred twenty (120%) percent of the average crimes reported. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Hillside Area shall mean any property containing slope areas of ten (10) percent or greater.

Homeless Shelter shall mean a facility that provides nightly sleeping accommodations and restroom facilities and that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. This term does not include congregate meal facilities or transitional housing. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by the City Council September 5, 2012.)

Home Occupation shall mean an occupation or business carried out for gain within a dwelling unit in a residential or agricultural zone, which is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes and which does not change the character of the residential use, established and operated in compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

Homeowners Association shall mean an organization incorporated under state law among property owners who have a common interest in certain property.

Hospital shall mean an institution specializing in giving clinical, temporary, and emergency services of a medical or surgical nature to ill or injured persons, and licensed by state law to provide in-patient facilities and services in surgery, obstetrics, and general medical practice.

Hotel shall mean a building in which there are five (5) or more guest rooms where transient lodging (for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less) with or without meals is provided for compensation.

Household shall mean one (1) or more individuals, related or unrelated, living together in a single dwelling unit. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

17.16.090 (I)
Illegal Structure, Use, or Lot shall mean a structure, lot, or use which did not conform to applicable laws when constructed or initiated and has not been granted legal nonconforming status by a categorical provision of this Zoning Ordinance or has not been brought into full conformity by a specific remedy provided in this Zoning Ordinance.

Immobile Populations shall mean persons who cannot or should not be moved. Centers of immobile populations include, but are not limited to, schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, prisons, and facilities for the mentally ill. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Improvement shall mean any place, building, structure, natural feature, or object constituting a physical addition to real property or a structure on real property, or any part of such addition or facade.

Improvement, Tenant, shall mean an improvement within the confines of an existing building exclusive of those required to meet minimum Uniform Building Code occupancy standards such as wiring or plumbing.

Incineration Facility shall mean a facility that uses thermal combustion processes to destroy or alter the character or composition of hazardous waste. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Income, Low shall mean those households earning eighty (80%) percent or less of the area median income as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Income, Moderate shall mean those households earning one hundred twenty (120%) percent or less of the area median income as defined in Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Income, Very Low shall mean those households earning fifty (50%) percent or less of the area median income as defined in Section 50079.5 of the Health and Safety Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Industrial Park shall mean a group of three (3) or more businesses located in industrially designated property, which is situated as an integral unit on a single parcel of land, or on separate parcels of land and which businesses utilize common off-street parking or access. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Inoperative Vehicle shall mean any vehicle which is not currently registered or which is not capable of self-propulsion.

Institutional Use shall mean an established organization, foundation, or governmental agency dedicated to education, public service or culture. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Intersection shall mean where two (2) or more roads connect at grade.

Irrigation System shall mean a connection of system components, including the water distribution network and the irrigation equipment downstream from the backflow prevention device that is necessary to ensure that all landscape areas and landscape materials are thoroughly and adequately watered. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

17.16.100 (J)
Junk shall mean any scrap, waste, reclaimable material or debris, whether or not stored or used in conjunction with dismantling, processing, salvage, storage, baling, disposal or other use or disposition. Materials or equipment kept on any premises for use in the construction of any building on such premises, and any materials or equipment customarily used on a farm or ranch, and so situated, shall not be deemed “junk” or “salvage material” within the meaning of this Section.

Junk Yard shall mean the same as Salvage Yard. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

17.16.110 (K)
Kennel shall mean any structure or facility in which five (5) or more dogs, cats, or other small animals over the age of four (4) months are kept, whether such keeping is for pleasure, profit, breeding, or exhibiting, including places where said animals are boarded, kept for sale, or hire.

Kitchen shall mean any space within a building designed, intended to be used or used for the cooking or the preparation of food, including storage and refrigeration.

17.16.120 (L)
Labor Organization shall mean a building or group of buildings occupied for the purpose of business offices and/or private meeting facilities by any registered group or association of employees that exist in whole or in part for the purpose of collective bargaining, dealing with employers concerning terms and conditions of employment, represents members in arbitrations and other employment matters and that meets the definition of “labor union” under US Code §7103(a)(4). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Land Disposal Facility shall mean a facility that involves any placement of hazardous waste in or on the land, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25179.3(h). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Land Reclamation Project shall mean a project established to restore otherwise unsuitable land to useful purposes through the use of fill materials such as rubbish, waste, soil and other unwanted materials. Land reclamation project shall include a dump or waste disposal facility.

Landform Grading shall mean a design concept which utilizes grading techniques that stress the preservation of significant topographic features, the selective placement of development, variations to slope gradients, transitional slopes, and the sculpture-like shaping of manufactured slopes in a manner that replicates the shapes and characteristics of natural landforms. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Landscape Area shall mean the entire yard areas less the footprint of legally erected structures, driveways, non-irrigated portion of parking lots, and structures such as decks and patios. Water features (including pools and ponds) are included in the calculation of the landscaped area. Areas dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards or vegetable gardens, are not included. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

Landscape Materials shall mean trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers, and/or lawns. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

Landscaping shall mean the planting and continuous maintenance of some combination of trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers, lawns or other decorative features to land. This may include the installation of natural landscape features such as rock and stone, earthen berms, walkways, plazas, courtyards, and structural features including but not limited to fountains, reflecting pools, art works and benches. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

Land Use shall mean the way in which property is or will be utilized or occupied.

Large Residential Care Facility. See Residential Care Facility, Large. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Law denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the State of California, the ordinances of the City of Palmdale, and when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder.

Learning/Tutoring Center means a charter school providing non-classroom based independent study, where students may attend weekly on-site individualized instruction/tutoring sessions for approximately 2 hours. A Learning/Tutoring Center provides no full-time classroom instruction at the facility and no on-site playgrounds, sports, or physical education classes are offered from the educational facility. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015)

Legislative Body shall mean the City Council of the City of Palmdale.

Light Source shall mean a device that produces illumination, including incandescent light bulbs, fluorescent and neon tubes, halogen and other vapor lights and reflecting surfaces or refractors incorporated into a lighting fixture. Any translucent enclosure of a light source or reflective surface is considered to be part of the light source.

Liquor Store shall mean an establishment in which the primary use is the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Loading Space shall mean an area used exclusively for loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such space is located.

Local Assessment Committee (LAC) shall mean a seven (7) member public body appointed by the City Council to represent the interests of the community in the hazardous waste facility review process, as defined in California State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.7. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Located within the Public Right-of-Way shall include any facility which, in whole or in part, itself or as part of another structure, rests upon, in, over or under the public right-of-way. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Lodging house. See boarding house. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Lot shall mean a parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon. The classification of lots are:

1.    Corner shall mean a lot located at the intersection of two (2) or more streets at an angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If the angle is greater than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot shall be considered an “interior lot.”

2.    Flag shall mean a lot having access or an easement to a public or private street by a narrow, private right-of-way.

3.    Interior shall mean a lot abutting only one (1) street.

4.    Key shall mean a lot with a side line that abuts the rear line of any one (1) or more adjoining lots.

5.    Reverse Corner shall mean a corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot.

6.    Through shall mean a lot having frontage on 2 generally parallel streets, with only 1 primary access.

Lot Area shall mean the total horizontal area included within the lot lines of a lot or parcel of land, exclusive of any landscape easement.

Lot Coverage shall mean the total horizontal area of a lot, parcel or building site covered by any building which extends more than three (3) feet above the surface of the ground level and including any covered car parking spaces. Covered patios shall not be considered as lot coverage provided that said patio is not more than fifty (50) percent enclosed.

Lot Depth shall mean the horizontal length of a straight line connecting the bisecting points of the front and the rear lot lines, exclusive of any landscape easement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

 



Lot Line shall mean any boundary of a lot. The classification of lot lines are:

1.    Front shall mean the line separating the parcel from the street on an interior lot. On a corner lot, front shall mean the shorter lot line abutting a street. (If the lot lines on a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the Director.) On a through lot, front shall mean the lot line abutting the street providing the primary access to the lot.

2.    Interior shall mean any lot line not abutting a street.

3.    Rear shall mean a lot line not intersecting a front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to, the front lot line. In the case of an irregularly shaped lot or a lot bounded by only three (3) lot lines, rear shall mean a line within the lot having a length of ten (10) feet, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line and shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the purpose of determining required yards, setbacks, and other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance.

4.    Side shall mean any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.

5.    Street Side shall mean any lot line abutting a street and over which access is permitted.

Lot Width shall mean the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the required front setback line.

17.16.130 (M)
Makeup, Permanent shall mean a cosmetic technique which employs permanent pigmentation of the dermis as a means of producing designs that resemble makeup, such as eyelining and other permanent enhancing colors to the skin of the face, lips, and eyelids. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Manufactured Home shall mean a residential dwelling unit manufactured in such a manner that all concealed parts or processes of manufacture cannot be inspected before installation at the building site without disassembly, damage, or destruction of the part which is either wholly or partially assembled on-site as permitted by the State of California and Federal laws.

Manufactured Home Park shall mean any lot or parcel of land where sites are rented or leased, or offered for rent or lease for one (1) or more Manufactured Homes.

Manufactured Home Site shall mean that portion of a Manufactured Home Park designated for use or occupancy of one (1) Manufactured Home, designed or used for the habitation of one (1) family, and including all appurtenant facilities thereon.

Manufactured Home Subdivision shall mean an area of land where lots are divided for sale, rent or lease to accommodate Manufactured Homes.

Manufactured Slope shall mean a manmade slope created by grading that consists wholly of cut or filled material. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Manufacturing shall mean the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the construction of products, and the blending of materials such as plastics, resins or oils.

Mass Grading shall mean a grading technique in which all lots, building pads and streets are generally graded over the entire area resulting in the disruption of the majority of the on-site natural grade and vegetation and, often resulting in, but not required to result in, a successive pad/terrace configuration. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Massage means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, or hygienic purposes by means of pressure on or friction against, or stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating the external parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the body, with or without the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliances, or with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, other similar preparations commonly used in this practice, or any other system for treatment or manipulation of the human body with or without any form of bath, such as Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Japanese, Shiahatsu, accupressure, vapor, shower, electric tub, sponge, mineral, fomentation, or any other type of bath, including herbal body wraps. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

Massage, Accessory Use means massage that is provided by a licensed and permitted massage technician as an accessory use to an approved primary use that uses only one massage table or one chair and where only one permitted massage technician is on-duty at any one time, in accordance with PMC 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

Massage Establishment means any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person provides or attempts to provide, engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any business of providing massages, as defined in this Section, or health treatments involving massage as the principal function and where more than one massage table or chair will be utilized, or more than one licensed and permitted massage technician will be on-duty at any one time. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

Massage Technician includes “masseur”, or “masseuse”, “massage practitioner” and “massage therapist”, and means any person who administers to any other person, for any form of consideration or gratuity, a massage as defined in this Section. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

Median shall mean a paved or planted area separating a street, accessway or highway into one (1) or more lanes of opposite direction of travel.

Medical Clinic shall mean any facility providing physical or mental health service, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured but shall not include in-patient or overnight accommodations. Medical clinic includes health center, health clinic and doctor’s offices.

Meeting facilities. See Conference and meeting facilities. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Microbrewery or Brewpub shall mean a small beer manufacturer that typically is dedicated to the production of specialty beers and requires an ABC Type 23 or 75 license, and may include a restaurant or pub on site. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Microwave Station shall mean a structure and appurtenant equipment necessary for the receiving, amplifying or transmitting of microwave signals, including necessary antenna systems, along a communications route or system which employs microwave frequencies assigned by the Federal Communications Commission. See Communication Facility. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

Mini-Warehouse or Self Storage Facility shall mean a structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis.

Mobilehome shall have the meaning set forth in Section 798.3 of the California Civil Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome, Comparable Housing shall mean housing which is comparable in floor area, number of bedrooms, and amenities, proximity to public transportation, shopping, schools, employment opportunities and medical services and other relevant factors to the mobilehome to which comparison is being made. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome, Eligible Resident shall mean a mobilehome resident whose mobilehome was located in a mobilehome park on the date of an application for change of use. Eligible resident includes the spouse, parents, children and grandchildren of the eligible resident when those persons resided in the mobilehome on the date of the application. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome, Handicapped Resident shall mean a mobilehome resident with any medically determinable physical or mental impairment as demonstrated by a finding of a State or Federal agency or a medical certificate, or who requires special care facilities in the mobilehome or special care equipment, such as, but not limited to, a wheelchair. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome, Legal Owner shall mean any person or entity having an ownership interest in a mobilehome other than the registered owner, such as a lender or mortgagor. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome Owner shall mean the registered owner or registered owners of a mobilehome, regardless of the number of such owners or the form of such ownership. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome Park or Park shall have the meaning set forth in PMC 5.44.020(K). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome Park, Comparable shall mean a mobilehome park substantially equal in terms of park condition, amenities, and other relevant factors, including, but not limited to, proximity to public transportation, shopping, medical services, employment opportunities and schools. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome Park Owner or Park Owner shall mean the person, persons or entity that owns a mobilehome park and includes any person authorized by the park owner to seek approval of an application for change of use or respond to a rent review petition filed pursuant to this Section. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome Resident or Resident shall mean a mobilehome owner who resides in the mobilehome he or she owns. Resident includes the mobilehome owner’s spouse, parents, children and grandchildren who reside in the mobilehome. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mobilehome Tenant or Tenant shall mean a person who occupies a mobilehome within a mobilehome park pursuant to a bona fide lease or rental agreement and who, during his or her tenancy, was not the owner of that mobilehome. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Model Home shall mean a dwelling unit temporarily used for display purposes as an example of dwelling units available for sale in a particular residential development.

Modification shall mean a change to an existing structure that involves any of the following: collocation, expansion, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation, including, but not limited to, changes in size, shape, color, visual design, or exterior material. “Modification” does not include repair, replacement or maintenance if those actions do not involve a change to the existing structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Monopole shall mean a structure composed of a pole or tower used to support antennas or related equipment. A monopole also includes a monopine, monopalm, monoeucalyptus, monocactus, and similar monopoles camouflaged to resemble faux trees or other faux objects attached on a monopole (e.g., water tower). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Month means a calendar month.

Motel shall mean one (1) or more buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, with one (1) or more such rooms or units having a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building or from an inner court. Such facilities are designed, used, or intended to be used, rented or hired out for temporary or overnight accommodations for guests, and are offered primarily to automobile tourists or transients by signs or other advertising media. Motel includes auto courts, motor lodges, tourist courts and motor hotels.

Motor Vehicle shall mean a self propelled device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved, or drawn upon a street or highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.

Mounted shall mean attached or supported. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Mulch shall mean any material, organic or inorganic, such as leaves, bark, straw, gravel, decomposed granite or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

Municipal Code shall mean the City of Palmdale Municipal Code.

Museum shall mean a use devoted to the acquisition, conservation, study, exhibition, and educational interpretation of objects having scientific, historical or artistic value. A museum shall also include a use that provides interactive exhibits that are designed to be manipulated by children. Museums may include gift shops and coffee shops as ancillary uses utilizing no more than a combined total of twenty (20%) percent of the floor area of the museum. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.16.140 (N)
Noise shall mean any undesirable audible sound.

Nonconforming Structure, Legal, shall mean any structure or improvement that was lawfully established in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time it was erected, but which, due to the application of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the structure or improvement is located.

Nonconforming Use, Legal, shall mean any use of land or property that was lawfully established in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the use commenced, but which, due to the application of this Ordinance or any amendment thereto, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which the use is located.

Nonresidential Development shall mean any development which is designated, used or intended to be used for any purpose other than a residence or residences. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Nuisance shall mean anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or is an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin or any public square, street or highway.

Nuisance Activities shall mean without limitation the following: disturbance of the peace; illegal drug activity; public drunkenness; illegal public consumption of an alcoholic beverage; public urination; harassment of passerby; gambling; prostitution; sale of stolen goods; excessive loud noise; lewd conduct; loitering; vandalism; assault; battery; sale to and/or consumption of alcohol by minors; and illegal parking. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.16.150 (O)
Official Zoning Map shall mean a map which graphically shows all zoning district boundaries and classifications within the City of Palmdale, as contained within the Palmdale Zoning Ordinance, which is signed by the Planning Director and is on file in the Palmdale Planning Department.

Open Space, Common, shall mean open space within a project owned, designed, and set aside for use by all occupants of the project or by occupants of a designated portion of the project. Common open space is not dedicated to the public and is owned and maintained by a private organization made up of the open space users. Common open space includes common recreation facilities, open landscaped areas, and greenbelts, but excludes pavement or driveway areas, or parkway landscaping within public right-of-way.

Open Space, Private, shall mean that open space directly adjoining the unit or building which is intended for the private enjoyment of the occupants of the unit or building. Private open space shall in some manner be defined such that its boundaries are evident. Private open space includes private patios or balconies and front, rear, or side yards on a lot designed for single family detached or attached housing.

Open Space, Usable, shall mean outdoor or unenclosed area on the ground or on a deck or terrace, designed and accessible for outdoor living recreation, pedestrian access, or landscaping but excluding streets, parking facilities, driveways, utility or service areas.

Ordinance shall mean an ordinance of the City of Palmdale.

Outdoor Advertising shall mean the uses of a sign or signs soliciting public support or directing public attention to the sale, lease, hire or use of any objects, products, services or functions which are not produced, sold or otherwise available on the premises where such sign is erected or maintained.

Outdoor Retail Sales shall mean any retail use where sales of goods or commodities mainly occur outdoors and is limited to uses that involve multiple vendors. Outdoor retail sales include but are not limited to swap meets and flea markets. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Overspray shall mean water from an irrigation system that is delivered beyond the landscaped area, wetting pavements, walks, walls, structures, or other non-landscaped areas. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

Owner, applied to a building or land, shall mean any person appearing on the last equalized assessment roll of the County of Los Angeles, including any part owner and joint owner.

17.16.160 (P)
Pad, Building, shall mean that area of a lot graded relatively flat, or to a minimum slope, for the purpose of accommodating a building and related outdoor space.

Parapet shall mean the extension of the main walls of a building above the roof level.

Parcel of Land shall mean a contiguous quantity of land in the possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the property of, the same claimant(s) or person(s).

Parking, Covered shall mean a permanent carport or garage that provides full overhead protection from the elements with roof coverings customarily used in building construction. Canvas, plastic, lath, and vegetation are not ordinary roof coverings and do not qualify a space, when used, as providing a covered parking space.

 

Parking Space shall mean an area, not including driveways, ramps, loading or work areas, which has been delineated and is maintained exclusively for the parking of one (1) motor vehicle.

Parkway shall mean the area of a public street that lies between the curb and the adjacent property line or physical boundary definition such as fences or walls, which is used for landscaping and/or passive recreation purposes.

Parolee means any of the following: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

1)    “California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation parolee” means an adult or juvenile individual sentenced to a term in the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, Division of Juvenile Operations and who received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation parole officer.

2)     “Federal parolee” means an individual convicted of a federal crime, sentenced to a United States federal prison, and who received conditional and revocable release in the community under the supervision of a federal parole officer.

3)    “State adult parolee” means an individual who is serving a period of supervised community custody, as defined in Section 3000 of the Penal Code, following a term of imprisonment in a state prison, and is under the jurisdiction of the California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation, Division of Adult Parolee Operations.

Parolee Home means any residential structure or unit, whether owned and/or operated by an individual for-profit or non-profit entity, which is not licensed by the State of California and which houses at least two parolees unrelated by blood, marriage or legal adoption, in exchange for monetary or non-monetary consideration and/or paid by the parolee and/or any individual or public/private entity on behalf of the parolee. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Pawn shop means a store where the principal business is that of taking in pawn and is required to obtain a pawnbroker license from the State of California pursuant to Section 21300 or 21301 of the Financial Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010.)

Probation means an individual serving a period of time on probation ordered by a court of law. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Probationer Home means any residential structure or unit, whether owned and/or operated by an individual for-profit or non-profit entity, which is not licensed by the State of California and which houses at least two probationers unrelated by blood, marriage or legal adoption, in exchange for monetary or non-monetary consideration and/or paid by the probationer and/or any individual or public/private entity on behalf of the probationer. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Patio Cover shall mean any roof-like structure attached to another structure, or any extension of a roof line, constructed for the purpose of decoration or protection from the elements in connection with outdoor living.

Patio Sales – see Garage Sales.

Permit shall mean written governmental permission issued by an authorized official, empowering the holder thereof to do some act not forbidden by law but not allowed without such authorization.

Permitted Use shall mean any use allowed in a zone and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zone.

Person shall mean any individual, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, company, joint stock association, corporation, estate, trust, organization, business, business trust, public agency, school district, the State of California and its political subdivisions or instrumentalities, receiver, syndicate or any group or combination thereof, acting as a unit, including any trustee, receiver or assignee.

Pet Boarding and Daycare shall mean any structure or facility which provides short-term boarding kennel services for dogs, cats, or other small animals over the age of four (4) months, providing overnight and/or daytime boarding with twenty-four (24) hour supervision. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 16-01, adopted by City Council September 7, 2016.)

Piercing, Ear shall mean making a hole(s) through the ear lobe or other parts of the ear with the use of a disposable single-use, presterilized stud or clasp or solid needle. “Ear Piercing” does not include the piercing of any other body part of the human body other than the ear. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Planned Development shall mean the planning, construction or implementation and operation of any use or structure, or a combination of uses and structures, based on a comprehensive and complete design or plan treating the entire complex of land, structures and uses as a single project.

Planning Commission shall mean the Planning Commission of the City of Palmdale.

Pole shall mean a single shaft of wood, steel, concrete or other material capable of supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as required by provisions of this Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Preceding and Following mean next before and next after, respectively.

Preferential Parking shall mean parking spaces designated or assigned, through use of a sign or painted space markings, for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single occupant vehicles. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Principal Use shall mean the primary purpose for which a building, structure, or lot is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which they may be used, occupied, or maintained under this Ordinance.

Professional Membership Organization shall mean a not-for-profit tax exempt voluntary membership organization that represents individuals with a common background in a subject or in professions such as law, medicine, and accounting. There are three types of professional societies: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

•    Associations such as the Los Angeles Conservancy that promote common personal interests and objectives.

•    A second type includes professional, scientific, engineering, and learned societies that strive to advance the bodies of knowledge in their field, such as the American Chemical Society, and the Society of Automotive Engineers.

•    A third type is dedicated to public service or policy causes, such as the National Council on Aging, and the American Lung Association.

Professional Office. An office from which a doctor, lawyer, engineer, or architect or similar professional may offer services.

Project shall mean the total development within the boundaries as defined on the development plan.

Projection, Architectural shall mean any projection including eaves, awnings, and/or chimneys which extend beyond the face of an exterior wall of a structure.

Prominent Landform shall mean a hill, portion of a ridge, canyon or similar features which possess a high level of visibility from existing and undeveloped areas within the City of Palmdale’s Sphere of Influence and form a component of the City’s natural skyline backdrop. Included within this definition would be landforms associated with the San Andreas Rift Zone and the lower foothills of the San Gabriel mountains. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Property includes real and personal property.

Property, Contiguous shall mean those properties which touch property lines of any parcel that is the subject of a land use decision, including those properties which touch said property lines of the subject parcel when projected across public or private rights-of-way easements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Property Owner shall mean the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the ordinance either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or his agent. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Public Facilities shall mean any establishment, building or operation which is intended to be utilized for the establishment of public and/or quasi-public uses.

Public Right-of-Way shall mean a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be or is presently occupied by a road, sidewalk, railroad, electric transmission lines, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary storm sewer, bikeway, pedestrian walkway, or other public use.

Public Utility Installations shall mean production, generation, reclamation, storage, or transmission facilities for electricity, water or natural gas, excluding individual service lines and facilities which do not have a local impact on surrounding properties.

Purchase and sale of secondhand tangible personal property shall mean a use permitted within the appropriate zone which purchases or accepts for consignment secondhand tangible personal property and may sell such goods as an incidental function of the primary business. Such businesses may include a jewelry store which purchases and/or sells used gold or jewelry, or an electronics store which purchases and/or sells used video games or other electronic media. The use is required to obtain a secondhand dealer license from the State of California pursuant to Section 21641 or 21642 of the Business and Professions Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010.)

17.16.170 (Q)
Quarry shall mean any place on a lot or parcel of land where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, rock, clay, decomposed granite, or other similar material is removed by excavation or otherwise. Quarry shall include mining operations for the removal of ores, precious stones, or other solid materials but shall not include:

1.    The excavation and removal of materials from a lot or parcel of land preparatory to construction of a building for which a building permit has been issued and remains in full force and effect, provided that such excavation is confined to that necessary for such building construction but in no event shall more than five thousand (5,000) cubic yards of soil or other excavated materials be removed from the premises.

2.    Excavation, on a lot, parcel of land or subdivision, necessary to grading, building construction or operation on the premises, where a building permit is not in full force and effect, provided that such grading is necessary to prepare a site for a lawful use permitted thereon but in no event shall more than five hundred (500) cubic years of soil or other excavated materials be removed from such premises.

17.16.180 (R)
Reclamation shall mean the process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

Recorder shall mean the Recorder of the County of Los Angeles.

Recreational Facility shall mean any establishment, building or operation which is intended for the provision of recreational sports activities including tennis, racquetball ball, health facilities, track facilities, golf and other related sports activities.

Residential Sports Court shall mean any recreational court or activity area constructed on the same parcel as an existing residential residence for the private use of the occupants of the principal dwelling or their nonpaying guests. Recreational sports courts shall not be permitted to be utilized for paid instructional or commercial purposes or as a sport team practice facility. Recreational sports courts include, but not limited to, complete or partial portions of the following: basketball courts, batting cages, football fields, hockey rinks, badminton, racquetball or squash courts, skateboard ramps, tennis courts, volleyball courts or other similar uses. A basketball hoop utilizing a driveway or attached to a structure is not a play court for purposes of the ordinance. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012.)

Recreational Vehicle shall mean a vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for recreational or sporting purposes. The term recreational vehicle includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, pickup campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks and buses, boats and boat trailers, and all-terrain vehicles.

Recreational Vehicle Park shall mean any area or tract of land where one (1) or more lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to owners or users of Recreational Vehicles or tent camping used for travel or recreation purposes.

Recyclable Material shall mean reusable material including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Section 25250.11 and 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health & Safety Code.

Recycling Facility shall mean a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer. Recycling facilities may include the following:

A.    Collection Facility (Small)

A small collection facility is a center which occupies an area no more than five hundred (500) square feet for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power driven processing equipment. Collection facilities may include the following:

1.    Reverse vending machines;

2.    Mobile units;

3.    Bulk reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty (50) square feet;

4.    Kiosk type units which may include permanent structures;

5.    Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials;

B.    Collection Facility (Large)

A large collection facility is a center which occupies an area in excess of five hundred (500) square feet and which may include permanent structures.

C.    Processing Facility

A processing facility is a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as bailing, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following:

1.    A light processing facility occupies an area of not more than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two (2) outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting grinding, shredding, and sorting of source separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

2.    A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

Religious Assembly Use shall mean a building or space primarily used for an assembly of persons to conduct worship, fellowship, study or other religious rituals, including, but not limited to, churches, synagogues, temples, mosques or shrines. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Rental of Rooms means the rental of a room or rooms in a single family

residence/dwelling for occupancy of not more than four individuals per single family residence/dwelling. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Residence shall mean one (1) or more rooms designed, used or intended to be used as permanent living quarters for a family and not as temporary or over-night accommodations.

Residential Care Facility, also known as a “Residential Facility” means a facility as defined in the California Community Care Facilities Act and is any family home, group care facility, or similar facility determined by the State Director of Health Care Services, for 24-hour non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. A Residential Care Facility must be licensed by the State of California. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Residential Care Facility, Small means a residential care facility as defined herein, licensed by the State of California to house six (6) or fewer individuals in accordance with the California Community Care Facilities Act. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Residential Care Facility, Large means a Residential Care Facility as defined herein, licensed by the State of California to house seven or more individuals in accordance with the Community Care Facilities Act. A Large Residential Care Facility must comply with the requirements and provisions of PMC 17.91.110 herein. See also Assisted Living Facility. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Residentially Designated Property shall mean property in any jurisdiction which is either zoned or designated in the General Plan for residential uses.

Responsible Beverage Service Training shall mean a certified training program in responsible methods and skill for selling and serving alcoholic beverages. Such program shall incorporate the RBS Best Practices of the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Reverse Vending Machine(s) – a reverse vending machine is an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the State. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary.

Reviewing Authority shall mean the person or decision-making body (i.e., Planning Director, Planning Commission or City Council) responsible for the review and/or final action on a land use entitlement.

Right-of-Way. See Public Right-of-Way.

Roof Line shall mean the top edge of the roof or top of the parapet, whichever forms the top line of the building silhouette.

Room shall mean an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closets, hallways, and service porches.

Rooming House. See Boarding House. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

17.16.190 (S)
Salvage Yard shall mean any premises used for the keeping or storage of junk, including but not limited to, iron and scrap metals, paper, rags, glass, wood and similar materials and shall include the dismantling of machinery or the storage or keeping for sale of parts and equipment resulting from dismantling or wrecking operations on said property or elsewhere. Salvage Yard shall also include the baling of cardboard, cardboard boxes, paper and paper cartons. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Sanitarium shall mean the same as hospital.

Satellite Dish shall mean an apparatus capable of receiving communications from a transmitter relay located in planetary orbit.

School shall mean a building or group of buildings for educational and/or classroom purposes operated by a school district and/or other private or public education institutions offering a general course of study at primary, secondary or high school levels, and for private schools, which is equivalent to the courses of study at such levels offered by the public school districts. Day nurseries, vocational and trade schools shall be considered schools only when incidental to the conduct of the school as defined herein. These establishments may be privately owned and operated for profit or not-for-profit, or they may be publicly owned and operated. They may also offer food and accommodation services to their students. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

School, vocational or technical shall mean a postsecondary institution offering educational services which provide career training or lead to an occupation or job title; prepare students to take or pass a licensing examination or other qualifying test for employment or which licenses persons in a particular profession, trade or job category. This definition does not include programs that lead to bachelor, master or doctoral degree or that provide solely a vocational or recreational program, or programs sponsored by a business or professional organization solely for the benefit of its members. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Screening shall mean a method of visually shielding or obscuring a structure or portion thereof or use from an abutting or nearby use, or from the general public, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm or similar structure, architectural or landscape feature, or combination thereof.

Second Hand Store shall mean a store where the primary business includes any buying, selling, trading, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property and is required to obtain a secondhand dealer license from the State of California pursuant to Section 21641 or 21642 of the Business and Professions Code. This definition specifically excludes antique and thrift stores, firearms, used vehicle sales, remanufactured automotive parts, recycling facilities pursuant to Chapter 17.97 PMC, and salvage yards pursuant to PMC 17.93.010. A secondhand store may sell some new items, but this shall be incidental to the primary use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010.)

Self-Service Display shall mean the open display or storage of Tobacco, Smoking Products or Smoking Paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of Self-Service Display. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Setback shall mean the minimum required distance that a building, structure, parking area or other designated item must be located from a lot line (see also Yard). Such distances shall be measured at a horizontal line at right angles to the property line or its target, exclusive of any landscape easements.



Setback Line shall mean a line within a lot parallel to and measured from a corresponding lot line, forming the boundary of a required yard and governing the placement of structures and uses on the lot (see also Yard).

Sex Offender means an individual that has served a term of imprisonment or jail time for an offense for which registration is required pursuant to Section 290 of the California Penal Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Sex Offender Home means any residential structure or unit, whether owned and/or operated by an individual for-profit or non-profit entity, which is not licensed by the State of California and which houses at least two sex offenders unrelated by blood, marriage or legal adoption, in exchange for monetary or non-monetary consideration and/or paid by the sex offender and/or any individual or public/private entity on behalf of the sex offender. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

Sexually-Oriented Businesses shall mean the same as Adult-Oriented Businesses as defined in PMC 17.92.050(B). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-4 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Shopping Center shall mean a group of three (3) or more commercial retail businesses which have been designed and developed together as an integral unit on a single parcel of land or separate parcels of land and which businesses utilize common off-street parking or access. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Shopping Center, Regional shall mean a center greater than fifty (50) acres located within a Regional Commercial land use designation as identified in the General Plan. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sidewalk means that portion of a street between the curbing and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.

Sign shall mean anything of visual appearance primarily used for or having the effect of, attracting attention from the streets, sidewalks or other outside public areas for identification purposes, including but not limited to, all outdoor advertising and any card, cloth, paper, paint, plastic, metal, painted glass, or wooden or stone materials, and any and all devices, structural and otherwise, lighted or unlighted, painted or not painted, attached to, made a part of, or placed in the window of, or in the front, rear, sides, or top of any structure on any land or any rock, bush, wall, tree, post, fence, building, or structure, which device in any manner, or by any means, whether enumerated in this subsection or not, conveys a message, announces or directs attention to the name, nature, merits, availability, price, or type of goods, services, or products produced, sold, stored, furnished, or available at that location or at any other location. For definitions of other terms pertaining to signs, see Chapter 17.88 PMC.

Sign, Abandoned shall mean any sign remaining in place for a period of ninety (90) days or more which advertises or identifies a business, product, or service where the establishment to which the sign is attached has ceased operation and where it is clear that the sign has been deserted or where there is no sign copy appearing on the sign. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Accessory shall mean signs that support drive-through or walk-up uses, fuel price signs as set forth under State law, signs that are placed on the outer edge of a permanent canopy island structure or that are displayed on or below a canopy projecting from a main building. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Advertising Structure shall mean a structure of any kind erected, used, or maintained for outdoor advertising purposes, upon which any poster, bill, printing, painting or other advertisement of any kind whatsoever may be placed, including statuary, for advertising purposes. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Alteration shall mean any change of size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction or supporting structure of an existing sign. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Animated shall mean a sign having moving parts or lighting, an image projection which creates the illusion of moving parts, or has flashing, chasing, or twinkling lights. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Balloon shall mean a flexible, nonporous bag inflated with a gaseous substance, such as helium, that is lighter than the surrounding air, which causes the bag to rise and float in the air. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Banner shall mean a temporary sign composed of flexible, lightweight material not enclosed in a rigid frame. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Billboard shall mean the same as outdoor advertising sign structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Cabinet or Can shall mean a sign consisting of one (1) or more flat translucent panels containing sign copy affixed to an internally illuminated box or cabinet mounted on a building or monument structure. Such signs are typically illuminated with fluorescent lights. Sign panels may or may not be interchangeable. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Canopy shall mean any sign printed or painted on the visible surface of a canopy or awning. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Change of Copy shall mean the changing of a message on a lawfully erected sign. A change of copy does not include the following (all of which acts shall be considered as the placing of a new sign): any alteration or reconfiguration of the outside dimensions of a sign, any structural modifications of a sign and/or relocation of all or any portion of a sign. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Changeable Copy shall mean a sign on which message copy can be changed manually through use of attachable letters and numerals. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Construct, when used with reference to a sign, shall mean to install, erect or place on the ground or on a building structure, or to affix, paint or post on or to a building or structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Copy shall mean either commercial speech or noncommercial speech messages. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Digital Advertising Display shall mean an electronic advertising display where the message is changed more than once every two (2) minutes, but no more than once every six (6) seconds and the transition between messages is no more than one (1) second. A Digital Advertising Display shall not be considered an Electronic Reader Board or Animated Sign as those terms are otherwise defined herein. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Directional shall mean any sign that serves solely to designate the direction or the location of any place or area and is placed on the property to which the public is directed. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Directory shall mean a sign or a set of similarly designed individual signs placed or displayed in sequence, to list all or part of the businesses within a building or business center or depicting the location of various units within a development. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Double-Faced shall mean a sign with copy on two (2) faces, legible from opposite directions. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Electronic Reader Board shall mean a sign that contains a video screen, rows of light bulbs or other type of electronic display, which when activated forms messages, symbols or graphics. Electronic reader boards do not include Outdoor Advertising Sign Structures utilizing Digital Advertising Display pursuant to PMC 17.88.160(E). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Externally Illuminated shall mean any sign constructed to have artificial light shone on the sign face from a lighting source that is external to the sign structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Flashing shall mean the same as Animated Sign. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Freestanding shall mean any sign supported by structures or supports that are placed on, or anchored in the ground, which are independent from any building or other structure. This definition may include pole signs, ground signs, and monument signs. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Height of Freestanding shall mean the greatest vertical distance measured from ground surface to the top of the freestanding sign and any accompanying architectural feature of the sign. Intentional changes in the elevation of the ground surface by mounding within landscape areas utilizing more than a 3:1 slope in order to achieve an increased overall height shall be counted in the calculation of sign height.

(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Height of Nonfreestanding shall mean the greatest vertical distance measured from the bottom to the top of the sign area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Human shall mean any person having a visual appearance primarily used for, or having the effect of, attracting attention from the streets, sidewalks or other outside public areas for identification purposes, which person in any manner, or by any means, whether enumerated in this subsection or not, conveys a message, announces or directs attention to the name, nature, merits, availability, price, or type of goods, services, or products produced, sold, stored, furnished, or available at that location or at any other location. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Illegal Nonconforming shall mean any sign structure which did not conform to applicable laws and/or was not granted a sign permit when constructed and has not been brought into full conformity by a specific remedy provided in this Chapter. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Information Kiosk shall mean a freestanding or wall-mounted sign structure, other than an outdoor advertising structure or monument sign that is designed to display a collection of two (2) or more signs that direct pedestrians to locations or businesses located on site, or display noncommercial messages. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Internally Illuminated shall mean any sign constructed to have artificial light shone on the sign face from a lighting source that is inside the sign structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Kiosk Program shall mean a uniform off-site directional sign program, administered by the BIA or an agency as determined by resolution of the City Council for the purpose of providing travel directions. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Legal Nonconforming shall mean any sign that was lawfully erected, with all necessary permits, but due to a change in the law, fails to conform to all applicable regulations and limitations of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

Sign, Maintenance shall mean the repair, restoration or preservation of an existing sign or sign structure to a condition or state similar to, but not larger than, that which was originally installed, erected or approved by the City. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Marquee shall mean a freestanding structure, wall sign or a structure that overhangs the entrance of a building or projects beyond a building facade, on which a changeable copy sign is affixed, such as those typically displayed outside theaters, hotels, schools or churches. Individual letters are changed manually on such signs as opposed to electronically. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Monument shall mean a low-profile, ground-mounted freestanding sign that is supported by a solid base as an essential element of the design of the sign. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Neon shall mean a sign constructed of tubing that is illuminated by means of a gas or vapors. Decorative or other architectural elements on buildings consisting of neon tubing are not included in this definition. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Off-Site Commercial shall mean a sign displaying a permanent message that is not located on the site of the business, accommodations, services or commercial activity served by the sign. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, On-Site Commercial shall mean a sign that is located on the site of the business, accommodations, services or commercial activity served by the sign. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Outdoor Advertising Structure shall mean a panel or billboard affixed to the ground, enclosed in a rigid frame used to display paid commercial and noncommercial messages or advertisements in outdoor public places, such as alongside highways. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Painted shall mean a wall sign painted directly onto the surface of a building or onto a separate flat surface that is attached to the side of a building. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Pole shall mean a permanent freestanding sign supported by one (1) or more posts, columns or poles that are not enclosed in a solid structure equal in width to at least one-half (1/2) the sign face and where the portion of the unenclosed posts, columns or poles exceeds eighteen (18) inches in height. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Projecting shall mean a sign that is attached to and projects away from the side of a building. Such signs are typically oriented for pedestrian visibility and are viewed perpendicular to the face of the building. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Reader Board shall have the same definition as the term Electronic Reader Board. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Relocation shall mean to move a sign from one (1) location to another or to remove a sign from one (1) location and construct a similar sign at another location. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Roof shall mean any sign erected upon, against, or directly above a roof, or projecting above the parapet of a building. Signs erected on a mansard roof shall not constitute a roof sign. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Secondary Skyline shall mean a wall sign that is placed below the second floor of a building consisting of three (3) stories or more. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Skyline shall mean a wall sign that is placed above the windows of the highest floor of a building consisting of three (3) stories or more. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Temporary shall mean a sign that is displayed for the specific period of time of an event and which is removed immediately after the completion of the event or time period. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Under-Canopy shall mean signs suspended no lower than eight (8) feet above the public right-of-way or a walkway under a canopy or awning of a building. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Unlawful shall mean a sign which was constructed illegally and which violates this Chapter, or which the Director declares to be unlawful because it has become dangerous to public safety. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Upgrade shall mean any activity intended to improve the design quality and aesthetic appeal of an existing sign, display, or device by modifying structural elements of, or providing substantial cosmetic enhancements to, such sign, display or device. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Vehicle shall mean any sign painted directly upon, magnetically affixed to or permanently affixed to the body or other integral part of an operative vehicle; provided, that the maximum number of such signs is two (2) and the maximum size of each sign is four (4) square feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Wall shall mean a sign attached to, painted or erected on the exterior wall of a building or structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel to the plane of the exterior wall. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign, Window shall mean a sign constructed of paper, canvas, cardboard or painted with water soluble pigment which is to be displayed on the inside of a glass window surface or painted on the outside of a window. This term does not include merchandise located in a window. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign Area shall mean the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles which encloses the extreme limits of the writing, representation, emblem, or any figure, together with any frame, background area, structural trim, or other material, including any light or color that forms an integral part of the display which is used to differentiate the sign from the background upon which it is placed. In the case of a sign designed with more than one (1) exterior surface, the area shall be computed as including only the maximum single display surface, which is visible from any ground position at one (1) time. The supports or uprights on which any such sign is supported shall not be included in determining the sign area unless such supports or uprights are designed in such a manner as to form an integral background of the display.

(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign Face shall mean the surface or that portion of a sign upon which the sign copy or message is located that is visible from a single point as generally a flat surface or a single plane. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign Program shall mean an approved plan by the Director setting forth all signage for an approved commercial, business or industrial center. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sign Structure shall mean any structure, which supports, has supported, or is capable of supporting a sign, including decorative cover. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Significant Ridgeline shall mean a long, conspicuous, continuous elevated landform that forms a part of the natural backdrop and skyline to the City of Palmdale. Said landform may consist of one (1) or more ridge features each of varying elevations dependent on the characteristics of the ridgeline being evaluated. Distinct natural ridgelines forming a portion of the City’s skyline backdrop to the City include Ritter Ridge, Portal Ridge, Verde Ridge, and the Sierra Pelona mountains. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Single Serve Container shall include, but not be limited to, any of the following products: 1) wine in containers of less than seven hundred fifty (750) milliliters; 2) malt beverage products with alcohol content greater than five and one-half (5 1/2%) percent by volume; 3) wine with an alcoholic content greater than fourteen (14%) percent by volume unless in corked bottles and aged at least two (2) years; 4) containers of beer or malt liquor not in their original factory packages of six (6) packs or greater; 5) single container of beer or malt liquor larger than thirty-nine (39) ounces; 6) cooler and frozen products (e.g., hard cider, lemonade or root beer, alcoholic juice boxes, etc.), either wine, liquor or malt beverage-based in less than four (4) pack quantities. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Site Plan shall mean a plan, prepared to scale, showing accurately and with complete dimensioning all of the buildings, structures, uses, easements, and the exact manner of development proposed for a specific parcel of land.

Site Plan Review shall mean a discretionary entitlement which may be granted under the provisions of this Ordinance which, when granted, authorizes the construction of a specific development on a parcel of land or the substantial modification of an existing development as defined in PMC 17.21.020, subject to compliance with conditions of approval imposed on the entitlement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

Slope shall mean an inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is expressed as a ratio of horizontal distance to vertical distance. See Gradient.

Slope Face shall mean the slopes located directly below, and leading up to, the crest of a significant ridgeline or prominent landform.

Slope, Manufactured shall mean a man made slope created by grading that consists wholly of cut or filled material.

Slope Steepness shall mean the relationship (the ratio) between the change in elevation (rise) and the horizontal distance (run) over which that change in elevation occurs. The percent of steepness of any given slope is determined by dividing the rise by the run on the natural slope of land, multiplied by 100.

Sludge shall mean the accumulated matter, whether mechanically treated, irradiated, digested, stabilized, composted or untreated, produced in the treatment of wastewater. This includes liquid, semi-liquid, and solid material that has been mechanically dewatered or air dried. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.)

Small Residential Care Facility. See Residential Care Facility, Small. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council.)

Small Residential Wind Generator Systems (SRWGS) shall mean a wind energy conversion system that is located on a pole designed with a vertical axis or a small conventional blade generator suitable for single family residential zones consisting of a wind turbine, tower, associated controls, and conversions systems and which will be used primarily to reduce on-site consumption of utility power by converting mechanical energy into electricity. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Small Residential Wind Generator Systems (SRWGS) Height shall mean the vertical distance from ground level to the tip of the wind generator at its highest point. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Small-Scale Solar Energy System shall mean a solar energy system consisting of one (1) or more roof-mounted and/or ground-mounted solar collector devices and solar-related equipment. A small-scale system is intended to primarily reduce on-site consumption of utility power but may include solar power generated for purchase by a utility provider; provided, that the generating facilities and any appurtenant equipment remain accessory to the primary use and structure(s). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Smoking Product shall mean any substance produced or sold to be used for smoking, ingestion or consumption in cigarettes, cigars, pipes, hookahs, e-cigarettes or other similar objects. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Sober Living Home means a residential structure or unit, not licensed by the state, which houses six or fewer residents and which meets the definition and complies with all the requirements set forth in PMC 17.91.130. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council.)

Social Club. see Club (fraternal) or lodge. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Social and Professional Organization shall mean a nonprofit association of persons, whether incorporated or unincorporated, organized for some common purpose including fraternities, sororities, lodges, political membership, veterans, civic, social, and similar organizations, but not including a group organized primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a business.

Solar Access shall mean a property owner’s right to have sunlight shine on his land or buildings for the specific purposes and to the extent provided under existing State law.

Solid Fill shall mean any non-combustible materials, insoluble in water, such as soil, rock, sand or gravel, that can be used for grading land or filling depressions.

Solid Fill Project shall mean any operation on a parcel of land where more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of solid fill materials are deposited for any purpose including the grading or reclaiming of land.

South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) shall mean the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet Federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the nondesert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San Bernardino Counties). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Specific Demand Not Currently Served shall mean an alcoholic beverage establishment where more than fifty (50%) percent of the alcoholic beverage products sold or served are not available within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the location. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Specific Plan shall mean a plan consisting of text maps, and other documents and exhibits regulating development within a defined area of the City, consistent with the General Plan and the provisions of Government Code Section 65450 et seq.

Speech, Commercial shall mean any message, the prevailing thrust of which is to propose a commercial transaction. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Speech, Noncommercial shall mean any message that is not determined to be commercial speech as defined herein. Speech that is determined to be obscene shall not be included. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

State shall mean the State of California.

Stealth Telecommunications Facility shall mean a telecommunications facility as defined in PMC 17.16.200 which by its size, location, design, or combination of such measures, causes the facility to be aesthetically integrated into the surrounding environment so as not to readily be seen or recognized. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

Stockpile shall mean the temporary placement or storage of inert materials, including but not limited to rock, sand, gravel and soil. No stockpile shall contain biological material, such as greenwaste, trash, composted material, biosolid material or sludge. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.)

Storage Shed shall mean a single-story accessory structure incidental to a main building and used for storage purposes. This term shall not include animal enclosures, garages, trailers, motor homes, mobile homes shipping and cargo containers, or other similar structures. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Story shall mean that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.

Story, Half, shall mean a story with at least two (2) of its opposite sides situated immediately under a sloping roof, with the floor area of said story not in excess of two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area of the floor immediately below it.

Strand Lights shall mean two (2) or more light bulbs connected along any length of wire and not contained in conduit or other rigid enclosure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Street shall mean any public or private thoroughfare which affords primary means of access to abutting property.

Structure shall mean anything constructed or erected, which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground.

Structure, Accessory shall mean a detached structure not for human habitation (as opposed to an accessory dwelling) which is incidental to and associated with a specific principal use or facility located on the same lot.

Structure, Advertising, shall mean a structure existing, erected or maintained to serve exclusively as a stand, frame or background for the support or display of signs.

Structure, Principal, shall mean one (1) or more buildings conducting the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated.

Subdivision shall mean the division of a lot, tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land for sale, development or lease.

Subdivision Development Plan shall mean the specific development plan for an approved tentative map, including plot plans, building elevations, grading plans and landscape plans applicable to individual lots within said tentative map.

Substantial Change in Mode or Character of Operation shall mean without limitation that an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment has done any of the following:

1.    Increased its floor area by twenty-five (25%) percent or more.

2.    Increased the floor area principally devoted to alcoholic beverage sales by twenty-five (25%) percent or more.

3.    Converted from a Bona-Fide Restaurant to a Bar or Night Club, or any other Primary On-sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment.

4.    A change of its ABC License type from a Type 20 to a Type 21 or a Type 41 to a Type 47 or Type 48.

5.    Had its ABC License suspended for a period greater than thirty (30) days.

6.    Had a Break in Service.

7.    Transferred its alcoholic beverage operations from one (1) premises to another. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Supportive Housing means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and when possible, work in the community. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

Swap Meet (indoor and outdoor) shall mean any location or activity where new or used goods or secondhand personal property is offered for sale or exchange to the general public by a multitude of individual licensed vendors, usually in compartmentalized spaces; and, where a fee may be charged to prospective buyers for admission, or a fee may be charged for the privilege of offering or displaying such merchandise. The term swap meet is interchangeable with and applicable to: flea markets, auctions, open air markets, other similarly named or labeled activities; but the term does not include the usual supermarket or department store retail operations. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

17.16.200 (T)
Tattoo shall mean to insert pigment under the surface of the skin of a human being, by pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an indelible mark or figure visible through the skin. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Telecommunications Tower shall mean a freestanding mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, freestanding tower or other structure designed and primarily used to support communication facility antennas. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Telephone Repeater Station shall mean a building used for housing amplifying equipment along aerial or underground telephone cable routes. See Communication Facility. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

Temporary Meteorological Tower (Met Tower) shall mean a temporary structure which includes the tower, base plate, anchors, guy cables and hardware, anemometers (wind speed indicators), wind direction vanes, booms to hold equipment anemometers and vanes, data logger, instrument wiring, and any telemetry devices that are used to monitor or transmit wind speed and wind flow characteristics over a period of time for either instantaneous wind information or to characterize the wind resource at any given location. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Temporary Structure shall mean a structure without any foundation or footings and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased.

Temporary Use shall mean a use established for a specified period of time, with the intent to discontinue the use at the end of the designated time period.

Tenant and Occupant, applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

Theatres, live performances shall mean a building or structure, enclosed or otherwise, which provides a stage and associated equipment for the presentation of artistic performance and seating or assembly area for two or more spectators. This definition does not include adult theatres, adult cabarets or any other adult oriented establishment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Thrift Store shall mean a commercial location where used goods are offered for sale or exchange to the general public by a registered non-profit organization. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010.)

Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia shall mean cigarette papers or wrappers, blunt wraps as defined in Section 308 of the Penal Code, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other instrument or paraphernalia designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, ingestion or consumption of tobacco and other smoking products. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer shall mean any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, in public view, tobacco, Tobacco Products, Smoking Products, Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia. Any person who distributes free or low cost samples of Tobacco Products, Smoking Products or Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia shall be deemed to be a Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer under this Chapter. “Tobacco Retailing” shall mean the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of Tobacco, Tobacco or Smoking Product, or Tobacco or Smoking Paraphernalia sold, offered for sales, exchanged or offered for exchange. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Tobacco Product shall mean (1) any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco; and (2) any product or formulation of matter containing biologically active amounts of nicotine that is manufactured, sold, offered for sale, or otherwise distributed with the expectation that the product or matter will be introduced into the human body, but does not include any product specifically approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for use in treating nicotine or tobacco product dependence. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Townhouse shall mean a building subdivided into individual units such that each owner owns the unit structure and the land on which the unit is located or an exclusive easement for it, plus a common interest in the land upon which the building is located.

Trailer shall mean a vehicle designed for carrying persons or property on its own structure and capable of being drawn by a motor vehicle.

Transfer Station shall mean an area, including any necessary buildings or structures, for the temporary storage and the salvage of rubbish, garbage or industrial waste.

Transit Operator shall mean the Antelope Valley Transit Authority (AVTA) which serves as the local and regional public transportation provider in the Antelope Valley. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Transitional Housing means buildings configured as rental housing, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

Transportation Demand Management (TDM) shall mean the alteration of travel behavior – usually on the part of commuters – through programs of incentives, services, and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Travel Trailer shall mean a Recreational Vehicle other than a motor vehicle, which is designed or used for human habitation and which may be moved upon a public highway without a special permit or chauffeur’s license or both, without violating any provision of the Vehicle Code.

Trip Reduction shall mean reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single occupant vehicles. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Triplex shall mean the same as Dwelling, Three-Family.

17.16.210 (U)
Unit, Attached shall mean a unit completely within an existing principal building or added to an existing principal building; provided, that both dwelling units shall be attached by a common wall, floor, or ceiling and not simply by an attached breezeway or porch; and shall be contained within one (1) building. An accessory dwelling unit constructed above an existing detached garage shall be considered an attached unit. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

Unit, Detached, shall mean a unit that is structurally independent and separated from the existing primary dwelling by a minimum of ten (10) feet.

Use shall mean the purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed, or intended to be used, or for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained.

Use, Accessory. See Accessory.

Use, Change of shall include all activities specified in Section 798.10 of the California Civil Code and amendments to the General Plan or any applicable specific plan, rezoning of property, land use permits, such as a Conditional Use Permit or a variance, tentative parcel or tentative tract maps, and building permits when they involve changing the use of or closing a mobilehome park or a part thereof. “Change of use” includes closure of a park when no new use is planned. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Use, Sensitive shall mean any residential use, public or private school, day care, playground, and retirement facility. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Use Inauguration shall mean the institution of use or occupancy of a property or that applicable grading and building permits have been issued, internal infrastructure installed, foundations poured and above ground construction initiated and ongoing.

Utility Pole shall mean any pole or tower owned by any utility company that is primarily used to support wires or cables necessary to the provision of electrical or other utility services regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Utility-Scale Solar Power Generating Facility shall mean a facility where solar energy generation for the purpose of sales of generated electricity is the principal use. Utility-scale solar generating facilities consist of one (1) or more freestanding ground-mounted solar collector devices, solar-related equipment and other accessory structures and buildings including substations, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and other appurtenant structures and facilities. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.16.220 (V)
Vanpool shall mean a vehicle carrying seven (7) or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven (7) to fifteen (15) adult passengers, and on a prepaid subscription basis. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Variance shall mean a discretionary entitlement which permits the departure from the strict application of the development standards contained in this Zoning Ordinance.

Vehicle shall mean any motorized form of transportation, including but not limited to automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Vehicle, Commercial shall mean a vehicle customarily used as part of a business for the transportation of goods or people.

Vehicle Reservoir Area shall mean an area for temporary stopping of motor vehicles in a line while awaiting service, such as provided at a drive-through business.

Vehicle Sight Distance shall mean the area through which a driver has a clear view of oncoming vehicle and pedestrian traffic when waiting to proceed at a street corner or driveway.

Veterinary Clinic, Small Animal, shall mean any facility providing medical or surgical treatment, clipping, bathing and similar services to dogs, cats and other small animals, but excluding boarding or the keeping of animals on the premises other than those requiring emergency treatment or those recovering from anesthetic.

Veterinary Hospital, Large Animal shall mean a place where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment, including incidental boarding to horses, livestock and other farm animals.

Vietnamese Pot Bellied Pigs shall mean those pigs (also known as “pygmy pigs” or “mini pigs”), referred to by the scientific name of Sus Scrofa Jubatas Muller or Sus Scrofa (Cristatas) Vittatus, that do not stand higher than twenty (20) inches at the shoulder, are no longer than forty (40) inches from the tip of the head to the end of buttocks, and weigh no more than one hundred twenty (120) pounds.

17.16.230 (W)
Warehouse, Storage and Distribution Buildings shall mean a building primarily used for the storage of equipment, building materials, lumber, furniture, manufactured goods, wholesale products, and similar types of materials or finished products, including, but limited to: wholesale distribution facilities, and moving and transfer storage, except mini-warehouses and personal storage facilities, and excluding bulk storage of materials which are flammable or explosive or which create hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions.

Warehousing shall mean the act of maintaining or operating a warehouse.

Wedding chapel shall mean a building or group of buildings primarily established to perform legal sectarian or non-sectarian marriages for a fee and generally available to the public. The wedding chapel may be free standing or incorporated into a religious assembly use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Wholesale Sales shall mean the sale of goods by an individual or firm, usually in large quantities and at lower prices, to another individual or firm for the purposes of resales; or a product for which no sales tax is paid by the purchaser.

Wireless Telecommunications Services shall mean the provision of services using a communication facility or a wireless telecommunications collocation facility, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following services: personal wireless services as defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 at 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C) or its successor statute, cellular service, personal communication service, and/or data radio telecommunications. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Wrecking Yard shall mean any premises used for the dismantling or wrecking of vehicles required to be registered under the Vehicle Code of the State of California including the buying, selling or dealing in such vehicles or the integral parts or component materials thereof, and the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled, partially dismantled or wrecked inoperative vehicles. Wrecking yards shall not include the incidental storage of inoperative or disabled vehicles in connection with the legal operation of an automobile repair garage, automobile body and fender repair shop or automobile impound yard. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

17.16.240 (X)
Xeriscape shall mean a water conservation concept that stresses the use of the appropriate plant material and irrigation techniques which are well suited for the local microclimate. This concept incorporates native plants, selected hardscapes, and proper planting and irrigation techniques that improve the overall water efficiency of a landscape system. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

17.16.250 (Y)
Yard shall mean an open space on a parcel of land, other than a court, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by this Zoning Ordinance.

Yard, Front shall mean an area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line or the existing or future street right-of-way and a structural setback line parallel thereto. On corner lots, the shortest street frontage shall be the front yard in residential land use districts, while the longest street frontage shall be the front yard in commercial/industrial land use districts. Typically, the property line is behind back of sidewalk, but could be more or less as determined by the City Engineer. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Yard, Interior Side shall mean an area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the required rear yard or, where there is no required rear yard, to the rear lot line and from the interior side lot line to a setback line parallel thereto.

Yard, Rear shall mean an area extending across the full width of the lot between the rear lot line and a setback line parallel thereto. On flag lots, the rear yard location shall be determined through project review.

 

Yard, Street Side shall mean an area extending from the required front yard or, where there is no required front yard, from the front lot line to the rear lot line, and from the side street lot line, or the existing or future side street right-of-way (whichever is greater) to a structural setback line parallel thereto.

Yard Sales – see Garage Sales.

Year means a calendar year.

17.16.260 (Z)
Zero Lot Line shall mean the location of a structure on a lot in such a manner that one (1) or more of the structure’s sides rest directly on a lot line.

Zone shall mean a portion of the territory of the City, exclusive of streets, alleys and other public ways, within which certain uses of land, premises and buildings are not permitted and within which certain yards and open spaces are required and certain height limits are established for buildings, all as set forth and specified in this Ordinance.

Zoning Ordinance shall mean this document, approved by Ordinance No. 1060, and any subsequent amendments thereto.

 

Chapter 17.20
GENERAL REVIEW PROCEDURES
17.20.010 Review Procedures
A.    Land use applications will be reviewed and approved in accordance with three basic procedures:

1.    Public hearing by the City Council and/or Planning Commission, in which the reviewing authority invites public testimony for and against the land use proposal, reviews evidence and renders its decision.

2.    Public hearing by the Hearing Officer, in which the Planning Director or his or her designee conducts a public hearing and invites public testimony for and against the land use proposal, reviews evidence and renders his/her decision.

3.    Administrative Review, used when land use decisions are made based upon standards that have been adopted by the City as law or policy. The reviewing authority shall be the Planning Director, or his or her designee. The reviewing authority may render a land use decision without giving notice to surrounding property owners and other parties. However, where deemed necessary, the reviewing authority may require that notice be provided to contiguous property owners.

B.    Review procedures for each application type are specified in Chapters 17.21 through 17.28 PMC.

17.20.020 Notification Procedures
A.    Public notice sign of submitted application

1.    Requirement for a Public Notice Sign. The Planning Director may require that at such time as an application requiring a public hearing has been filed and deemed complete, a public notice sign or signs be posted at the project site. The purpose of the sign notice requirement is to notify the community and the residents in the affected area of the proposed development early in the review process, allowing an opportunity for public input during the initial stages of project review. At a minimum, the sign shall state the application file number, a description of the proposed use (including square footage), the area of the project site, the current zoning and any proposed zone change, and any other pertinent information needed to clearly convey the nature of the proposed project.

2.    Sign criteria and maintenance. The following rules and standards shall apply to required public notice signs:

a.    Sign size and specifications. All public notice sign(s) shall be four (4) feet by eight (8) feet in size and be constructed to the specifications of Figure 17.2.20.2. The specific project information text on the sign shall be provided by the Planning Division. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    Location and installation standards. All public notice sign(s) shall be installed according to the specifications of Figure 17.2.20.2. The location for the sign(s) on the project site shall be determined by the Planning Director. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

c.    Sign removal and maintenance. All public notice sign(s) must be kept adequately maintained and remain in place until the final decision on the application has been made or the application is withdrawn. All sign(s) shall be removed by the applicant within fourteen (14) days of the final decision or date of withdrawal. Failure to remove the sign within the prescribed period may result in removal and forfeiture of the sign to the City, with the cost of removal and storage to be paid by the applicant.

B.    Notice of land use decisions

1.    General provisions

a.    Notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all surrounding property owners and occupants for land use decisions using the Public Hearing procedures as described in this Section. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    Notice shall be given by first class mail to any person who has filed a written request for such notice. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

 

FIGURE 17.2.20.2
INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PUBLIC NOTICE SIGNS

c.    When the notification procedures for applications as specified in this Chapter permit decisions with limited notice, notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to all contiguous property owners.

d.    Notice shall be given in the case of a conversion of residential real property to a condominium project, community apartment project or stock cooperative, pursuant to State law.

e.    Notice may be given in such other manner as is required by State law or deemed necessary or desirable by the Planning Department.

f.    Said notice shall include information about the proposal, the project site, the hearing, the environmental review process, and proposed findings pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act, including but not limited to the date, time, and place of the public hearing, the identity of the hearing body or officer, a general description of the matter to be considered, a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the real property (if any) that is the subject of the hearing, and whether a Negative Declaration or Environmental Impact Report has been prepared.

g.    “Surrounding property,” for the purposes of this Section, shall be defined as those properties that fall within a radius drawn from the nearest limits of the property that is the subject of the land use application, as follows:

(i)    If the subject property is twenty (20) acres or less in size, all properties within a five hundred (500) feet radius shall be notified.

(ii)    If the subject property is greater than twenty (20) acres but less than one hundred sixty (160) acres in size, all properties within a seven hundred (700) foot radius shall be notified.

(iii)    If the subject property is greater than one hundred sixty (160) acres in size, all properties within a one thousand (1,000) foot radius shall be notified.

(iv)    The Planning Director may expand the surrounding property notice requirement if deemed necessary to include all properties potentially affected by the application.

h.    A one-eighth (1/8) page display advertisement in a newspaper of general circulation within the City may be substituted for individual property owner notice, whenever the individual notice would require notification of one thousand (1,000) or more property owners. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

2.    Public hearing notification

At least ten (10) days before the required public hearing on a land use decision, the Planning Director shall cause notice of the time and place of the public hearing on the project to be given in the following manner:

a.    Notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation within the City for land use approvals requiring a public hearing, if such a newspaper has been legally adjudicated for this purpose.

b.    Notice shall be posted at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing in at least three (3) public places.

c.    The public notice sign(s) required under subsection A of this Section shall indicate the public hearing date and shall remain on the subject site a minimum of ten (10) days prior to the hearing.

d.    Additional public notification beyond the boundaries specified in subsection (B)(1)(g) of this Section may be required for a development related project as determined by the Planning Director in any one of the following circumstances:

(i)    The proposed development is a residential infill project with a higher intensity land use than that of the existing neighborhood; or,

(ii)    The proposed development is an infill project which requires a General Plan amendment; or,

(iii)    The development is a proposed infill project which requires an EIR; or,

(iv)    As determined to be necessary and desirable by the Planning Director based on the nature of the proposed project. For large projects, the Planning Director may determine that more than one sign is necessary.

e.    In determining the boundaries of an expanded notification area, the following criteria shall be used:

(i)    The expanded area may be directly affected by the proposed project due to proposed or established circulation, drainage patterns, view, grading, or other environmental or infrastructural conditions; or

(ii)    The expanded area is an integral part of the affected neighborhood or subdivision.

f.    If it is determined upon initial submittal that supplemental notification is necessary, the applicant shall be notified within thirty (30) days, as part of the City’s Notice of Complete Application, of expanded notification area to be included in the mailings, and shall be required to submit three (3) sets of gummed address labels based on the latest equalized tax assessors rolls for the expanded area. The application shall not be deemed complete until the labels have been submitted.

17.20.030 Pre-Application Conference
A.    The Planning Department may request that an applicant submit materials for and attend a pre-application conference to review the development proposal prior to acceptance of the application. The purpose of this conference is to acquaint the City with the intentions of the applicant, to acquaint the applicant with any applicable policies and procedures, to identify City Codes and improvement standards applicable to the proposal, and to identify any significant development opportunities and/or constraints on the site.

B.    The pre-application conference shall include an exchange of information concerning the entire area intended by the applicant to be developed, even if such development is intended to proceed by stages, whether or not applications for review of the entire project area are made at the time of the initial application.

C.    Application for a pre-application conference shall be made at the Planning Department, and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as adopted by the City Council. The applicant shall submit development plans and or other applicable materials, showing proposed land use types, areas and locations. The conceptual development plan and/or materials shall include sufficient information about the proposal to permit evaluation of the development issues identified in this Section.

D.    The pre-application conference shall address, but not be limited to, the following subject matter:

1.    Subject parcel: Its size, location, dimensions and area; any existing improvements or development on site; existing General Plan and zoning designations;

2.    Proposed development project: Uses proposed for the site; type and placement of buildings and other improvements;

3.    Characteristics of the project site and vicinity: Existing and proposed land use designations and development on adjacent parcels; any identified natural or man-made hazards on site or in the vicinity;

4.    Proposed circulation improvements, both on and off-site: Access points and vehicular accessways, parking, loading, and pedestrian circulation; location, width and existing and proposed improvements on adjacent roadways;

5.    Public improvements: Type, location and sizes of public facilities likely to be required to support the proposal, including utilities, sewer, water and drainage, along with a plan for providing and maintaining improvements;

6.    Open space: Location, amount, type and method of maintenance for proposed open space and landscaped areas; and

7.    Community service impacts: Estimated impacts on public services, including schools, parks, fire and police protection, and solid waste disposal.

17.20.040 Development Applications
A.    Scope. Applications for all land use decisions shall be made at the Planning Department on forms available from the Department. Each application for a land use decision shall be accompanied by such information and materials deemed necessary by the Department to render the requested land use decision. All applications shall comply with all applicable procedures of this Section and be consistent with the following:

1.    Any application made under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance may be initiated by the City Council, or by any person who has a legal interest in the property which is the subject of the application unless otherwise indicated in this Zoning Ordinance.

2.    All land use decisions that are subject to the California Environmental Quality Act shall be reviewed by the Planning Department.

3.    When more than one (1) land use decision is required for a single project, all applications shall be filed concurrently, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director.

4.    The Planning Department shall prepare written guidelines that set forth detailed procedures for the review of each application type, and which outline the information and materials required for each application. Any application for a land use decision that does not meet the requirements set forth in the applicable guidelines may be deemed incomplete or not accepted for filing.

B.    Application fees and deposits. Concurrent with the submittal of an application for development, a fee and/or deposit shall be made, in the amount determined by City Council resolution, to cover the cost incurred in the processing of the application(s).

17.20.050 Time Limitations for Application Acceptance
The following time limits are established for accepting land use applications as complete, unless otherwise required or authorized by applicable law.

A.    Not later than thirty (30) days after the City has received an application for a development project, the City shall determine, in writing, whether the submitted application materials are complete, and shall immediately transmit such determination to the applicant.

Upon receipt of any resubmittal of the application, a new thirty (30) day time period shall begin during which the City shall determine the completeness of the application. If the application together with these submitted materials are determined not to be complete, the applicant may appeal the decision to require additional information to the Planning Commission, as provided for in PMC 17.20.110.

B.    The Planning Director or his/her designee and the applicant may mutually agree to a reasonable extension of these time limits, as permitted by State law.

17.20.060 Denial of Incomplete Applications
A.    In the event an application is deemed incomplete and the applicant fails to provide required information within six (6) months of the date of the incomplete letter, the City shall notify the applicant, in writing, that said application will be deemed automatically withdrawn unless all items needed to deem the application complete are received within twelve (12) months of the incomplete letter. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.20.070 Time Limits for Rendering Land Use Decisions
The following time limits are established for rendering land use decisions, unless otherwise required or authorized by applicable law.

A.    Except for legislative acts of the City Council, the City shall render its decision on a land use application within the following time limits unless otherwise required or authorized by applicable law:

1.    If a Negative Declaration is prepared, or if the project is exempt pursuant to the Public Resources Code, the project shall be approved or disapproved within the time limits set forth by California Government Code Section 65950, as amended from time to time except as provided in subsection (A)(3) of this Section.

2.    If an Environmental Impact Report (EIR) is prepared, the project shall be approved or disapproved within the time limits set forth by California Government Code Section 65950, as amended from time to time, except as provided in subsection (A)(3) of this Section.

3.    Should compelling circumstances justify additional time to complete the environmental review process, an extension of time may be granted by the Planning Department, if the project applicant requests or consents to such an extension, subject to the applicable provisions of State law and the City’s adopted CEQA Guidelines.

4.    The Planning Commission shall approve, conditionally approve, extend, or disapprove a tentative map or minor subdivision plot plan of a proposed subdivision within the legal time limits established by the Subdivision Map Act. These time limits or any other time limits for reporting and acting on maps as specified in the Title 16 PMC (Subdivisions) or any other applicable adopted ordinance, policy or code, may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the Planning Department. Upon consent of the subdivider, a waiver of any of these time limits may be obtained for the purpose of permitting concurrent processing of related land use applications, or an environmental review on the same development project or subdivision.

B.    When a land use application decision is contingent on approval of another application which requires legislative action, such as a general plan amendment or zone change, the time limits specified by this Section for acting on such a land use application shall commence on the effective date of the last such legislative action on which that land use application is contingent.

17.20.080 Decisions by Reviewing Authority
A.    A reviewing authority may refer a request for a land use decision to the reviewing authority designated as the appeal body for that type of land use application. In such cases, a statement containing the reasons for referring the land use decisions shall be prepared by the referring authority.

B.    Prior to rendering a land use decision, the reviewing authority shall address each of the required findings or criteria that apply to the application type as described in this Division. Evidence or testimony shall be given to substantiate the reviewing authority’s determination on each of the findings applicable to the case being considered, and shall be specifically cited in the action taken by the reviewing authority.

C.    From time to time, development actions may be continued. Where such continuances are requested by the applicant, the City may require payment of fees as specified by City Council resolution, to reimburse costs reasonably borne for such continuance of the public hearing.

D.    The reviewing authority may take an action of denial without prejudice on a land use application. Such action shall allow the applicant to reapply for the same permit immediately upon the effective date of the decision unless otherwise specified in the Zoning Ordinance.

E.    In approving an application for a land use decision, the reviewing authority may establish reasonable conditions to its approval that are found to be necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.

17.20.090 Effective Date of Land Use Decisions
A.    Ordinances approving land use decisions shall become effective thirty (30) days after the second reading of the ordinance, unless otherwise specified within the ordinance.

B.    Land use decisions made at a public hearing shall be effective on the eleventh day after the decision date, except when the tenth such day is not a City business day. In such circumstances, the land use decision shall become effective on the second consecutive City business day following such tenth day.

C.    Land use decisions made by administrative action shall become effective on the eleventh day after the written notice of the land use decision has been deposited in the U. S. mail, except when the tenth such day is not a City business day. In such instances, the land use decision shall become effective on the second consecutive City business day following such tenth day.

D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, land use decisions which are made contingent upon approval of a legislative action, such as a general plan amendment or zone change, shall become effective on the date when the approval of the last such application to which they are subject becomes effective.

17.20.100 Modifications to Land Use Approvals
Minor modifications to the approved site plan or the conditions of approval for a development project may be approved by the Planning Director through an application for a Minor Modification, pursuant to PMC 17.26.040. However, should the Planning Director determine that the modification(s) may have significant impacts on the project site or surrounding properties, the Planning Director may require submittal of an application and approval of a Major Modification to the original project approval. In the latter case, the review procedures for the requested modification(s) shall be those which were applicable to the project when originally reviewed.

17.20.110 Appeal Procedures
A.    Prior to its effective date, any land use decision made in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance by a reviewing authority other than the City Council, may be appealed by the applicant, a member of the City Council, or any other person as follows: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

1.    The Planning Commission shall consider appeals regarding land use decisions made by the Planning Director.

2.    The Planning Commission may refer consideration of an appeal to the City Council, except for those decisions involving a variance, a determination as to the completeness of an application, or the requirement for preparation of an EIR.

3.    The City Council shall consider appeals regarding land use decisions made by the Planning Commission, except as specified above.

B.    Applications for an appeal of a land use decision, including an appeal filed by a member of the City Council, shall be made upon forms supplied by the reviewing authority to which the appeal is being made. All such applications for appeals shall be submitted to the Planning Department and shall be accompanied by a written statement of the grounds upon which the appeal is based. A uniform fee, as established by the City Council, shall be paid at the time the appeal is filed. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

C.    An appeal of a land use decision must be filed prior to the date on which such land use decision becomes effective, as specified in PMC 17.20.090. A properly filed application for appeal stays proceedings in the matter appealed until a decision is rendered on the appeal.

D.    Within thirty (30) days of the acceptance of an application for an appeal of a land use decision (except where otherwise provided in the State Subdivision Map Act), the Planning Director or City Clerk shall establish a hearing date and shall give notice of the date, time and place of the hearing to the appellant, the applicant, and to any other party who has requested in writing to be so notified. In addition, notice shall also be given in the same manner as notice was given for the land use decision being appealed.

E.    Any member of the City Council who appeals a land use decision made in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance to the City Council shall abstain from participating as a member of the City Council in the appeal hearing and decision, but may provide written or oral testimony on the matter to the City Council in the same manner as, and in the time provided for, members of the general public. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

F.    Upon hearing the appeal, the appeal body shall consider the record and such additional evidence as may be offered, and may affirm, reverse or modify, in whole or in part, the order, requirements, decision, determination, interpretation or ruling being appealed, or may make or substitute such other or additional decision or determination as it may find warranted under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, or other applicable adopted City ordinance, resolution or standards. The appeal body is subject to all of the criteria and findings requirements imposed upon the original decision maker, including the requirements for environmental review. The appropriate authority shall forthwith transmit a copy of the decision to the applicant, appellant and, in the case of a City Council decision, to the City Planning Commission.

17.20.120 Approval Period for Conditional Land Use Decisions
Any conditional land use decision made in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to the following time limitations:

A.    Unless all conditions have been complied with and the occupancy, use or division of land authorized by the land use decision has been inaugurated or been recorded within the time specified for each land use application type within this Zoning Ordinance, the land use decision shall become null and void. For the purposes of this Section, the term “inaugurated” shall mean that applicable grading and building permits have been issued, internal infrastructure installed, foundations poured, and above ground construction initiated and ongoing.

B.    Where circumstances warrant, the reviewing authority may grant an extension of time. The length of such extension shall be determined by the reviewing authority based on the limitation specified in this Division, but in no case shall a conditional land use decision be extended for a total approval period exceeding five (5) years unless otherwise provided by state law. The reviewing authority of an application for an extension of time of a previously approved development project shall be the authority which reviewed the original application, except where such application was approved on appeal. All requests for a time extension shall be submitted in complete form within ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date and be deemed complete by the City by the expiration date in accordance with PMC 17.20.050 and 17.20.060.

C.    Public projects shall not be subject to a time limitation unless specific time limits are included within conditions placed upon the project’s approval. When time limits are placed within the conditional approval of a public project, extensions of time may be granted whenever warranted, provided no single action is taken to grant an extension greater than twenty-four (24) months.

17.20.130 Pre-Construction Conference
A.    The City may request that a project applicant or developer attend a pre-construction conference prior to the submittal of construction and/or grading plans for a conditionally approved development project. The purpose of this conference is to acquaint the developer with the requirements, policies and procedures of the City, to identify special conditions of approval and/or mitigation measures which must be addressed at the construction stage, and to familiarize the City with anticipated construction schedules and personnel.

B.    Application for a pre-construction conference shall be made at the Planning Department, and shall be accompanied by the required fee as adopted by the City Council. The applicant may be required to submit materials at the time of application to facilitate review of construction related issues on the project.

17.20.140 Final Clearance
A.    No building, structure, or land shall be used or occupied, and no change in the existing occupancy classification or existing use of a building, structure, or land, or portion thereof, shall be made unless a Zoning Clearance is first obtained from the Planning Department, in addition to other required approvals, inspections, and certificates.

B.    New buildings

Final clearance from the Planning Department shall be granted only after such new buildings, enlargement, or alteration have been completed in conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and with any approved site development plans and required conditions, and when the proposed use conforms to the Zoning Ordinance and any other applicable adopted City codes, resolutions, ordinances, or standards.

C.    Existing buildings and undeveloped land

Except as provided in Chapter 17.29 PMC (Non-Conforming Uses and Structures), final clearance from the Planning Department shall be granted for the re-use of an existing building or the use of undeveloped land only after the improvements for such building or land conform to the property development standards of the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable City ordinances, resolutions, codes, or standards. Such standards may include the provision of required walls, landscaping, parking, trash enclosures, street improvements, and all other improvements determined by the reviewing authority to be necessary or required by any regulating authority for the particular use.

Chapter 17.21
SITE PLAN REVIEW
17.21.010 Purpose
The provisions of this Chapter are intended to establish a Site Plan Review process by which certain types of development projects and structures are subject to a discretionary review approval process before the Approval Authority, to ensure that the site plan, building layout, size, shape, scale, mass, height, architectural design, architectural components, materials, colors, landscaping and other aspects of the physical plan for the development project are compatible with neighboring developments, are appropriate for the site, and achieve the highest level of design that is feasible for the project. The City intends to use this Site Plan Review process to improve the aesthetic character of the community, preserve and enhance property values, protect adjacent properties from adverse impacts caused by development projects, assist private and public developers to be more cognizant of public concerns for the aesthetics of projects, and bring about a community that is safe, functional and attractive. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-03, adopted by City Council January 28, 2004.)

17.21.020 General Provisions
A.    No person shall undertake, conduct or use, or cause to be undertaken, conducted or used, any development project(s) which requires Site Plan Review, without having first complied with the provisions of this Chapter.

B.    Where the use proposed, the adjacent land uses, environmental significance or limitations, topography, or traffic circulation is found to so require, the reviewing authority may establish more stringent regulations than those otherwise specified for the applicable zone district in which the project site is located.

C.    The following uses have been determined to be exempt from Site Plan Review requirements:

1.    Interior remodels which do not result in substantial changes in the character of the occupancy or use, or cause greater impact on traffic or waste disposal, as determined by the Director of Building and Safety and Planning Director;

2.    Alterations to building exteriors not resulting in significant changes of use, drainage patterns, parking, traffic, easements, or greater impacts on infrastructure and public services, as determined by the Planning Director;

3.    Repair and maintenance of structures or parking areas, unless constrained by existing infrastructure and existing drainage patterns and/or easements;

4.    Replacement and/or repair of a structure partially destroyed by fire, flood or other natural occurrence, when the repair of such structure is determined by the Director of Building and Safety and Planning Director to be consistent with the design, use and intensity of the original structure, and consistent with the zoning and General Plan designations;

5.    Expansions to multiple residential, commercial or industrial buildings or structures of less than twenty-five (25) percent in total floor area or fifteen hundred (1500) square feet, whichever is greater, where the proposed expansion will not result in a change in the land use or intensity, or cause increased impacts on existing infrastructure and public services, as determined by the Planning Director. A new Site Plan Review or Major Modification shall be required where an addition, which combined with any addition approved within thirty-six (36) months of the filing of the application, exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the total floor area or fifteen hundred (1500) square feet, whichever is greater;

6.    Reductions of floor or building area within a previously approved Site Plan Review where it is determined that the modification would not result in a significant change in circumstances requiring additional environmental or planning review.

7.    Single-family residential development (one residence per parcel) and duplex development (two residences per parcel), on existing lots of record.

D.    Where permitted by the zone and unless otherwise specified, the following uses shall require approval of a Site Plan Review.

1.    Any new construction of a commercial, industrial, multiple-family residential, or institutional use (including public and quasi-public facilities), except as otherwise specified in this Chapter;

2.    Additions to preexisting multiple residential, commercial or industrial structures or uses which have been legally established under the provisions of an approved Site Plan Review and which are permitted as such in the applicable zone district, which will result in an increase in total floor area of twenty-five (25%) percent or greater, or expansions of one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or greater;

3.    Projects involving an intensification of land use when the new use has a higher required parking ratio than that required by the previous use that is permitted in the underlying zone district with Site Plan Review. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

E.    All applications for Site Plan Review or a Major Modification of a Site Plan Review shall be reviewed by the Hearing Officer, which shall be the Planning Director or his/her designee, except as otherwise provided by PMC 17.20.080.

F.    Any use existing on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance which was permitted subject to an approved Site Plan Review shall be deemed a pre-existing use. Such use may continue in accordance with this Division, provided that the use is operated and maintained in compliance with the conditions prescribed at the time of its establishment, if any. Any expansion, alteration, or reconstruction of a building housing a previously approved Site Plan Review use which has become non-conforming due to adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendments thereto, shall comply with Chapter 17.29 PMC regulating non-conforming uses until such use is brought into conformance with this Zoning Ordinance. Any use existing on the effective date of this Ordinance which would require approval of a Site Plan Review to be established in that zone, but for which such approval has not been obtained, shall be deemed a Non-Conforming Use and regulated by Chapter 17.29 PMC.

17.21.030 Application Procedure
A.    Pre-application conference

A conference between City staff, any referral agencies deemed necessary by the City, and the applicant may be conducted pursuant to PMC 17.20.030.

B.    Formal application submittal

1.    The project applicant must be the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner.

2.    After a pre-application conference has been held, when applicable, the applicant shall prepare a comprehensive site plan and complete the required application forms supplied by the City. The applicant shall file said plans and application with the Planning Department, along with the required fee as adopted by the City Council. Information requested on the application form and other processing requirements, including but not limited to number of copies requested, maps, graphics or informational reports and studies, shall be determined by the Planning Department.

3.    The applicant may be required to clarify, correct or supply additional information before the application is determined by the City to be complete. Upon making the determination as to whether the application conforms to these standards, the City will notify the applicant in writing when the application has been accepted, or whether the application has been deemed incomplete, within the time limitations outlined in PMC 17.20.050.

 

C.    Site plan

The application shall be accompanied by the required number of site plan maps, drawn at a minimum scale of 1"=20' or other scale approved by the Planning Department, on standard sheets of 24" by 36". The site plans shall indicate the location of all known and proposed easements and improvements; structures and improvements proposed to be demolished, relocated, or constructed; and all other pertinent information which can be graphically depicted on the plan, as specified in the checklist provided by the Planning Department.

D.    Drawings and elevations

Elevations showing the general appearance, features and heights of proposed structures shall be submitted, as required on the application checklist.

When required by the Planning Department, drawings and elevations shall be submitted in addition to those accompanying the site plan, which shall include but not be limited to the following:

1.    Roof overhangs and any other parts of the structures that protrude from the building surfaces.

2.    Details indicating rooftop screening materials, methods, and a view analysis of proposed screening, when required.

3.    Uses of each room or floor plans, if required.

17.21.040 Approval Requirements
A.    A Site Plan Review approval shall apply only to the property for which the application was made, and shall apply to that property as long as the use for which approval was granted is in effect, regardless of changes in ownership.

B.    A project approved by Site Plan Review shall be inaugurated within thirty-six (36) months from the effective date of the decision. One or more extensions of time, not to exceed a total of twenty-four (24) months from the original expiration date, may be granted pursuant to PMC 17.20.120.

C.    The following requirements may be placed upon the development project by the reviewing authority as conditions of approval:

1.    Dedications and/or easements for streets, alleys, drainage, public utilities, recreational trails, flood control, and such other rights-of-way as may be determined essential to the orderly development of the site and abutting properties.

2.    On and off-site improvements, including but not limited to the following:

a.    Grading, drainage, and drainage structures necessary to protect the public safety;

b.    Curbs and gutters, street pavement, sidewalks, street lights and traffic control devices, and bus turnouts and shelters; all road improvements are to be constructed pursuant to plans and specifications of the Public Works Department of the City of Palmdale;

c.    Adequate water service and fire protection equipment, pursuant to plans and specifications of the Public Works Department of the City of Palmdale and Los Angeles County Fire Department;

d.    Sanitary sewer facilities and connections;

e.    Services from public utilities where provided;

f.    Street trees and landscaping;

g.    On-site landscaping, walls and/or fences, trash enclosures, and lighting fixtures;

h.    Pedestrian walkways and site amenities, including seating and other fixtures, where appropriate;

i.    In addition to the above requirements, the reviewing authority shall require such additional improvements and facilities as determined reasonably necessary for the proper development of the site and the area.

17.21.050 Determination by the Approval Authority
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-03, adopted by City Council January 28, 2004.)

No Application for Site Plan Review shall be approved by the Approval Authority unless the application, in its final submitted form, or as conditioned, meets all of the following criteria:

A.    The design and layout of the proposed development or structures is consistent with the City’s General Plan, any applicable specific plan, any applicable design guidelines, and the development standards set forth in this Zoning Ordinance;

B.    The design of the structures, including layout, size, shape, mass, height, architectural elements and other design factors are appropriate to the size and shape of the lot and are compatible and harmonious with the uses and structures on adjacent properties;

C.    The design of the project will provide a desirable environment for its occupants, the visiting public and its neighbors through the use of high-quality building materials, design elements, colors textures and landscape features; and

D.    The building materials and design features are of a quality and type that will remain aesthetically appealing over time without necessitating frequent and unrealistic maintenance or replacement.

17.21.060 Revisions and Modifications
Revisions or modifications of Site Plan Review cases can be requested by the applicant.

A.    Minor revisions

A revision or modification to an approved Site Plan Review such as, but not limited to, minor changes in the site design, parking or building placement, which will not increase or change the use or intensity of the site, may be acted on by the Planning Director upon submittal of an application, required materials and applicable fees for Minor Modification, pursuant to PMC 17.26.040.

B.    Major revisions

A major revision or modification to an approved Site Plan Review such as, but not limited to, change in conditions, expansions, intensification, location, or hours of operation, may be requested by the applicant. Such request shall be processed through application of a Major Modification or new Site Plan Review, pursuant to the provisions contained in this Division.

17.21.070 New Applications Following Denial
Following the denial of an application for a Site Plan Review, no application for a Site Plan Review for the same or substantially the same use and design on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one (1) year from the date of denial.

Chapter 17.22
CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
17.22.010 Purpose
The purpose of a Conditional Use Permit is to allow certain uses that contribute to the orderly growth and development of the City to be properly integrated into the surroundings in which they are to be located. The Conditional Use Permit process is intended to provide an opportunity for public review and evaluation of site specific requirements and characteristics, to provide adequate mitigation of any potentially adverse impacts, and to ensure that all site development regulations and performance standards are provided in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance. In addition, the Conditional Use Permit ensures ongoing compliance with conditions of operation which may be applied to the use in order to protect public health, safety and welfare, and to ensure compliance with the General Plan goals, objectives and policies.

17.22.020 General Provisions
A.    No person shall undertake, conduct or use, or cause to be undertaken, conducted or used, any development projects which require a Conditional Use Permit, without having first complied with the provisions of this Division.

B.    In granting any Conditional Use Permit, the reviewing authority shall affix those conditions which it deems necessary in order to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare of the district and to ensure compliance with the General Plan. Where the use proposed, the adjacent land uses, environmental significance or limitations, topography, or traffic circulation is found to so require, the reviewing authority may establish more stringent regulations than those otherwise specified for the zone district in which the project is located.

C.    Any use existing on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance which was permitted subject to an approved Conditional Use Permit shall be deemed a pre-existing conditional use. Such use may continue in accordance with this Ordinance, provided that the use is operated and maintained in compliance with the conditions prescribed at the time of its establishment, if any. Any expansion, alteration, or reconstruction of the use or a building housing a previously approved conditional use which has become non-conforming due to adoption of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendments thereto shall comply with Chapter 17.29 PMC regulating non-conforming uses, until such use is brought into conformance with the Zoning Ordinance. Any use existing on the effective date of this Ordinance which would require approval of a Conditional Use Permit to be established in that zone, but for which such approval has not been obtained, shall be deemed a Non-Conforming Use and regulated by Chapter 17.29 PMC.

D.    The Planning Commission shall review requests for Conditional Use Permits at a public hearing, pursuant to PMC 17.20.020.

E.    Uses listed as “Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit” may be permitted in the applicable zone districts pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.

17.22.030 Application Procedure
A.    Pre-application conference

A conference between City staff, any referral agencies deemed necessary by the City, and the applicant may be conducted pursuant to PMC 17.20.030.

B.    Application submittal

1.    The project applicant must be the property owner or an authorized agent of the property owner.

2.    After a pre-application conference has been held, when applicable, the applicant shall prepare a comprehensive site plan and complete the required application forms supplied by the City. The applicant shall file said plans and application with the Planning Department, along with the required fee as adopted by the City Council. Information requested on the application form and other processing requirements, including but not limited to number of copies requested, maps, graphics or informational reports and studies, shall be determined by the Planning Department.

3.    The applicant may be required to clarify, correct or supply additional information before the application is determined by the City to be complete. Upon making the determination as to whether the application conforms to these standards, the City will notify the applicant in writing when the application has been accepted, or whether the application has been deemed incomplete, within the time limitations outlined in PMC 17.20.050.

C.    Site plan

The application shall be accompanied by the required number of site plans, drawn at a minimum scale of 1"=20' or other scale approved by the Planning Department, on standard sheets of 24" by 36". The site plans shall indicate the location of all known and proposed easements and improvements; structures and improvements proposed to be demolished, relocated, or constructed; and all other pertinent information which can be graphically depicted on the plan, as specified in the checklist provided by the Planning Department.

D.    Drawings and elevations

Elevations showing the general appearance and features of proposed structures shall be submitted, as required on the application checklist.

When required by the Planning Department, drawings and elevations shall be submitted in addition to those accompanying the site plan, which shall include but not be limited to the following:

1.    Roof overhangs and any other parts of the structures that protrude from the building surfaces.

2.    Details indicating rooftop screening materials, methods and view analysis of proposed screening, when required.

3.    Uses of each room, or floor plans, if required.

E.    Other pertinent information, as required

Where deemed necessary by the Planning Department to complete the City’s review and evaluation of the proposed use, additional information may be required regarding ongoing use of the site, including but not limited to hours of operation, provisions for on- or off-site security, and other similar conditions of operation.

17.22.040 Approval Requirements
A.    Conditional Use Permit approval shall apply only to the property for which the application was made, and shall apply to that property as long as the use for which approval was granted is in effect, regardless of changes in ownership.

B.    A Conditional Use Permit shall be inaugurated within the period of time specified by the Planning Commission, not to exceed thirty-six (36) months from the effective date of the decision, except as otherwise specified in the conditional use permit. One or more extensions of time, not to exceed a total of twenty-four (24) months from the original expiration date, except as otherwise specified in the conditional use permit, may be granted pursuant to PMC 17.20.120.

C.    The following requirements may be placed upon the development project by the reviewing authority as conditions of approval:

1.    Dedications and/or easements for streets, alleys, drainage, public utilities, recreational trails, flood control, and such other rights-of-way as may be determined essential to the orderly development of the site and abutting properties.

2.    On and off-site improvements, including but not limited to the following:

a.    Grading, drainage and drainage structures necessary to protect the public safety;

b.    Curbs and gutters, street pavement, sidewalks, street lights, traffic control devices and bus turnouts and shelters; all road improvements are to be constructed pursuant to plans and specifications of the Public Works Department of the City of Palmdale;

c.    Adequate water service and fire protection equipment, pursuant to plans and specifications of the Public Works Department and Los Angeles County Fire Department;

d.    Sanitary sewer facilities and connections;

e.    Services from public utilities where provided;

f.    Street trees and landscaping;

g.    On-site landscaping, walls and/or fences, trash enclosures, and lighting fixtures;

h.    Surfacing of parking areas subject to City specifications;

i.    In addition to the above requirements, the reviewing authority shall require such additional improvements and facilities as determined reasonably necessary for the proper development of the site and area.

3.    Regulation of uses and operations on the site, including but not limited to the following:

a.    Regulation of use;

b.    Regulation of time for certain activities;

c.    Duration of use;

d.    Regulation of noise, vibration, odors and lights;

e.    Maintenance of special yards, spaces and buffer areas;

f.    Regulation of points of vehicular ingress and egress;

g.    Regulation of signs;

h.    Required landscaping and site maintenance;

i.    Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the site and surrounding area in an orderly and efficient manner, and in conformity with the intent and purposes of this Zoning Ordinance.

17.22.050 Determination by the Approval Authority
The approval authority will determine the merits of the proposed Conditional Use Permit, and its compliance with the principles, standards, policies and goals of the General Plan, Zoning Ordinance and other applicable ordinances and codes adopted by the City of Palmdale, in order to protect the public health, safety and general welfare. Approval shall be based upon the following minimum criteria, which shall also constitute the findings to be made by the approval authority in approving or denying a Conditional Use Permit:

A.    The proposed use is consistent with the goals, policies, and objectives of the General Plan.

B.    The proposed use is beneficial and desirous to the community and is consistent with the purpose, intent and standards of the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable ordinances and codes adopted by the City of Palmdale.

C.    The site for the proposed use is adequate in size and shape to accommodate all yards, open spaces, setbacks, walls and fences, parking areas, fire and building code considerations, and other features pertaining to the application.

D.    The proposed use and the on-going operation of the use will not have a substantial adverse effect on abutting property or the permitted use thereof, and will not generate excessive noise, vibration, traffic, or other disturbances, nuisances, or hazards.

E.    The site for the proposed use has adequate access, meaning that the site design incorporates street and highway limitations.

17.22.060 Revisions and Modifications
Revisions or modifications of Conditional Use Permits can be requested by the applicant in accordance with the procedures and criteria specified below. Further, the Planning Commission may periodically review, modify or revoke a Conditional Use Permit as specified herein.

A.    Revisions/modifications by applicant

1.    Minor revisions

A revision or modification to an approved Conditional Use Permit such as, but not limited to, minor changes in the site design, parking or building placement, which will not increase or change the use or intensity of the site, may be acted on by the Planning Director upon submittal of an application, required materials, and applicable fees for Minor Modification, pursuant to PMC 17.26.040.

2.    Major revisions

A major revision or modification to an approved Conditional Use Permit such as, but not limited to, change in conditions, expansions, intensification, location, or hours of operation, may be requested by the applicant. Such request shall be processed through application of a major modification or new Conditional Use Permit, as determined by the Planning Director.

B.    Review by Planning Commission

The Planning Commission may periodically review any Conditional Use Permit to ensure that it is being operated in a manner consistent with conditions of approval or in a manner which is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the Commission deems that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full examination, then a public hearing date shall be set.

C.    Modification or revocation by the Planning Commission

1.    After setting a date for public hearing, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant and owners of the Conditional Use Permit in question. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall state that the Commission will be reviewing the Conditional Use Permit for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with PMC 17.20.020.

2.    The Planning Director shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report for the Planning Commission’s consideration. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the commission shall render a decision to do one of the following measures:

a.    Find that the conditional use is being conducted in compliance with the terms and conditions of the Conditional Use Permit and in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke is necessary; or

b.    Find that the conditional use is not being conducted in compliance with the terms and conditions of the Conditional Use Permit and in an appropriate manner and that modifications to conditions are necessary; or,

c.    Find that the conditional use is not being conducted in compliance with the terms and conditions of the Conditional Use Permit and in an appropriate manner and that measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the use; upon making this determination, the Planning Commission may revoke the Conditional Use Permit and order the operation to cease and desist in the time allotted by the Commission.

3.    If the Planning Commission either modifies or revokes a Conditional Use Permit, the resolution shall state reasons for such action.

D.    New applications following denial or revocation

Following the denial or revocation of a Conditional Use Permit application, no application for a Conditional Use Permit for the same or substantially the same use and design or use of the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one (1) year from the date of denial or revocation.

Chapter 17.23
VARIANCES AND MINOR EXCEPTIONS
17.23.010 Purpose
The purpose of a variance or minor exception shall be to ensure that no property, because of special circumstances specifically related to its size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings, shall be deprived of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone district.

17.23.020 General Provisions
A.    In no case shall a variance or minor exception be granted to permit a use other than a use permitted or conditionally permitted in the zone district applicable to the property.

B.    Any variance or minor exception granted shall be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment thereby authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and district in which such property is situated.

17.23.030 Reviewing Authority
A.    The reviewing authority may grant minor exceptions and variances from any property development standard (including setbacks and heights) in the City’s adopted Zoning Ordinance, subject to the procedures set forth in this Division.

B.    Review and approval for the following minor exception requests will be through Administrative Review, pursuant to the following provisions and based upon the findings contained in PMC 17.23.060(C), except that if the development project proposing such minor exception will be reviewed by the Planning Commission or City Council, the reviewing authority for the project may approve the minor exception in conjunction with the project approval.

1.    Fence height. The maximum height of any fence, wall, hedge, or equivalent screening may be increased by a maximum of two (2) feet, where topography or a difference in grade between abutting sites warrants such increase in height to maintain a level of privacy, or to maintain effectiveness of screening, or to provide additional security when warranted, provided that the increased height does not encroach into the Vehicle Site Distance or otherwise impede visibility of motorists. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997)

2.    Setbacks. The minimum setback may be decreased by not more than ten (10) percent where the proposed setback area or yard is in character with the surrounding neighborhood and is not required as an essential open space or recreational amenity to the use of the site, and where such decrease will not unreasonably affect abutting sites. Notwithstanding the provisions of this paragraph, a minor exception may be granted to allow reduction of a required side yard on a single family residential lot by not more than five (5) feet, if it can be determined that the tentative tract map in which the lot is located was approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and that development patterns or conditions within the lot or tract make a larger setback impractical.

3.    Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage may be increased by not more than ten (10) percent of the lot area, where such increases are necessary for improved site planning or architectural design, creation or maintenance of views, or otherwise facilitate desirable features or amenities, and where such increase will not unreasonably affect abutting sites.

4.    Off-site parking. A maximum of ten (10) percent of the required parking for a use may be located on a contiguous site. Said parking shall not be located more than three hundred (300) feet walking distance from the building entrance on the site of the use which such parking will serve, provided that the Planning Director determines that the use will be served as effectively, safely, and conveniently as it would be served if parking was located on the site for which it is required. For the purpose of this Section, contiguous shall mean sharing a common lot line and shall not include parcels, separated by a public right-of-way. The reviewing authority shall require an agreement to ensure on-going availability and maintenance of off-site parking facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.87.050(A)(3).

5.    On-site parking. A maximum ten (10) percent reduction in the required on-site parking spaces may be granted pursuant to PMC 17.87.030(C). The reviewing authority may grant reductions in the number of required parking spaces in accordance with an approved Transportation Demand Management program, pursuant to PMC 17.87.030(B)(5) or for provision of a bus turnout, pursuant to PMC 17.87.030(B)(6).

6.    Minor reconfiguration of existing parking. The reviewing authority may authorize minor reconfiguration of an existing parking lot in order to comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Such reconfiguration may include a maximum ten (10) percent reduction of the applicable onsite parking requirements when it is demonstrated that the reduction will not result in a traffic hazard.

7.    Loading Facilities. A maximum reduction in the number of loading spaces on one (1) space may be granted by the reviewing authority, based upon a finding supported by evidence that such space will not be needed by the use.

8.    Height. The reviewing authority may authorize a ten (10) percent increase in the maximum height limitation for structures, not including signs. Such increases may be approved where necessary to significantly improve the site plan or architectural design, and where scenic views or solar access on surrounding properties are not affected.

9.    On-site landscaping. The reviewing authority may authorize a ten (10) percent decrease in the required on-site landscaping requirement, where it can be demonstrated that such reduction is necessary in order to provide for necessary public transportation and transit improvements, such as bus turnouts and turning lanes; where site constraints preclude the relocation of such landscaping to another location; and where the overall appearance of the site will not be adversely affected.

10.    Landscape setback area. The reviewing authority may allow averaging of the required landscape setback area adjacent to arterial streets, provided the following conditions are met:

a.    The required on-site landscaping requirement is fully met on the site; and

b.    No more than thirty (30%) percent of the landscape setback area along the site frontage shall be allowed to be reduced in width; and

c.    In no case shall the landscaped setback area be less than the ten (10) feet in width; and

d.    The overall landscape design shall not be adversely affected.

11.    Downtown Parking Reduction Study. A reduction in quantity of on-site parking or loading facilities required for uses in the Downtown Commercial Zone may be approved by the Planning Director and City Traffic/Transportation Engineer in consideration of any of the following factors: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-1 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

a.    Availability and proximity of on-street parking and/or municipal parking lots: Striped on-street parking, unstriped but permitted on street parking, median parking and parking within future municipal parking lots may be counted towards meeting a portion of the parking requirements, provided that the Downtown Parking Permit applicant can demonstrate the following to the satisfaction of the Planning Director:

(i)    On-street public parking, which is underutilized during the peak hours of the proposed business operation, exists within 500 feet of the subject property.

(ii)    Off-street municipal parking lots, which are underutilized during the peak hours of the proposed business operation, exist within 500 feet of the subject property.

It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to obtain and submit evidence supporting the off-site parking findings listed above.

b.    Provision of transit shelters may qualify a proposed project for a parking credit of up to ten (10) percent towards the overall parking requirements listed in this Chapter. Provision of bus benches or bus turnout may qualify a proposed project for a parking credit of up to five (5) percent towards the overall parking requirements listed in this Chapter.

c.    Provision of any three or more Pedestrian Amenities listed in PMC 17.75.030(A)(7) may qualify a proposed project for a parking credit of up to five (5) percent towards the overall parking requirements listed in this Chapter. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

d.    Any project which provides both transit and pedestrian amenities as described above may qualify for a cumulative parking credit of up to fifteen (15) percent.

e.    The Planning Director and City Traffic/Transportation Engineer will review and consider requests for reductions in the quantity of required parking or loading facilities for any use where the applicant can submit reliable and compelling evidence to demonstrate the adequacy of a lessor quantity of required parking or loading facilities. Said evidence shall normally consist of a parking study or parking survey, prepared by a qualified individual and meeting appropriate technical standards as deemed necessary by the City Planning Director and City Traffic/Transportation Engineer.

f.    Joint use of loading zones may be incorporated into a Downtown Parking Reduction study. When considering a request for joint use of loading zones, the reviewing authority shall consider proximity of the loading zone to the uses being served, the nature of the uses being served, their demand for frequent or continuous loading and the nature of the goods being loaded.

g.    Any change of use, change in combination of uses or change in location shall require application and approval of a new Downtown Parking Reduction Study.

12.    Other deviations from development standards determined by the Planning Director to be minor in nature, provided that such deviation does not exceed ten (10) percent of any required specification and no adverse effects will result from the deviation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

C.    In calculating percentages specified in subsection B of this Section, rounding up of fractions shall not be permitted.

D.    Any request to deviate from development standards required by this Zoning Ordinance which is not listed in subsection B of this Section shall be deemed a variance and shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission at a public hearing.

E.    The Planning Commission is authorized to grant variances in accordance with the procedures in this Division, with respect to development standards which include but are not limited to the following:

1.    Fences, walls, and screening;

2.    Site area, width, and depth;

3.    Front, rear, and side yards;

4.    Lot coverage;

5.    Height of structures;

6.    Landscaping;

7.    Usable open space;

8.    Performance standards;

9.    Parking facilities; any reduction in the number of spaces shall be reviewed pursuant to the requirements of PMC 17.87.220. Provision of off-site parking is subject to the provisions of PMC 17.87.050(A)(3).

10.    Loading areas and facilities, provided that any reduction in the number of loading spaces is supported by evidence demonstrating that the space will not be needed by the use.

11.    Sign height, number, and location.

17.23.040 Application Procedures
A.    An application for a minor exception or variance shall be filed with the Planning Department, along with the required fee. The signed application shall be made by the property owner or his authorized agent.

B.    An application for a minor exception or variance shall be accompanied by all required materials and a site plan showing the subject property as well as the surrounding area. Plans of the subject property shall show all existing and proposed buildings and uses, and any other data required by the Planning Department to adequately review the application.

17.23.050 Approval Requirements
The following requirements may be placed upon a minor exception or variance by the reviewing authority as conditions of approval. All such conditions shall be binding upon the applicants and their successors.

A.    Requirements for special yards, open spaces, buffers, fences, walls, and screening;

B.    Requirements for installation and maintenance of landscaping and erosion control measures;

C.    Requirements for street improvements and dedications, regulation of vehicular ingress and egress, and traffic circulation;

D.    Requirements for maintenance of landscaping and other improvements;

E.    Establishment of development schedules or time limits for performance, completion, or removal;

F.    Requirements for periodic review by the reviewing authority;

G.    Any other such conditions as the reviewing authority may deem reasonably necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, to preserve the public health, safety and welfare, and to enable the reviewing authority to make the findings required by PMC 17.23.060(C).

17.23.060 Determination by the Approval Authority
A.    Minor exception

In evaluating a request for a minor exception, the Planning Director shall determine that the request satisfies the applicable requirements of PMC 17.23.030(B) and the required findings contained in subsection C of this Section and, if granted, is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable codes and ordinances. Prior to rendering a decision, the Planning Director shall provide written notice to contiguous property owners of the requested minor exception. Such notice shall contain a description of the type and location of the requested minor exception and the anticipated decision date, and shall allow ten (10) days to submit comments to the City. Upon the passage of ten (10) days, the Director may render a decision.

B.    Variance

The Planning Commission will determine the merits of any proposed variance, and its compliance with the principles, standards, policies, and goals of the General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance. Approval of any Variance shall be based upon the findings to be made by the approval authority in approving or denying a variance as contained in subsection C of this Section.

C.    Findings for approval of a minor exception or variance

1.    There are special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, so that the strict application of this Zoning Ordinance would deprive such property of privileges enjoyed by other properties in the vicinity and under identical land use district classification;

2.    Granting the minor exception or variance is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other properties in the same vicinity and land use district and denied to the property for which the variance is sought;

3.    Granting the minor exception or variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the properties or improvements in such vicinity and land use district in which the property is located;

4.    Granting the minor exception or variance does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and land use district in which such property is located.

17.23.070 New Application Following Denial
Following the denial of a minor exception or variance application, no application for the same or substantially the same application on the same or substantially the same site shall be filed within one year of the date of denial.

17.23.080 Appeal Procedure
A.    Prior to its effective date, any decision made on a minor exception request by the Planning Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission, pursuant to the provisions of PMC 17.20.110.

B.    Prior to its effective date, any decision made on a variance by the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council, pursuant to the provisions of PMC 17.20.110.

17.23.090 Voiding of Variances or Minor Exceptions
A.    Except as otherwise provided in this Section, any variance or minor exception granted under the provisions of this Ordinance shall become null and void unless:

1.    The construction authorized by said variance or minor exception has been inaugurated within twelve (12) months of the effective date of said variance or minor exception, and pursued diligently to completion; or

2.    The occupancy of land or buildings authorized by such variance or minor exception has taken place within twelve (12) months of the effective date of such variance or minor exception.

B.    Where a variance request is granted concurrently with one or more other entitlements, the variance shall be in effect for the time period allotted under the other land use entitlements, not to exceed an initial period of thirty-six (36) months.

C.    Where circumstances beyond the control of the applicant cause delays which do not permit compliance with the time limits established herein, the reviewing authority may grant an extension of time for a period not to exceed twelve (12) additional months except as provided herein. Where a Variance request is granted concurrently with one or more entitlements, an extension of the variance may be considered by the reviewing authority concurrently with the time extension requests for the other entitlements; however, in no event shall a variance be extended beyond the expiration date of any other land use entitlement on the project site.

D.    The reviewing authority may void any variance or minor exception for non-compliance with the conditions set forth in approving the variance or minor exception.

Chapter 17.24
ZONING/LAND USE ADMINISTRATION
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.24.100 Zone Changes
A.    Purpose

Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or the policies set forth in the General Plan justify such action, zoning boundaries may be amended through the procedures established in this Section.

B.    General provisions

1.    A change in the boundaries of any zone may be initiated by the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of property, by filing an application for a zone change as prescribed in this Section. If the property for which rezoning is proposed is in more than one ownership, all the owners or their authorized agents must join in filing the application. If deemed appropriate by the City to expand the boundaries of any proposed zone change, notice shall be given to all property owners within the proposed expansion boundaries.

2.    A change in the boundaries of any zone may be initiated by the City Council.

3.    An application for a zone change may be filed concurrently with any other application(s) on the same property.

4.    Following the denial of an application for a change in zone, an application for the same or substantially the same change shall not be accepted within one year of the date of denial.

5.    A change in zone shall be indicated on the Zoning Map, along with a notation listing the number and date of each Ordinance amending the Zoning Map, within the revision block of said map.

C.    Application procedure

1.    An application for a change of zone shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Department, along with the required fee as established by City Council resolution.

2.    The Planning Director may require additional information if deemed necessary to enable the Planning Commission and City Council to determine whether the change is consistent with the standards of this Zoning Ordinance and the maps and policies of the General Plan.

D.    Action by Planning Commission

1.    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a zone change. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    The Planning Commission shall determine whether the proposed zone change is consistent with the required findings for approval as set forth in subsection F of this Section, and, if so, shall recommend to the City Council that the zone change be granted or granted in a modified form. If the Planning Commission determines that the proposed change does not meet the required findings for approval, the Planning Commission shall deny the application and their action is final, unless the matter is set for hearing pursuant to PMC 17.20.110 and Section 65856 of the California Government Code.

3.    When the Commission determines, following a public hearing on a proposed zone change, that a change to a zone classification other than the proposed classification specified in the hearing notice is desirable, the Commission may recommend an alternate classification, following new notice and public hearing. The Commission must determine that the recommended alternative is more appropriate for the subject property and is consistent with the General Plan and the Zoning Ordinance.

E.    Action by the City Council

1.    Upon recommendation of the Planning Commission to approve a proposed zone change, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    Following the closing of a public hearing, the Council shall make specific findings as to whether the change is consistent with the objectives of this Zoning Ordinance and the General Plan. If the Council makes these findings, as contained in subsection F of this Section, it shall introduce an ordinance amending the Zoning Map.

3.    The City Council shall not modify a recommendation of the Planning Commission on a zone change until it has requested and considered a report of the Planning Commission on the modification. Failure of the Commission to report within forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of the Council request shall be deemed concurrence.

F.    Required findings for approval

Approval of a change of zone shall be based on the following findings:

1.    The proposed change in zone is consistent with the General Plan.

2.    The site of the proposed change in zone is suitable for any of the land uses permitted within the proposed zone district.

3.    The proposed change in zone is reasonable and beneficial at this time.

4.    The proposed change in zone will not have a substantial adverse effect on surrounding properties or the community in general.

G.    Pre-zoning

1.    For the purpose of establishing zone district boundaries to become effective only upon annexation, property outside the corporate boundaries of the City of Palmdale and within the adopted sphere of influence may be classified within one or more zones in the same manner and subject to the same procedural requirements as prescribed for property within the City.

2.    Upon passage of an ordinance establishing the applicable pre-zoning designation for property outside the City, the Zoning Map shall be revised to show the potential or “pre-zoned” classification to become effective upon annexation. The Zoning Map shall also identify each zone or zones applicable to such property with the label “Pre-zoning” or “PZ” in addition to such other map designation as may be applicable.

17.24.110 Zoning Ordinance Amendments
A.    Purpose

These provisions are intended to provide the City Council with a procedure to amend the Zoning Ordinance when deemed necessary or appropriate to protect public health, safety and welfare or to implement the policies of the General Plan.

B.    General provisions

1.    A Zoning Ordinance amendment may be initiated by any person or entity having a legal interest in property within the City. If the amendment is directly related to a parcel of land, the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of property must file the application. Further, if property that is the subject of an application is in more than one ownership, all of the owners or their authorized agents must join in filing the application.

2.    A Zoning Ordinance amendment may be initiated by the City Council.

3.    Following the denial of an application for a Zoning Ordinance amendment, an application for the same or substantially same amendment shall not be accepted within one (1) year of the date of denial, except as initiated by the Planning Commission or City Council.

4.    A Zoning Ordinance amendment adopted by the City Council shall be incorporated into the Zoning Ordinance.

C.    Application procedure

1.    An application shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Department. An application initiated by a private person or agency shall be accompanied by a fee established by City Council resolution and all necessary application materials.

2.    The Planning Director may require additional information if necessary to enable the Commission and Council to determine whether the amendment is consistent with the objectives of the City’s General Plan.

D.    Action by Planning Commission

1.    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a Zoning Ordinance amendment. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    The Planning Commission shall determine whether the Zoning Ordinance amendment is consistent with the required findings for approval as set forth in subsection F of this Section, and shall recommend to the City Council that the Zoning Ordinance amendment be approved, approved as amended, or denied based upon said findings.

E.    Action by City Council

1.    Upon recommendation of the Planning Commission on a proposed zone change, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    Following the closing of a public hearing, the Council shall determine whether the proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment meets the criteria as set forth in the required findings for approval in subsection F of this Section. If the Council makes these required findings, it shall introduce an Ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance.

3.    The Council shall not modify a recommendation of the Planning Commission on a Zoning Ordinance amendment until it has requested and considered a report of the Commission on the modification. Failure of the Commission to report within forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of the Council request shall be deemed a concurrence.

F.    Required findings for approval

Prior to taking an action to approve or recommend approval of a Zoning Ordinance amendment, the reviewing authority shall find as follows:

1.    The proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment conforms with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan.

2.    The proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment is necessary to implement the General Plan and to provide for public safety, convenience and/or general welfare.

3.    The proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment conforms with the intent of the Zoning Ordinance and is consistent with all other related provisions thereof.

4.    The proposed Zoning Ordinance amendment is reasonable and beneficial at this time.

17.24.120 Determination on Unlisted Uses
A.    Purpose

The procedures contained in this Section allow the Planning Director upon a written request, or the Planning Commission upon referral by the Planning Director, to determine whether a use not specifically listed as a use that is principally permitted or conditionally permitted in a particular zoning district of the City, should be given such designation based upon a similarity to uses already listed.

B.    General provisions

1.    Where the term “similar uses permitted by Planning Director determination” is mentioned within any zone district, it shall be deemed to mean other uses which, in the judgment of the Planning Director as evidenced by a written decision, are similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the same district.

2.    The Planning Director may refer a determination on an unlisted use to the Planning Commission, pursuant to PMC 17.20.080.

3.    In no instance shall the Planning Director or the Planning Commission determine, nor shall these regulations be so interpreted, that a use shall be permitted in a zone when such use is specifically first listed as permissible in a zone district allowing more intensive uses.

4.    The procedures of this Chapter shall not be substituted for the amendment procedure as a means of adding new uses to the list of permitted or conditional uses.

5.    The Planning Commission may, on its own motion or at the request of any party affected thereby, reconsider and change a written decision regarding uses previously determined by the Planning Commission or by the Planning Director.

6.    The Planning Director’s determination regarding conformance of a use to a zone district may be appealed to the Planning Commission, pursuant to PMC 17.20.110. The Planning Commission’s determination regarding conformance of a use to a zone district may be appealed to the City Council, pursuant to PMC 17.20.110.

C.    Application procedure

Application for a Determination on an Unlisted Use shall be made in writing to the Planning Director, and shall include a detailed description of the proposed use and such other information as may be required to facilitate review of the request, along with the required fee as established by resolution of the City Council.

D.    Investigation and report

The Planning Director shall prepare a report which will address the following, and shall submit copies to the applicant and to the Planning Commission:

1.    Comparison of the proposed use to the type and intensity of other uses principally permitted or conditionally permitted in the same zone district;

2.    Evaluation of the purpose and intent of that zone district;

3.    Review of the General Plan to compare the proposed use characteristics with the applicable goals and objectives.

E.    Determination

The Planning Director, or the Planning Commission upon referral by the Planning Director, shall base the decision upon the following findings:

1.    The use in question is of a similar type and intensity to other principally permitted or conditionally permitted uses in the same zone district.

2.    The use in question meets the purpose and intent of the district in which it is proposed.

3.    The use in question meets and conforms to the applicable policies and maps of the General Plan.

17.24.130 General Plan Amendments
A.    Purpose

Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare, or the policies set forth in the General Plan justify such action, land use boundaries may be amended through the procedures established in this Section.

B.    General provisions

1.    A change in the boundaries of any land use designation may be initiated by the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of property, by filing an application for a General Plan Amendment as prescribed in this Section. If the property for which General Plan Amendment proposed is in more than one (1) ownership, all other owners or their authorized agents must join in filing the application. If deemed appropriate by the City to expand the boundaries of any proposed General Plan Amendment, notice shall be given to all property owners within the proposed expansion boundaries.

2.    A change in the boundaries of any designation may be initiated by the City Council.

3.    An application for a General Plan Amendment may be filed concurrently with any other application(s) on the same property.

4.    Following the denial of an application for a change in designation, an application for the same or substantially the same change shall not be accepted within one (1) year of the date of denial.

5.    A change in land use designation shall be indicated on the Land Use Map, along with a notation listing the number and date of each Resolution amending the General Plan Map, within the revision block of said map.

C.    Application procedure

1.    An application for a change of designation shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Division, along with the required fee as established by City Council resolution.

2.    The Director may require additional information if deemed necessary to enable the Planning Commission and City Council to determine whether the change is consistent with the standards of the General Plan.

D.    Action by Planning Commission

1.    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each application for a General Plan Amendment. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    The Planning Commission shall determine whether the proposed General Plan Amendment is consistent with the required findings for approval as set forth in subsection F of this Section, and, if so, shall recommend to the City Council that the General Plan Amendment be granted or granted in a modified form. If the Planning Commission determines that the proposed change does not meet the required findings for approval, the Planning Commission shall deny the application and their action is final, unless the matter is set for hearing pursuant to PMC 17.20.110 and Section 65856 of the California Government Code.

3.    When the Planning Commission determines, following a public hearing on a proposed land use, that a change to a land use designation other than the proposed classification specified in the hearing notice is desirable, the Planning Commission may recommend an alternate classification, following new notice and public hearing. The Planning Commission must determine that the recommended alternative is more appropriate for the subject property and is consistent with the General Plan.

E.    Action by City Council

1.    Upon recommendation of the Planning Commission to approve a proposed General Plan Amendment, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    Following the closing of a public hearing, the City Council shall make specific finding as to whether the change is consistent with the objectives of the General Plan. If the City Council makes the finding, as contained in subsection F of this Section, it shall adopt resolution amending the Land Use Map.

3.    The City Council shall not modify a recommendation of the Planning Commission on a General Plan Amendment until it has requested and considered a report of the Planning Commission on the modification. Failure of the Planning Commission to report within forty-five (45) calendar days after receipt of the City Council request shall be deemed concurrence.

F.    Required findings for approval

1.    The proposed change in land use is consistent with State law.

2.    The amendment is suitable and beneficial for the uses permitted within the associated zone districts. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Chapter 17.25
PROCESSING OF AGREEMENTS
17.25.100 Development Agreements
A.    Purpose

This Section provides procedures and requirements for the consideration of development agreements for the purposes specified in and as authorized by Section 65864 et. seq. of the California Government Code.

B.    General Provisions

1.    Only a qualified applicant may file an application for a Development Agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is the subject of the Development Agreement, or an authorized agent of a person who has a legal or equitable interest. The Planning Director may require an applicant to submit a title report or other evidence satisfactory to the Planning Director to verify the applicant’s interest in the real property and of the authority of the agent to act for the applicant.

2.    An application for a development agreement may be filed concurrently with any other application(s) having a direct relationship to the property which is the subject of the proposed agreement.

C.    Application procedure

1.    An application for a development agreement shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Department, along with the required fee and deposit established by the City Council.

2.    A draft of the proposed development agreement (along with the required number of copies) may be submitted along with the application. Said agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney. If deemed appropriate, the City Attorney may draft the initial agreement for review by the parties thereto. Any legal fees incurred by the City in drafting or reviewing a development agreement shall be paid by the applicant.

3.    The Planning Director may require additional information if deemed necessary to enable the Planning Commission and City Council to determine whether the development agreement is consistent with the objectives of the City’s General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

D.    Action by Planning Commission

1.    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for a development agreement. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    The Planning Commission shall determine whether the development agreement is consistent with the required findings for approval as contained in paragraph F of this Section, and shall recommend to the City Council that the development agreement be approved, approved as amended, or denied.

E.    Action by City Council

1.    Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission on a proposed development agreement, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    Following the closing of a public hearing, the Council shall determine if the Development Agreement is consistent with the findings contained within subsection F of this Section. If determined to be consistent, the City Council shall introduce an ordinance adopting the development agreement.

F.    Required findings for approval

Prior to taking an action to approve or recommend approval of a development agreement, the reviewing authority shall find as follows:

1.    The proposed development agreement conforms with the maps and policies of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

2.    The proposed development agreement complies with the requirements of California Government Code Sections 65865 through 65869.5.

3.    The proposed development agreement will not be detrimental to or cause adverse effects to adjacent property owners, residents, or the general public.

4.    The proposed development agreement provides clear and substantial benefit to the residents of the City of Palmdale.

G.    Ongoing review

The City shall periodically review all approved development agreements to determine whether the applicant, or successor in interest thereto, is demonstrating good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. This review process may require the submittal of an application form, materials, and fees as established by City Council resolution.

H.    Amendments to approved development agreements

Any amendment to a previously-approved development agreement shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures outlined in this Section for a new application.

17.25.110 Density Bonus Agreements
A.    Purpose

This Section provides procedures and requirements for the consideration of density bonus agreements for the purposes specified in and as authorized by Section 65915 et. seq. of the California Government Code.

B.    General provisions

1.    Only a qualified applicant may file an application for a density bonus agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has a legal or equitable interest in the real property that is the subject of the density bonus agreement, or an authorized agent of a person who has a legal or equitable interest. The Planning Director may require an applicant to submit a title report or other evidence satisfactory to the Planning Director to verify the applicant’s interest in the real property and the authority of the agent to act for the applicant.

2.    Where a density bonus request does not involve an existing development, the application for a density bonus agreement shall be filed concurrently with all other development application(s).

3.    The density bonus agreement may only be requested for development projects consisting of (prior to any density increase) five or more dwelling units.

4.    For the purposes of this Chapter, “incentives” and/or “concessions” shall be provided to developers as specified in subsection (B)(10) of this Section in return for the development of housing at affordable levels and shall consist of any of the following: (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

a.    Waiver or modification of a development standard (e.g., parking, setbacks, open space, etc.) that would otherwise inhibit the ability to utilize a density bonus granted on a specific site. A waiver and/or reduction shall not be given if it is determined to have a specific, adverse impact upon health, safety or the physical environment that cannot otherwise be feasibly mitigated. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the housing project if commercial, office, industrial or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and is compatible with the housing project and surrounding area. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

c.    Other regulatory incentives or concessions proposed by the developer or the City that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

5.    When determining the number of units that are affordable, the density bonus shall be included. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

6.    When calculating base density or density bonus numbers, any fractional portion of a unit shall be rounded up. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

7.    Density bonuses, as specified in this Chapter, shall be granted when an applicant for housing development requests and agrees to construct at least any one (1) of the following: (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

a.    Low-Income Housing. A twenty (20%) percent density bonus shall be granted when ten (10%) percent of the total units are designated for lower-income households. For each one (1%) percent increase above ten (10%) percent in the percentage of units affordable to lower-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half (1.5%) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35%) percent. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    Very Low-Income Housing. A twenty (20%) percent density bonus shall be granted when five (5%) percent of the total units are designated for very low-income households. For each one (1%) percent increase above five (5%) percent in the percentage of units affordable to very low-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half (2.5%) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35%) percent. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

c.    Senior Housing. A fifty (50%) percent density bonus shall be granted for development of senior citizen housing, defined as housing for those age fifty-five (55) or older. An additional twenty (20%) percent density bonus shall be granted when ten (10%) percent of the total units in a senior housing development are designated for lower-income households. For each one (1%) percent increase above ten (10%) percent of the percentage of units affordable to lower-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one (1%) percent up to a maximum of eighty (80%) percent. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

d.    Condominium and Planned Development. A five (5%) percent density bonus shall be granted when ten (10%) percent of the total units in a condominium or planned development are designated for moderate-income households pursuant to Government Code Sections 65915 to 65918. For each one (1%) percent increase above ten (10%) percent of the percentage of units affordable to moderate-income households, the density bonus shall be increased by one (1%) percent up to a maximum of thirty-five (35%) percent. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

e.    Land Donation. Pursuant to provisions contained in Government Code Sections 65915 to 65918, a fifteen (15%) percent density bonus shall be granted for qualifying land donations. An additional density bonus up to a maximum of thirty-five (35%) percent may be authorized pursuant to that Section. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

f.    Child Care Facility. In conjunction with providing the affordable housing specified in subsections (B)(7)(a) through (d) of this Section, an additional density bonus or concession may be granted for providing child care facilities located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the project in accordance with the following: (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

i.    Child care facilities in the community shall be deemed inadequate. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

ii.    The density bonus shall consist of residential space that is equal to or greater than the amount of square feet in the child care facility. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

iii.    One (1) concession or incentive in addition to those permitted under subsection (B)(10) of this Section may be granted in lieu of the density bonus. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

iv.    The child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the density bonus units are required to remain affordable. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

v.    Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low-income households, lower-income households, or families of moderate income shall equal a percentage equal to or greater than the percentage of dwelling units that are required for the applicable housing development. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

8.    Required parking for housing development seeking a density bonus shall not exceed the following: (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

a.    Zero to one (1) bedroom: one (1) on-site parking space. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    Two (2) to three (3) bedroom: two (2) on-site parking spaces. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

c.    Four (4) and more bedrooms: two and one-half (2 1/2) parking spaces. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

9.    For any density bonus granted under the provisions of this Section, the developer shall agree to ensure continued affordability of all lower-income density bonus units for no less than thirty (30) years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005). Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

10.    Applicants for density bonuses may in addition to the density bonus request the following number of incentives or concessions: (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

a.    One (1) incentive or concession for projects that include at least ten (10%) percent of the total units for lower-income houses, at least five (5%) percent for very low-income households, or at least ten (10%) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    Two (2) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least twenty (20%) percent of the total units for lower-income households, at least ten (10%) percent for very low-income households, or at least twenty (20%) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a condominium or planned development. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

c.    Three (3) incentives or concessions for projects that include at least thirty (30%) percent of total units for lower-income households, at least fifteen (15%) percent for very low-income households, or at least thirty (30%) percent for moderate-income households in a condominium or planned development. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

11.    The City shall grant the concession or incentive requested by the applicant under subsection (B)(10) of this Section, unless it makes a written finding, based upon substantial evidence, of either of the following: (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

a.    The concession or incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or for rents for the targeted units as defined within Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    The concession or incentive would have a specific adverse impact upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources for which there is no feasible method to mitigate or avoid without rendering the development unaffordable. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

12.    The granting of a density bonus, concession or incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a General Plan amendment, zone change, variance or other discretionary approval. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Application procedure

1.    An application for a density bonus agreement shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Department, along with the required fee and/or deposit established by the City Council.

 

2.    The applicant shall provide financial data as determined by the Director of Planning showing that any requested concession and/or waiver is necessary to make the affordable units economically feasible. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005).

3.    The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate number of draft density bonus agreements as listed on the application. Said agreement shall be in a form acceptable to the City Attorney and may include the following provisions as well as any other deemed necessary by the City during review of specific proposals:

a.    The terms and conditions of the agreement shall run with the land which is to be developed, shall be binding upon any or all successor in interest of the developer, and shall be recorded in the Office of the Los Angeles County Recorder, prior to issuance of any building permits for the project;

b.    The developer shall give the City the continuing right-of-first-refusal to purchase or lease any or all of the designated units at the fair market value;

c.    The deeds to the designated units shall contain a covenant stating that the developer or his/her successor in interest shall not sell, rent, lease, sublet, assign, or otherwise transfer any interests for same without the written approval of the City confirming that the sales price of the units is consistent with the limits established for very low, low- and/or moderate-income households, which shall be related to the Consumer Price Index;

d.    The City shall have the authority to enter into other agreements with the developer or purchasers of the dwelling units, as may be necessary to assure that the required dwelling units are continuously occupied by eligible households.

4.    The Planning Director may require additional information if deemed necessary to enable the Planning Commission and City Council to determine whether the density bonus agreement is consistent with the objectives of the City’s General Plan and any applicable specific plan. This may include, but not be limited to, a market feasibility/absorption study for the proposed project.

D.    Action by Planning Commission

1.    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on an application for a density bonus agreement. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    The Planning Commission shall determine whether the density bonus agreement is consistent with the required findings for approval as set forth in subsection F of this Section, and shall recommend to the City Council that the density bonus agreement be approved, approved as amended, or denied.

E.    Action by City Council

1.    Upon receiving a recommendation from the Planning Commission on a proposed density bonus agreement, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

2.    Following the closing of a public hearing, the Council shall determine if the density bonus agreement is consistent with the findings contained within subsection F of this Section. If determined to be consistent, the City Council shall introduce an ordinance adopting the development agreement.

F.    Required findings for approval

Prior to taking an action to approve or recommend approval of a density bonus agreement, the reviewing authority shall find as follows:

1.    The proposed density bonus agreement is consistent with the maps and policies of the General Plan and any applicable specific plan.

2.    The proposed density bonus agreement complies with the requirements of California Government Code Section 65915 et. seq.

3.    All waivers and/or concessions granted in conjunction with the proposed density bonus are necessary in order to make the project’s affordable units economically feasible. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005).

4.    The granting of the proposed density bonus will result in provision of housing for lower income households and/or persons with special needs, as identified in the Housing Element. (Zoning Ordinance 05-02, adopted by City Council December 12, 2005).

5.    The granting of the proposed density bonus will not have an adverse impact on adjacent properties or on the general public.

G.    Ongoing review

The City shall periodically review all approved density bonus agreements to determine whether the applicant, or successor in interest thereto, is demonstrating good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. This review process may require the submittal of an application form, materials and fees as established by City Council resolution.

H.    Amendments to approved density bonus agreements

Any amendment to a previously-approved development agreement shall be reviewed pursuant to the procedures outlined in this Section for a new application.

Chapter 17.26
MISCELLANEOUS ADMINISTRATIVE APPROVALS
17.26.010 General Provisions
A.    Purpose

This Chapter specifies the procedures for review of a variety of minor development applications and approvals. These applications include Subdivision Development Plans, Zoning Clearances, Minor Modifications to Approved Plans, Home Occupation Permits, Exotic Animal Permits, Additional Animal Permits and Large Family Day Care Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

B.    Review authority

The reviewing authority for the applications described in this Chapter shall be the Planning Director, or his or her designee, except as otherwise authorized by PMC 17.20.080. As provided in this Division, the reviewing authority is authorized to approve, impose reasonable conditions upon such approval, or deny such applications under the Administrative Review procedures as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare.

17.26.020 Subdivision Development Plan Review
A.    Purpose

The Subdivision Development Plan (SDP) process provides for the review of building plans associated with residential subdivisions. The SDP Review process involves the review and approval of plot plans, unit mixes, elevations, street tree plans, and other applicable development plans to ensure that the conditions of approval applied to the subdivision map are being met, and that the unit mix and lotting concept promotes a functional, high quality living environment for current and future residents.

B.    Application procedure

1.    A Subdivision Development Plan Review application shall be submitted and approved prior to the issuance of building permits for any single family detached residence located within a tract.

2.    An application shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Department, and submitted along with the required fee as established by City Council resolution.

3.    The Planning Director may require additional information and modification of any plans deemed necessary to ensure compliance with applicable ordinances and conditions of approval, prior to taking any action on a Subdivision Development Plan application.

C.    Review criteria

Any application for a Subdivision Development Plan Review shall be evaluated using the following criteria:

1.    The plan shall be consistent with the policies and maps of the General Plan.

2.    It can be determined that the plan, through its unit design and lotting, creates a functional, efficient and aesthetically beneficial living environment for its future residents.

3.    The plan complies with all applicable terms of City ordinances and codes.

4.    There are no violations of the Municipal Code existing on the subject property.

5.    The Plan is consistent with and complies with the requirements and conditions of the tentative map and any other related entitlements.

D.    Time period for approval

Subdivision Development Plans shall remain valid until such time as new or modified plans are submitted or for as long as the underlying tract map is in effect.

17.26.030 Zoning Clearance Review
A.    Purpose

The Zoning Clearance procedure is intended to ensure that a proposed use of land and/or existing building(s), or the minor alterations of land and building(s) within the City, meet the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance and, if applicable, the conditions of approval for a previously approved permit.

B.    General provisions

1.    A Zoning Clearance shall be obtained prior to the initiation of a use of land and/or the construction of structures requiring a building permit when no discretionary review process is otherwise applicable to the proposed initiation of use or construction. Projects requiring a Zoning Clearance include, but are not limited to establishment of a new use within an existing building in conjunction with obtaining a Business License; individual custom homes on lots of record; and minor additions to residential structures or lots, including patio covers, pools/spas and detached accessory structures.

2.    In no case shall a Zoning Clearance be issued for a use other than a use permitted within that zone district.

C.    Application procedure

1.    A request for a Zoning Clearance shall be submitted on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Department, along with the required fee as established by the City Council.

2.    The Planning Director may require additional information including but not limited to, parking summaries and a written description of use(s) prior to taking any action on a Zoning Clearance.

3.    A Zoning Clearance shall be filed by the owner of the subject property or his or her authorized agent.

D.    Review criteria

A Zoning Clearance shall be approved provided that the proposed use of land or structures:

1.    Is permissible under the present zoning on the land and does not require additional land use entitlements such as a Conditional Use Permit or Site Plan Review;

2.    Is consistent with the policies and maps of the General Plan;

3.    Complies with all applicable terms and conditions of any existing entitlement;

4.    Meets all applicable Zoning Ordinance requirements including, but not limited to, minimum structure design, construction standards and setbacks, or has been deemed to be legally non-conforming with respect to these standards; and

5.    There are no violations of the Municipal Code existing on the subject property.

E.    Modification of revocation by the Planning Director (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

1.    If the Planning Director determines that the use approved under the Zoning Clearance is not in compliance with the requirements of this Section, the Planning Director shall notify the owner of the subject property or his or her authorized agent of the date for a hearing on the use’s compliance with this Section. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall state that the Planning Director will be reviewing the Zoning Clearance for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with PMC 17.20.020.

2.    The Planning Director shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report regarding the reported violation of the Zoning Clearance requirements. A copy of the report shall be sent to the property owner or his or her authorized agent. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Director shall make one of the following determinations and take such accompanying action:

a.    Find that the use is being conducted in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke the Zoning Clearance is necessary; or,

b.    Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and impose modifications to conditions as are necessary; or,

c.    Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that the measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the use. Upon making this determination, the Planning Director may revoke the Zoning Clearance approval and order the property owner or his or her authorized agent to cease and desist in the time specified by the Director.

F.    Effective period of Zoning Clearance approval

A Zoning Clearance verifies that a specified use or structure is consistent with the Zoning Ordinance and applicable City ordinances and policies on the date of its issuance. Any change to the use or structure, or any change to the applicable Ordinance provisions, may invalidate the Zoning Clearance.

17.26.040 Minor Modifications to Approved Plans
A.    Purpose

The Minor Modification process provides a means of reviewing requests for proposed changes to approved development plans which, as determined by the Planning Director based upon the criteria specified in subsection D of this Section, are minor in nature and which are in substantial conformance with previously approved entitlements or conditions of approval.

B.    Application procedure

1.    An application for a Minor Modification meeting the criteria specified in subsection C of this Section shall be filed prior to the commencement of any construction related to the modification.

2.    A Minor Modification shall be filed by the owner of the subject property or his or her authorized agent.

3.    A request for a Minor Modification shall be submitted on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Department, along with the required fee established by the City Council.

4.    The Planning Director may require additional information and/or refer the application to pertinent departments/agencies as deemed necessary prior to taking any action on a Minor Modification.

C.    Applicability

The Minor Modification procedure may be utilized for the following types of revisions to previously approved development projects:

1.    To allow minor reconfiguration of an architectural feature that does not modify the previously approved theme or plan for the project;

2.    To allow minor changes to approved building footprint(s) within the buildable area of a project site;

3.    To allow the replacement of one model floor plan or elevation for another on a previously approved Subdivision Development Plan;

4.    To allow the replotting of no more than twenty-five (25) percent of lots within any tract or phase tract provided that the number of lots replotted does not exceed fifteen (15);

5.    To allow minor reconfiguration or striping of parking lots which will not decrease the number of parking spaces for an approved project, as required by PMC 17.87.030; (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

6.    To allow minor changes in building materials and colors for an approved project;

7.    To allow the addition of minor accessory structures to an approved project, provided that such structure(s) will not increase the total building area by more than five (5) percent;

8.    To allow the fulfillment of a condition of approval in a manner which may vary from that specified in the original condition, provided that the intent and purpose of such original condition is fully met; or

9.    Other requests similar to the above minor modifications, as determined by the Planning Director.

D.    Review criteria

A Minor Modification may be approved provided that the proposed modification:

1.    Is listed under subsection C of this Section and does not require additional land use entitlements such as a Conditional Use Permit or Site Plan Review;

2.    Is consistent with the policies and maps of the General Plan;

3.    Complies with the purpose and intent of all applicable terms and conditions of the existing entitlement;

4.    The proposed structure or addition meets all applicable Zoning Ordinance requirements including, but not limited to, minimum structure design, construction standards and setbacks; and

5.    There are no violations of the Municipal Code existing on the subject property.

17.26.050 Reserved
17.26.060 Home Occupation Permit
A.    Purpose

The purpose of the Home Occupation Permit provisions is to permit the establishment and operation of businesses within the home, in such a way as to minimize any impacts of such businesses on adjacent properties or the general neighborhood. Home occupations are limited to those uses which may be conducted within a residential dwelling, without in any way changing the appearance or condition of the residence or the surrounding neighborhood.

B.    No home occupation may occur and no permit for a home occupation shall be issued unless the procedures and criteria specified in this Section are satisfied.

C.    Application procedure

1.    Application for a Home Occupation Permit shall be filed with the Planning Department, along with a fee as established by resolution of the City Council.

2.    The reviewing authority shall review the request for a home occupation permit to ensure compliance with the criteria for operations established in this Section. In rendering a decision, the reviewing authority shall clearly state, in writing, any conditions of approval or reasons for denial.

D.    Mandatory conditions for operation

Home occupations may be permitted on property used for residential purposes, provided that the use is operated pursuant to the following conditions of operation:

1.    The home occupation shall be incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes.

2.    There shall be no customers, clients, nor visitors coming to the residence for purposes of the home occupation except for the purpose of individual instruction such as academic tutoring or music lessons. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-3 adopted by City Council October 11, 1995.)

3.    No signs relating to the home occupation shall be allowed.

4.    Advertising shall not include the residential address.

5.    No one other than a resident of the dwelling shall be employed on the premises in the conduct of a home occupation.

6.    Home Occupation Permits are valid only for the person(s) and residence approved by the City and are nontransferable.

7.    No dwelling shall be built, altered, furnished or decorated for the purpose of conducting the home occupation in such a manner as to change the residential character and appearance of the dwelling, or in such a manner as to cause the structure to be recognized as a place where a home occupation is conducted.

8.    There shall be no entrance or exit specifically provided or marked on the dwelling or on the premises for the conduct of the home occupation.

9.    A home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and the activities of such home occupation shall not be visible, or otherwise noticeable, outside the dwelling unit structure.

10.    There shall be no home occupation activities that are objectionable due to glare, dust, fumes, odor, vibration, noise or that disturb the peace.

11.    No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible electrical or mechanical interference in any radio or television receiver or other device outside the dwelling unit structure, or causes fluctuations in the line voltage outside the dwelling unit structure.

12.    The home occupation shall not require any upgraded utility service capacity beyond that which is customary for residential service. Separate utility meters which serve only the home occupation shall not be permitted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-3 adopted by City Council October 11, 1995.)

13.    A garage may be used for home occupation purposes; provided, however, that such use shall not interfere with the maintenance of two (2) parking spaces. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

14.    No mechanical or construction equipment which is not typically found in residential districts shall be stored on the premises. Warehousing of goods, wares or merchandise shall be prohibited. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-3 adopted by City Council October 11, 1995.)

15.    No vehicles or trailers except those normally incidental to a residential use shall be parked so as to be visible from the public right-of-way.

16.    The home occupation shall not cause, involve or result in the use of commercial vehicles for deliveries to or from the premises, excluding a vehicle not to exceed 3/4 ton capacity which shall be registered to the operator of such home occupation.

17.    Use of the United States Postal Service in conjunction with appropriate uses as determined by the Director of Planning, such as mail order businesses, shall be done by means of a post office box.

18.    No deliveries may originate from or be made to the premises except during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

19.    The home occupation shall not generate vehicular traffic and/or vehicular parking which degrades or is otherwise detrimental to the residential nature of the neighborhood.

20.    If the home occupation is to be conducted in a rental unit, a written statement from the property owner giving his or her permission for operation of the home occupation shall be provided to the City.

21.    The home occupation shall not affect nor reduce the parking spaces required by the Zoning Ordinance.

22.    Home occupations shall not involve the use and/or on-site storage of chemicals, flammable materials, or other hazardous materials except as may be permitted by the Uniform Fire Code.

23.    The operator of a home occupation shall obtain and maintain a current business license from the City.

24.    No home occupation shall include the sale or storage of fire arms, ordnance, ammunition or other weapons which are regulated by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, at the site of the home occupation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

E.    Additional conditions for mobile businesses

Home Occupation Permits for mobile businesses may be permitted, provided that the mobile business is operated pursuant to the Mandatory Conditions of Operation described in subsection D of this Section, in addition to the following conditions which specifically apply to mobile businesses:

1.    The service provided by the mobile business must be in compliance with the zone in which the work is performed.

2.    The mobile business must comply with all applicable requirements of any agency with regulatory or permitting authority over the conduct of that business.

3.    Any automotive-related services shall be limited to cleaning, detailing, and minor replacement or repair to glass and/or accessory parts; no mobile business operating under a Home Occupation Permit shall be permitted to conduct auto repair, auto body or engine work.

4.    No work shall be conducted in a publicly accessible parking lot; however, work may be conducted in parking lots which are restricted to employees only.

5.    No work shall be conducted on city-owned property, including parks, park and ride lots, parking lots, or public rights-of-way.

F.    Review by Planning Director

The Planning Director may periodically review any home occupation permit to ensure that it is being operated in a manner consistent with the conditions of operation and in a manner which is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the Planning Director deems that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full examination, then a public hearing date shall be set.

G.    Modification or revocation by the Planning Director

1.    If the Planning Director determines that the Home Occupation is not being conducted in compliance with the requirements of this Section, the Planning Director shall notify the operator of the Home Occupation of the date for a public hearing on the operator’s compliance with this Section. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall state that the Planning Director will be reviewing the Home Occupation Permit for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of the hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with PMC 17.20.020. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

2.    The Planning Director shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report regarding the reported violation of the Home Occupancy requirements. A copy of the report shall be sent to the operator of the Home Occupation. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Planning Director shall make one of the following determinations and take such accompanying action: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

a.    Find that the Home Occupation Permit is being conducted in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke the permit is necessary; or

b.    Find that the Home Occupation Permit is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and impose modifications to conditions as are necessary; or,

c.    Find that the Home Occupation Permit is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the business. Upon making this determination, the Planning Director may revoke the Home Occupation Permit and order the operation to cease and desist in the time specified by the Director.

H.    Lapse of approval

1.    A home occupation permit, approved under the provisions of this Section, shall become null and void upon expiration of a business license issued in conjunction with the home occupation permit and will require the filing of a new application, including applicable fees, with the City.

2.    Where a home occupation permit has been nullified pursuant to subsection G of this Section, a new application for the same or substantially the same occupation may be filed immediately.

I.    New application following denial

Following the denial or revocation of a home occupation permit, no application for a home occupation permit for the same or substantially the same occupation on the same site shall be filed within one (1) year from the date of denial or revocation.

17.26.070 Exotic Animal Permit
A.    Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to ensure that the keeping of exotic animals as defined in PMC 17.16.050, will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare; that adjacent property owners and residents are notified of the proposed keeping of exotic animals; and that such animals are provided with adequate facilities to ensure their health and well-being.

B.    General provisions

1.    An Exotic Animal Permit shall be required to keep any exotic animal as an accessory use to a primary single family detached residential use, as permitted in the zone district. Keeping of exotic animals in multiple family or attached dwelling units is not permitted.

2.    Any required State permits for the keeping of a wild or exotic animal shall be obtained prior to granting of an Exotic Animal Permit.

C.    Application procedure

1.    An application to keep an exotic animal shall be filed with the Planning Department, along with a fee as established by the City Council.

2.    The review procedure shall be Administrative Review, pursuant to PMC 17.20.010(A)(3).

D.    Requirements for keeping exotic animals

The approval to keep exotic animals shall be based upon the applicant’s adherence to the following requirements:

1.    The keeping of the animal must comply with all Zoning Ordinance requirements for animal enclosures, including setbacks from property lines and other dwellings;

2.    The keeping of the animal must comply with all applicable Federal and State requirements;

3.    No more than two (2) exotic animals over the age of six (6) months may be kept as an accessory use to a single-family residence, unless a Conditional Use Permit for a menagerie or zoo has been approved.

4.    Each exotic animal must have sufficient area to be maintained and exercised in a normal healthy manner, as determined by a City-approved veterinarian.

5.    Any noise, odor or activity associated with the exotic animal(s) shall be contained within the site.

6.    Any other conditions as deemed reasonably appropriate by the Planning Director.

E.    Determination by the approval authority

In evaluating an application for an exotic animal permit, the Planning Director shall determine that the request satisfies the requirements contained in subsection D of this Section and, if granted, is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable codes and ordinances. Prior to rendering a decision, the Planning Director shall provide written notice to contiguous property owners of the request to keep one or more exotic animals. Such notice shall contain a description and location of the requested type and number of animals and the anticipated decision date, and shall allow ten (10) days to submit comments to the City. Upon receipt of response(s) from contiguous owner(s) or the passage of ten (10) days, whichever occurs first, the Director may render a decision.

F.    Modification or revocation by the Planning Director (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

1.    If the Planning Director determines that an approved Exotic Animal Permit is not in compliance with the requirements of this Section, the Planning Director shall notify the operator of the subject property or his or her authorized agent of the date for a public hearing on the use’s compliance with this Section. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall state that the Planning Director will be reviewing the Exotic Animal Permit for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of the hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with PMC 17.20.020.

2.    The Planning Director shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report regarding the reported violation of the Exotic Animal Permit requirements. A copy of the report shall be sent to the property owner or his or her authorized agent. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Director shall make one of the following determinations and take such accompanying action:

a.    Find that the keeping of exotic animals is being conducted in an appropriate manner in compliance with this Section and that no action to modify or revoke the permit is necessary; or,

b.    Find that the keeping of exotic animals is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and impose modifications to conditions as are necessary; or,

c.    Find that the keeping of exotic animals is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that the measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the use. Upon making this determination, the Planning Director may revoke the Exotic Animal Permit approval and order the property owner or his or her authorized agent to cease and desist in the time specified by the Director.

17.26.080 Additional Animals Permit
A.    Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to allow keeping of additional animals over those permitted by the underlying zone standards, and to ensure that the keeping of such animals will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare; that adjacent property owners and residents are notified of the proposed keeping of additional animals; and that such animals are provided with adequate facilities to ensure their health and well-being.

B.    General provisions

An additional animals permit shall be required to keep animals that are permitted as an accessory use in the underlying zone, where the number of such animals exceeds the number permitted in the zone. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

C.    Application procedure

1.    An application to keep additional animal(s) shall be filed with the Planning Department, along with a fee as established by the City Council.

2.    The review procedure shall be Administrative Review, pursuant to PMC 17.20.010(A)(3).

D.    Requirements for keeping additional animals

The approval to keep additional animals shall be based upon the applicant’s adherence to the following requirements:

1.    The keeping of the animal(s) must comply with all Zoning Ordinance requirements for animal enclosures, including setbacks from property lines and other dwellings.

2.    The keeping of the animal(s) must comply with all applicable Federal and State requirements.

3.    The keeping of additional animals within any residential zone shall be prohibited. Within the agricultural zone, an additional animal permit shall allow up to two (2) additional dogs, for a total of six (6), and one (1) additional cat, for a total of six (6). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

4.    Each animal must have sufficient area to be maintained and exercised in a normal healthy manner, as determined by a City-approved veterinarian.

5.    Any odor or activity associated with the animal(s) shall be contained within the site. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

6.    The keeping of animals must conform with the provisions of the City’s General Plan and noise ordinance (Chapter 9.18 PMC). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

7.    Any other conditions as deemed reasonably appropriate by the Planning Director.

E.    Determination by the approval authority

In evaluating an application for an Additional Animal(s) Permit, the Planning Director shall determine that the request satisfies the requirements contained in subsection D of this Section and, if granted, is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable codes and ordinances. Prior to rendering a decision, the Planning Director shall provide written notice to contiguous property owners of the request to keep additional animals. Such notice shall contain a description and location of the requested type and number of animals and the anticipated decision date, and shall allow ten (10) days to submit comments to the City. Upon receipt of response(s) from contiguous owner(s) or the passage of ten (10) days, whichever occurs first, the Director may render a decision. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

F.    Modification or revocation by the Planning Director (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

1.    If the Planning Director determines that an approved Additional Animal Permit is not in compliance with the requirements of this Section, the Planning Director shall notify the operator of the subject property or his or her authorized agent of the date for a public hearing on the use’s compliance with this Section. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall state that the Planning Director will be reviewing the Additional Animal Permit for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of the hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with PMC 17.20.020.

2.    The Planning Director shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report regarding the reported violation of the Additional Animal Permit requirements. A copy of the report shall be sent to the property owner or his or her authorized agent. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Director shall make one of the following determinations and take such accompanying action:

a.    Find that the keeping of additional animals is being conducted in an appropriate manner in compliance with this Section and that no action to modify or revoke the permit is necessary; or,

b.    Find that the keeping of additional animals is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and impose modifications to conditions as are necessary; or,

c.    Find that the keeping of additional animals is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that the measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the use. Upon making this determination, the Planning Director may revoke the Additional Animal Permit approval and order the property owner or his or her authorized agent to cease and desist in the time specified by the Director.

17.26.090 Large Family Day Care Permit
A.    Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to allow establishment of Large Family Day Care facilities within residential neighborhoods, in order to provide for quality care of the community’s children in a home-like setting while ensuring that the surrounding neighborhood is not adversely impacted by the operation.

B.    General provisions

A Large Family Day Care Permit shall be required to establish a day care use in a single family residence where family day care is provided for seven (7) to twelve (12) children under the age of eighteen (18), plus up to two (2) additional school age children as permitted by the State Department of Social Services and Government Code Section 1597.41. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Application procedure

1.    An application to establish a Large Family Day Care facility shall be filed with the Planning Department, along with a fee as established by the City Council.

2.    The review procedure shall be Administrative Review, pursuant to PMC 17.20.010(A)(3).

D.    Requirements for establishment and operation of a Large Family Day Care facility

The approval to establish and operate a Large Family Day Care facility shall be based upon the applicant’s adherence to the following requirements:

1.    The operator of the facility must reside in the dwelling unit in which the facility is operated.

2.    The facility may only be operated within a detached single family dwelling unit having sufficient indoor and outdoor area to meet state and county requirements, including a fenced play area.

3.    The operator must obtain and comply with all applicable approvals of other agencies, including state licensing and building, fire and health codes.

4.    No day care facility shall be located along any dead end street or cul-de-sac on which a day care facility is currently operating. The boundary of a parcel or lot containing a day care center in any structure shall be separated from the boundary of any other parcel or lot containing a day care center by not less than three hundred (300) feet.

5.    No more than fourteen (14) children may be supervised at the day care facility at any given time, including children who reside at the home. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

6.    No signs advertising the day care service shall be allowed, either on or off of the premises.

7.    Large Family Day Care permits are valid only for the person(s) and residence approved by the City and are nontransferable.

8.    No dwelling shall be built, altered, furnished or decorated for the purpose of conducting the day care use in such a manner as to change the residential character and appearance of the dwelling.

9.    There shall be no entrance or exit specifically marked on the dwelling or on the premises for the conduct of the day care use.

10.    Adequate area shall be available for a drop-off and pick-up zone for parents, so as to avoid any adverse traffic or parking impacts to the residential neighborhood.

11.    Any employees coming to the residence to assist in the day care operation shall be provided with an on-site parking space.

12.    If the day care use is to be conducted in a rental unit, a written statement from the property owner giving his or her permission for operation of the use on the premises shall be provided to the City.

13.    Outdoor play areas along common property lines with residential uses shall be screened with not less than a six (6) foot high sight-obscuring fence, wall or hedge.

14.    The site must be landscaped in a manner compatible with adjacent residences.

15.    Lot size, building size, setbacks and lot coverage shall conform to those applicable to the zone district.

E.    Determination by the approval authority

In evaluating an application for a Large Family Day Care permit, the Planning Director shall determine that the request satisfies the requirements contained in subsection D of this Section and, if granted, is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable codes and ordinances. Prior to rendering a decision, the Planning Director shall provide written notice to owners of property located within one hundred (100) feet of the parcel which is the subject of the request to establish a Large Family Day Care facility. Such notices shall contain a description and location of the request and the anticipated decision date, and shall allow ten (10) days to submit comments to the City. Upon receipt of response(s) from contiguous owner(s) or the passage of ten (10) day, whichever occurs first, the Director may render a decision.

17.26.100 Requests for Reasonable Accommodation
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 04-02, adopted by City Council July 12, 2004.)

A.    Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to establish a formal procedure for persons with disabilities seeking equal access to housing to request reasonable accommodation in the application of the City’s zoning laws and to establish relevant criteria to be used when considering such requests.

B.    General Provisions

A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative or any entity, when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. A person with a disability is a person who has a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment or anyone who has a record of such impairment. This Section is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the Federal Fair Housing Act and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (the Acts).

A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability equal opportunity to housing of their choice. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by subsection (C) of this Section.

C.    Application procedure

1.    Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the Planning Department, or in the form of a letter, to the Director of Planning and shall contain the following information:

a.    The applicant’s name, address and telephone number.

b.    Address of the property for which the request is being made.

c.    The current actual use of the property.

d.    The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the Acts.

e.    The zoning code provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested.

f.    Why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual.

2.    Review with other land use applications

If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made also requires some other discretionary approval (including but not limited to, conditional use permit, site plan review, general plan amendment, zone change, annexation, etc.) then the applicant shall file the information required by subsection (C)(1) of this Section together for concurrent review with the application for discretionary approval.

3.    Review procedure

The review procedure shall be Administrative Review. Generally, applications for reasonable accommodations shall be submitted to the Planning Department pursuant to PMC 17.20.010(A)(3).

D.    Grounds for accommodation

In making a determination regarding the reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the following factors shall be considered:

1.    Special need created by the disability;

2.    Potential benefit that can be accomplished by the requested modification;

3.    Potential impact on surrounding uses;

4.    Physical attributes of the property and structures;

5.    Alternative accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit;

6.    In the case of a determination involving a single-family dwelling, whether the structure would be considered a single housing unit if it were not using special services that are required because of the disability of the residents;

7.    Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue administrative burden on the City; and

8.    Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a City program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning.

E.    Determination by the approval authority

In evaluating an application regarding the reasonableness of a requested accommodation, the Planning Director shall determine that the request satisfies the requirements contained in subsection D of this Section and, if granted, is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable codes and ordinances. Prior to rendering a decision, the Planning Director shall provide written notice to contiguous property owners of the request for reasonable accommodation. Such notice shall contain a description and location of the request and the anticipated decision date, and shall allow ten (10) days to submit comments to the City. Upon receipt of response(s) from contiguous owner(s) or the passage of ten (10) days, whichever occurs first, the Director may render a decision.

17.26.110 Amateur Radio Antenna Permit
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-2, adopted by City Council on September 9, 2011)

A.    Purpose

The purpose of these provisions is to allow establishment of Amateur Radio Antennas within residential neighborhoods, in order to provide for radio communication while ensuring that the surrounding neighborhood is not adversely impacted by the antenna/antenna structure.

A basic community objective, as contained the City’s General Plan Land Use and Community Design Elements, is to encourage desirable urban character and appearance. The City finds that regulation of the size, location and height of antennas is necessary to accomplish this objective.

The City further finds that regulation of the size, location, and height of antennas is necessary for the preservation of the health, safety and welfare of the community. More stringent regulation of antennas is necessary in residential areas compared to nonresidential areas in order to preserve neighborhood compatibility and the open vistas and appearance of the community.

The regulations adopted herein are the minimum practicable regulations necessary to accomplish the City’s legitimate purpose of protecting all of its citizens and their rights as described herein.

The purposes of this Section are:

1.    To establish an application process and standards for installation of antennas while preserving the attractive appearance of the community;

2.    To promote the public health, safety and welfare by ensuring that amateur radio antennas are designed, installed and located in a way that avoids hazards to public health and safety, minimizes adverse aesthetic effects, and is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood by preventing adverse visual, health, safety, and other impacts on the surrounding properties and/or the community; and

3.    To accommodate reasonably the needs of licensed amateur radio operators.

It is the intent of the City in adopting this Division to recognize the Federal Communications Commission’s limited preemption of local regulations governing amateur radio station facilities and to adopt the minimum practicable regulations to accomplish the City’s legitimate purposes.

B.    General Provisions

An Amateur Radio Antenna Permit shall be required in order to construct and operate an amateur radio antenna as described in Zoning Ordinance PMC 17.95.030(E). Any amateur radio antenna for which an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit is issued shall also comply with all design and operational standards set forth in PMC 17.95.030.

C.    Application Procedure

An application to establish an Amateur Radio Antenna shall be filed with the Planning Department, along with a fee as established by the City Council. The review procedure shall be Administrative Review, pursuant to PMC 17.20.010(A)(3), and all requirements for notice, time limits, modifications and appeal procedures shall be those requirements contained in Chapter 17.20 PMC, or as specifically modified in this Section or PMC 17.95.030.

D.    Application Requirements

Application for a Amateur Radio Antenna Permit shall be on the forms provided by the Planning Department and in addition to the information required on this form, any additional information as requested by the Director of Planning, including but not limited to the following:

1.    The name, address and call letters of the amateur radio operator;

2.    Manufacturer’s specifications of the antenna structure (if available);

3.    Visual representation to scale of the antenna structure and array, either through manufacturer’s specifications, or through the preparation of project-specific elevations drawn to scale and dimensioned so as to fully describe the proposed project.

E.    Requirements for establishment and operation of an Amateur Radio Antenna.

1.    A fixed height antenna/antenna structure that is installed, placed, or maintained at a height that does not exceed 45 feet in height and may include a horizontal antenna that does not exceed a 35-foot turning radius.

2.    A retractable antenna/antenna structure that meets all of the following characteristics:

a.    The antenna/antenna structure shall not exceed a maximum height of 45 feet when measured in the nested position;

b.    The antenna/antenna structure does not exceed 75 feet in height when in operation;

c.    The horizontal antenna does not exceed a 35-foot turning radius and shall not extend into any required setback;

3.    All antennas approved under an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit shall be located within the rear yard and shall be colored to minimize its reflectivity and blend with its surroundings as much as possible.

F.    Determination by the approval authority.

In evaluating an application for an amateur radio antenna permit, the Director of Planning shall determine that the request satisfies the requirements contained in PMC 17.95.030 and, if granted, is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable codes and ordinances. Prior to rendering a decision, the Director of Planning shall provide written notice to owners of property located within one hundred (100) feet of the parcel that is the subject of the application. Such notices shall contain a description and location of the request, along with the anticipated decision date. The notice shall provide for no less than 10 days to submit comments to the City regarding the proposed application. Upon receipt of response(s) from the public or the passage of ten (10) days, whichever occurs first, the Director may render a decision.

G.    Findings for approval

The Director of Planning shall make the following findings prior to approving an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit for an antenna and/or antenna structure:

1.    That the applicant has demonstrated compliance with the development standards contained in subsection E of this Section.

2.    That the antenna, including the antenna structure, shall be located, sized and designed so as to minimize the amount of the antenna/antenna structure that is visible from surrounding properties, public streets and all public rights-of way, recognizing that complete screening may not be possible.

3.    That there is adequate space on the property for the antenna and antenna structure without conflicting with buildings on the property or encroaching into required setback areas.

4.    The antenna would not despoil the primary view of a neighbor.

5.    The antenna/antenna structure is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood with respect to, including but not limited to, scale and massing in comparison to lot size, impact on adjacent properties, and aesthetic impacts.

6.    The permit and any conditions of approval attached thereto would accommodate reasonably the amateur radio operator’s desire for communication, while at the same time requiring the minimum practicable regulation to accomplish the City’s legitimate purpose of protecting the public health, safety, welfare, aesthetics and compatibility with the neighborhood.

In granting the permit, the Director of Planning may impose conditions reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of this Section, provided those conditions do not unreasonably interfere with the ability of the applicant to receive or transmit signals.

H.    Modification or revocation by the Director of Planning

1.    Any permit for an amateur radio antenna shall include a condition that the permittee shall report any changes to the antenna/ antenna structure from that authorized by the permit and shall if necessary obtain a modification to the permit. A modification may be required, for example, if the antenna/antenna structure height will be increased above the height previously approved, the construction design or materials will change, or additional antennas are added to the antenna/antenna structure previously approved.

2.    If the Director of Planning determines that an approved Amateur Radio Antenna is not in compliance with the requirements of this Section or with the conditions of approval applied to the permit, the Director of Planning shall notify the owner of the subject property or his or her authorized agent of the date for a hearing on the use’s compliance with this Section and/or the permit conditions. Such notice shall state that the Director of Planning will be reviewing the permit for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with PMC 17.20.020.

3.    The Director of Planning shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report regarding the reported violation of the permit requirements. A copy of the report shall be sent to the property owner or his or her authorized agent. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Director of Planning shall make one of the following determinations and take such accompanying action:

a.    Find that the use is being conducted in an appropriate manner in compliance with this Section and with the conditions of approval and that no action to modify or revoke the Amateur Radio Antenna Permit is necessary; or

b.    Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and impose modifications to conditions as are necessary; or

c.    Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that the measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the use. Upon making this determination, the Director of Planning may revoke the Amateur Radio Antenna Permit approval and order the property owner or his or her authorized agent to cease and desist in the time specified by the Director.

17.26.120 Minor Site Plan Review
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012.)

A.    Purpose

The Minor Site Plan Review process provides a means of reviewing requests for certain types of accessory uses and structures through an administrative review approval process; to ensure that impacts to adjacent properties are minimized; and that adjacent property owners and residents are notified of the proposed project.

B.    Application Procedure

1.    An application for a Minor Site Plan Review shall be filed with the Planning Department, along with the required fee. The application shall be submitted by the property owner or his/her authorized agent.

2.    An application for a Minor Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by all required materials and a site plan showing the subject property as well as the surrounding area. Plans of the subject property shall show all existing and proposed buildings and uses, fencing, walls, and netting, light fixtures and any other data required by the Planning Department to adequately review the application.

3.    The Planning Director may require additional information and/or refer the application to pertinent departments/agencies as deemed necessary prior to taking any action of a Minor Site Plan Review application.

C.    Determination by the Approval Authority

1.    In evaluating a request for a Minor Site Plan Review, the Planning Director shall determine that the request satisfies the required findings contained in subsection D of this Section and, if granted, is consistent with the General Plan and all applicable codes and ordinances. Prior to rendering a decision, the Planning Director shall provide written notice to all property owners within a 300-foot radius of the requested Minor Site Plan Review. Such notice shall contain a description of the type and location of the requested Minor Site Plan Review, the anticipated decision date, and shall allow ten (10) days to submit comments to the City. Upon the passage of ten (10) days, the Director may render a decision.

2.    The effective date of a land use decision shall be in accordance with PMC 17.20.090.

3.    Prior to its effective date, any decision made on a Minor Site Plan Review request by the Planning Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission, pursuant to the provisions of PMC 17.20.110.

4.    A project approved by Minor Site Plan Review shall be inaugurated within twelve (12) months from the effective date of the decision. Unless all conditions have been complied with and the use of land authorized by the land use decision has been inaugurated within 12 months, the land use decision shall become null and void. For the purposes of this Section, the term “inaugurated” shall mean that applicable grading and building permits have been issued and construction initiated and ongoing.

D.    Findings for Approval

1.    That the proposed use is consistent with the policies and maps of the General Plan, and the purposes of the zone in which the project site is located.

2.    The proposed accessory structure or use meets all applicable Zoning Ordinance requirements, including, but not limited to, setbacks and building separations, wall and fence standards and lighting standards.

3.    That the proposed structure or use or, together with the conditions applicable thereto, will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or materially injurious to properties or improvements in the vicinity.

In granting the permit, the Director of Planning may impose conditions reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of this Section.

E.    Modification or Revocation by the Director of Planning

1.    If the Planning Director determines that the use approved under the Minor Site Plan Review is not in compliance with the requirements of this Section, the Planning Director shall notify the owner of the subject property or his or her authorized agent of the date for a hearing on the use’s compliance with this Section. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall state that the Planning Director will be reviewing the Minor Site Plan Review for possible modification or revocation. It shall also state the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with PMC 17.20.020.

2.    The Planning Director shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report regarding the reported violation of the Minor Site Plan Review requirements. A copy of the report shall be sent to the property owner or his or her authorized agent. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the Planning Director shall make one of the following determinations and take such accompanying action:

a.    Find that the use is being conducted in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke the Minor Site Plan Review is necessary; or,

b.    Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and impose modifications to conditions as are necessary; or,

c.    Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that the measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the use. Upon making this determination, the Planning Director may revoke the Minor Site Plan Review approval and order the property owner or his or her authorized agent to cease and desist in the time specified by the Director.

Chapter 17.27
TEMPORARY USES
17.27.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate land use activities of a temporary nature so as to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The intent of these regulations is to ensure that temporary uses will be compatible with surrounding land uses, to protect the rights of adjacent residents and land owners, and to minimize any adverse effects on surrounding properties and the environment.

17.27.020 General Provisions
A.    Temporary uses shall be established only in those zone districts where temporary uses are expressly permitted or conditionally permitted.

B.    A temporary use or structure (as defined in PMC 17.16.200) which does not have a valid and current temporary use permit as specified herein is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, subject to the enforcement provisions of the Municipal Code and other applicable laws.

C.    The reviewing authority may approve, conditionally approve or deny a permit for a temporary use, and may establish conditions and limitations, including but not limited to hours of operation, provision of parking areas, signing and lighting, traffic circulation and access, temporary or permanent site improvements, and other measures necessary to minimize potential effects on properties adjacent to and in the vicinity of the proposed temporary use.

D.    Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, all sites utilized for temporary uses shall be cleaned of trash, debris and any temporary structures within five (5) days after the termination of such event.

E.    The City may require a cash deposit or other security as approved by the City Attorney to defray the costs of cleanup of a site by the City, in the event the applicant fails to leave the property in a presentable and satisfactory condition, or to guarantee removal and/or reconversion of any temporary use to a permanent use allowed in the subject zone district.

F.    A change in ownership or operator of a use or structure subject to a temporary use permit, as specified in this Chapter, or an approved change or modification to the structure or use allowed on a parcel subject to such a permit, shall not affect the time periods established by this Chapter which allow such temporary uses or structures.

17.27.030 Permits Required for Temporary Uses
Applications for temporary uses shall be filed with the Planning Department, along with the required fee, and shall be subject to the requirements and criteria specified herein and to any other additional conditions that the City determines to be reasonably necessary to ensure that the use will not be injurious to health, safety or welfare.

A.    Special Event Permit

A Special Event Permit shall be required for the following temporary uses:

1.    Parking lot and sidewalk sales, providing merchandise customarily sold on the premises, for businesses located within a commercially designated property, subject to the development standards and sign standards contained within the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable requirements. Such sales shall be limited to not more than ten (10) one (1) day events in any ninety (90) day period. (For events that are more than one (1) day a Temporary Use Permit will be required. Parking lot and sidewalk sales authorized by this Section shall not include the off-site sale of any vehicle or vessel, including but not limited to automobiles, recreational vehicles, trailers, campers, trucks, construction equipment, boats or other watercraft, or motorcycles or all-terrain vehicles. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-02, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003; urgency ordinance adopted by City Council April 9, 2003.)

2.    Grand openings and anniversary events for businesses located within a commercially designated property, subject to the development standards and sign standards contained within the Zoning Ordinance and other applicable requirements. Such events shall be limited to one (1) day and be held no more than once annually. (For events that are more than one (1) day a Temporary Use Permit will be required.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

3.    Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits, limited to not more than ten (10) one (1) day shows or exhibits in any ninety (90) day period. (For events that are more than one (1) day a Temporary Use Permit will be required.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Bazaars, pony rides, festivals and similar events, limited to not more than ten (10) one(1) day events in any ninety (90) day period. (For events that are more than one (1) day a Temporary Use Permit will be required.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

5.    Mobile health services, including medical, dental or veterinary services, blood-mobiles or health fairs, limited to not more than ten (10) one (1) day events in any ninety (90) day period. Health fairs may include corporate massage pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (For events that are more than one (1) day a Temporary Use Permit will be required.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

6.    Parades, and other events conducted within the public right-of-way shall be subject to the provisions of Title 12 PMC.

B.    Temporary Use Permit

A Temporary Use Permit shall be required for the following temporary uses:

1.    Christmas tree lots, pumpkin lots, haunted houses and firework stands, subject to the following guidelines and conditions:

a.    Christmas tree sales, sale of pumpkins and operation of haunted houses shall be located on commercially zoned and designated property. Fireworks stands may be located on property within any zone designation provided: 1) such property is not residentially developed; 2) a stand must be located a minimum of 200 feet from any residential use; and 3) a stand may not be located within any area subject to a very high fire hazard severity zone designation as defined by PMC 8.04.203. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-01, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

b.    Christmas tree sales shall be limited to the period of time between the Friday after Thanksgiving and December 25th, both dates inclusive. No structures, including but not limited to poles, fences, lights, spray booths, and sheds, shall be erected or maintained on the site, and no Christmas trees shall be delivered to the site sooner than the Monday before Thanksgiving or later than December 30th. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

c.    Sales of pumpkins from pumpkin lots shall be limited to the period of time between October 1st and October 31st, both dates inclusive. No structure, including but not limited to poles, fences, lights, and sheds, shall be erected or maintained on the site, and no pumpkins shall be delivered to or left on the site sooner than September 20th or later than November 1st, unless a Temporary Use Permit has been requested for Christmas tree sales, subject to subsection (B)(1)(b) of this Section. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

d.    Operation of haunted houses shall be limited to the period of time between October 1st and November 1st, both dates inclusive. Haunted houses shall only be permitted in permanent buildings with appropriate occupancy rating, as determined by the Building and Safety Department. Any temporary interior modifications are subject to Building and Safety Department requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

e.    Firework stands (occupancy and/or sales) shall be limited to the period of time between noon on June 28 and noon on July 5. No structure, including but not limited to poles, fences, lights, and sheds, shall be erected or maintained on the site, and no fireworks shall be left on the site, after July 6. Fireworks stands shall be separated from adjacent fireworks stands and other structures as required by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-01, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

f.    All lighting shall be directed away from and shielded from adjacent properties and streets.

g.    Adequate provisions for traffic circulation, off-street parking, dust control and pedestrian safety shall be provided as approved by the Planning Director and City Traffic/Transportation Engineer.

h.    All requirements of the City shall be complied with throughout duration of the use.

2.    Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, concerts, shows or similar enterprises, and any of the uses permitted with a Special Event Permit that operate for more than one (1) day are subject to the following guidelines and conditions: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

a.    All such uses shall be located on commercially zoned and designated property. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

b.    Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, concerts, shows or similar enterprises, shall be limited to not more than fifteen (15) continuous days, or not more than three (3) weekends, of operation in any one hundred eighty (180) day period. Any request to exceed this time limitation shall require the review and approval of a Conditional Use Permit, pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

c.    Any of the uses permitted with a Special Event Permit that operate for more than one (1) day shall be limited to not more than ten (10) days of operation in any ninety (90) day period. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

d.    All such activities shall have a minimum setback of one hundred (100) feet from any residential area. This requirement may be waived or modified by the Planning Director, if it is determined that no adverse impacts would result.

e.    Adequate provisions for traffic circulation, off-street parking, and pedestrian safety shall be provided as approved by the Planning Director and City Traffic/Transportation Engineer.

f.    Sanitary facilities shall be provided, the number and location of which shall be approved by the City and other applicable agencies.

g.    Security personnel shall be provided as required by the Sheriff’s Department for circuses, carnivals, rodeos, concerts, shows or similar enterprises. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

h.    Circuses, carnivals, rodeos, concerts, shows or similar enterprises shall provide designated parking accommodations for workers and support vehicles. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

 

i.    Noise attenuation for generators and carnival rides shall be provided as approved by the Planning Director.

j.    All lighting shall be directed away from and shielded from adjacent properties and streets.

k.    Applicant shall obtain all applicable local, County or State permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

3.    Trailer coaches, motorhomes or manufactured homes, for use as temporary living quarters for security personnel, temporary residence of the subject property owner, or on active construction sites, where permitted by the zone. The following restrictions shall apply: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

a.    The Planning Director may approve a temporary vehicle for the duration of the construction project, or for a specified period, but in no event for more than three (3) years. If exceptional circumstances exist, a one (1) year extension may be granted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

b.    Vehicles permitted pursuant to this Section shall not exceed a maximum gross square footage of six hundred fifty (650) square feet in size (tongue not included), and shall have a minimum of two hundred fifty (250) square feet for one (1) or two (2) persons, or a minimum of six hundred (600) square feet for occupancy by three or more persons. The unit must have a valid California vehicle license. Pickup campers shall not be permitted.

c.    The temporary vehicle installation must meet all applicable requirements of the Los Angeles County/Health Department and the City of Palmdale Department of Building and Safety.

d.    Any permit issued pursuant to this Section in conjunction with a construction project shall become invalid upon cancellation or completion of the building permit for which this use has been approved, or the expiration of the time for which the approval has been granted.

e.    The permitted vehicle shall be removed from the site within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the temporary use permit, the final clearance or the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy, or the expiration of the building permit, whichever occurs first. A motor home, fifth-wheel trailer or other recreational vehicle permitted under this Section shall be disconnected from all utilities at the time of final clearance or issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

f.    Any vehicle permitted under this Section shall be connected to approved sewage, electrical and water facilities at all times during which the vehicle is occupied on the site.

g.    A minimum lot size of 40,000 square feet shall be required where a vehicle is proposed to be used as a temporary residence during construction of an individual single family residence.

4.    Temporary office modules. The use of temporary structures, such as trailers or pre-fabricated structures for use as interim offices on active construction sites may be permitted in any zone which allows the use, subject to the following requirements:

a.    The Planning Director may approve a temporary office module for the duration of the construction project, or for a specified period of time. If exceptional circumstances exist, one or more one (1) year extension(s) of time may be granted, provided that building permit(s) for permanent dwelling(s) or structure(s) on the same site remain valid; that project construction is being pursued; and that the location of the temporary office does not interfere unreasonably with the project’s residents or users.

b.    Installation of such structures may occur only after a valid building permit has been issued by the City of Palmdale Department of Building and Safety.

c.    Vehicles or modular structures permitted pursuant to this Section shall not exceed a maximum gross square footage of six hundred fifty (650) square feet in size (tongue not included). Where applicable, a valid California vehicle license must be affixed to the vehicle.

d.    The temporary office module installation must meet all applicable requirements of the Los Angeles County/Health Department and the City Department of Building and Safety.

e.    Any permit issued pursuant to this Section in conjunction with a construction project shall become invalid upon cancellation or completion of the building permit for which this use has been approved, or the expiration of the time for which the approval has been granted.

f.    The permitted office module shall be removed from the site within sixty (60) days following the issuance of a final clearance, the issuance of the Certificate of Occupancy or, where such module is used for temporary sales, upon the occupancy of the permanent sales office.

g.    No recreational vehicles shall be used for this purpose.

5.    In-tract model home sales complexes. A model home sales complex may be constructed within a tract pursuant to the approval of a Temporary Use Permit. One model within such tract may be used as an office solely for the sale of homes within the tract and/or complex. All such complexes are subject to the following conditions:

a.    The sales office shall be located within a garage or the main structure of one of the dwelling units within the tract.

b.    Model home sales complex approvals shall be valid for an initial period of three (3) years, or as otherwise approved in the TUP. Upon expiration of the TUP, the sales office shall be terminated, the structure restored to a residential use and all appurtenant structures related to the model home complex removed. Extensions may be granted by the Planning Director in one (1) year increments or until all units are sold.

c.    A cash deposit, letter of credit, or other security approved by the City, if applicable, shall be submitted to the City of Palmdale, in an amount to be established by the Director of Building & Safety, to ensure the restoration of the sales office and the removal of parking facilities and other structures associated with the complex.

d.    The sales office is to be used only for transactions involving the sale, rent, or lease of lots and/or structures within the tract in which the sales office is located, contiguous tracts, or a planned community.

e.    Street improvements and temporary off-street parking at a rate of two (2) spaces per model, or a minimum of six (6) spaces, whichever is greater, shall be completed as approved by the City Engineer and Planning Director, prior to commencement of sales activities or the display of model homes.

f.    All fences proposed in conjunction with the model homes and sales office are to be located outside the public right-of-way, except as approved by the City Engineer. An encroachment permit will be required for any fence or structure proposed to be located within a public right-of-way.

g.    Flags, pennants, or other on-site and off-site advertising shall be permitted and regulated pursuant to the applicable sections of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

h.    All model home lots shall be fully landscaped, in conformance with Ordinance U-992, with at least one model utilizing xeriscape landscaping, to produce a pleasing aesthetic environment.

i.    Adequate on-site lighting shall be provided to ensure a safe and secure environment, while at the same time being designed and placed so as to prevent stray light or glare from becoming a nuisance factor for adjacent properties. The lighting design shall be submitted for review and approval of the Planning Department prior to the issuance of building permits on the subject site.

j.    Adequate paved access from a public right-of-way shall be provided to the model home complex and/or sales office.

k.    Failure to terminate the sales office, restore the structure, and remove parking facilities and associated structures or failure to apply for an extension on or before the expiration date, may result in forfeiture of the cash deposit, a halt in further construction or inspection activity on the project site, and enforcement action to ensure restoration of the model complex site to single family residences.

6.    Stockpiling, subject to the following guidelines and conditions:

a.    No stockpiling shall be permitted on undisturbed native desert vegetation without appropriate environmental review, pursuant to state law.

b.    Stockpiled material shall not exceed a height of three (3) feet, and should be evenly spread.

c.    Location of stockpiled material shall not adversely impact adjacent properties or uses through creation of windblown dust, visual appearance, or other creation of an attractive nuisance.

d.    During placement or removal of stockpiled material appropriate traffic control measures shall be taken, as determined by the City Traffic/Transportation Engineer. Truck access to the stockpiling area from the adjacent right-of-way shall be approved by the Traffic/Transportation Engineer.

e.    Dust control measures shall be taken during stockpiling or removal operations as deemed necessary by the Planning Director.

f.    Erosion control measures on stockpiled material shall be implemented as determined necessary by the City Landscape Architect.

g.    Stockpiled material shall not contain greenwaste, trash, composted material, sludge, or biosolid material in any combinations or quantities. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.)

7.    Temporary Sales of Alcoholic Beverages (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 04-01, adopted by City Council July 11, 2005.)

Any event sponsor or applicant that anticipates a temporary event with alcohol sales shall obtain a Temporary Use Permit. The application is to be filed with the Planning Department at least sixty (60) days in advance of the event.

The Event Sponsor is the entity determined by the City to be liable for protecting public health and safety of event participants (those who attend the event), of event operators (those who create and execute the event), and of all others affected by the actions of event participants and event operators.

a.    The Planning Director shall review and approve applications for a Temporary Use Permit.

b.    Conditions for a Temporary Use Permit

1.    The applicant shall obtain property owner’s authorization.

2.    The applicant shall obtain a Business License and any other permits applicable for the event.

3.    The applicant shall submit a site plan showing the event and areas that alcohol is to be sold.

4.    The applicant shall have control over points of access to the location where alcoholic beverages are dispensed and consumed.

5.    The applicant shall have control and containment of individuals who consume alcoholic beverages.

6.    Los Angeles Sheriff’s Department liaison shall determine the number of deputies required for security of the event based on the type and size of the event.

7.    All alcoholic beverage servers shall have in their possession proof of completing “Responsible Beverage Service” training from the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.

8.    A Temporary Alcoholic Beverage Control license is required for the duration of this event. A copy of the temporary license is to be submitted to the City of Palmdale Planning Department prior to the start of the event.

9.    The applicant shall specify the hours of operation of the event and the hours of sale of alcoholic beverages.

10.    The applicant shall provide liability insurance in the amount determined by the City Attorney based on the size and type of the event with an “Alcohol Endorsement” and naming the City of Palmdale as additionally insured.

11.    The applicant shall provide traffic and parking control as required to facilitate safe and orderly on-site and off-site traffic flow and circulation for the event including handicapped access and fire lanes. Obtain approval of the site plan from the Los Angeles County Fire Department. The approved site plan is to be submitted to the Planning Department along with the Temporary Use Permit application.

12.    The site shall be restored to the original condition. Site shall be free of debris, all trash receptacles removed, temporary fencing removed, and all disturbed asphalt shall be restored to the original condition. Disturbed landscape areas are also to be restored to the original condition. The applicant shall be financially responsible for any damage to the parking lot surface and landscape areas resulting from the event.

13.    All proposed signage is to be approved by the Planning Department and shall comply with Chapter 17.88 PMC, Signs.

14.    All tents and other temporary structures shall require Fire Department approval. Provide a copy of the signed plans to the Planning Department prior the event.

15.    The applicant is to comply with all Los Angeles County Fire Department requirements such as Fire lanes, access points, and may require on-site Los Angeles County Fire Department staff.

16.    All uses involving electricity require an electrical permit from the Building and Safety Department.

17.    The applicant shall provide sanitary facilities for the participants of the event.

18.    All unimproved parking areas and main walk areas shall be kept damp or shall be covered with a material to prevent dust.

19.    The site shall be kept free of debris and wind blown trash. The applicant shall provide adequate number of trash receptacles based on the size of the event.

20.    All temporary lighting shall be directed away from and shielded from adjacent parcels, streets, and public rights-of-way.

21.    If live entertainment is planned, noise generated from performances is to be directed away from residential uses and kept at an acceptable level.

22.    All food vendors are required to obtain a Los Angeles County Health Permit for the sale of food and drinks.

23.    A minimum deposit of five hundred ($500) or more as determined by the Planning Director is to be submitted to the Planning Department prior to the event to ensure timely compliance with Temporary Use Requirements.

24.    The applicant shall comply with all other Conditions of Approval for the Temporary Use Permit.

C.    Site Plan Review

The following temporary use may be permitted subject to Site Plan Review approval and approval of a Temporary Use Permit.

1.    Off-site model home sales complexes. A model homes sales complex, when not located within the subdivision in which the models are being constructed, is considered to be an off-site model home sales complex. Off-site model home sales complexes may be permitted where allowed by the zone and subject to Site Plan Review approval and a Temporary Use Permit by the Planning Director, pursuant to Chapter 17.21 PMC, and in conformance with the following criteria:

a.    The sales office associated with the model home complex may be located only within a dwelling unit itself, or within a garage. Trailers, modulars, manufactured units, or any similarly temporary structure shall not be permitted.

b.    All structures shall be constructed pursuant to the minimum requirements of the zone district in which they are located.

c.    A cash deposit, letter of credit, or other security approved by the City, if applicable, shall be submitted to the City of Palmdale, in an amount to be established by the Director of Building and Safety, to ensure the restoration of the sales office and the removal of parking facilities and other structures associated with the complex.

d.    Street improvements and temporary off-street parking at a rate of two (2) spaces per model, or a minimum of six (6) spaces, whichever is greater, shall be completed as approved by the City Engineer and Planning Director, prior to commencement of sales activities or the display of model homes.

e.    All fences proposed in conjunction with the model home sales office are to be located outside of the public right-of-way except as approved by the City Engineer pursuant to approval of an encroachment permit.

f.    Adequate on-site lighting shall be provided to ensure a safe and secure environment, while at the same time being designed and placed so as to prevent stray light or glare from becoming a nuisance factor for adjacent properties. The lighting design shall be submitted for review and approval of the Planning Department prior to the issuance of building permits on the subject site.

g.    Flags, pennants, or other on-site and off-site advertising shall be permitted and regulated pursuant to the applicable sections of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

h.    The approval of this permit shall be for an initial period of thirty-six (36) months, at which time the model home/sales office use shall be terminated. Time extensions may be granted by the Planning Director subject to the provisions contained in Chapter 17.21 PMC.

i.    Adequate paved access from a public right-of-way shall be provided to the model home complex and/or sales office.

j.    The structure shall meet all requirements of the City of Palmdale Department of Building and Safety, including but not limited to the installation of handicapped accessible restroom facilities, and adequate utility facilities.

k.    All model home lots shall be fully landscaped, in accordance with Ordinance U-992, with at least one model utilizing water efficient landscaping, to produce a pleasing and aesthetic environment.

l.    Failure to terminate the sales office, restore the structure, and remove parking facilities and associated structures or failure to apply for an extension on or before the expiration date may result in forfeiture of the cash deposit, a halt in further construction or inspection activity on the project site, and enforcement action to ensure restoration of the model complex site to single family residences.

D.    Temporary Vehicle Sales Permit. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-02, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003; urgency ordinance adopted by City Council April 9, 2003.)

A Temporary Vehicle Sales Permit shall be required for any off site display and sales of three (3) or more vehicles or vessels, including but not limited to automobiles, light trucks, recreational vehicles, trailers, campers, commercial trucks, construction equipment, boats or other watercraft, motorcycles or all-terrain vehicles, or other similar forms of motorized vehicular transport. Off-site sales shall mean the display and sale of three (3) or more vehicles or vessels at a business location not open for the sales of said vehicles or vessels during regular business hours on a year-round basis.

1.    Permit Application and Issuance:

a.    A complete Temporary Vehicle Sales Permit Application must be filed a minimum of twenty-one (21) days prior to the date of the proposed event. Applications filed less than twenty-one (21) days from the date of the proposed event, or incomplete applications, will not be accepted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    Applications will be processed in the order they are received. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

c.    Each application shall be submitted on the form provided by the City, and shall be accompanied by: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

1.    The fee set forth in the City’s adopted Fee Resolution; (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

2.    Authorization from the underlying property owner; and (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

3.    A site plan which shows all proposed activities including tents, shade structures, temporary fencing or barricades, generators, temporary power lines, air conditioning equipment, inflatable devices, spot lights, stages or entertainment areas, portable restrooms, trash receptacles, signage and banners, food vending activities, portable lighting, and/or jump tents and other play equipment shall be provided. If an activity is not shown and specifically approved on the site plan, it shall not be permitted. The site plan shall be adequately detailed to show all proposed activities, shall be fully dimensioned and shall be at a scale adequate to depict the proposed site and the scope of the event. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

d.    Issuance of Temporary Vehicles Sales Permits shall be limited to a total of ten (10) permits in the City as a whole per calendar year. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

e.    Each Temporary Vehicle Sales event shall be limited in duration to no more than five (5) consecutive days, not including set up and strike down days which shall be approved by the Director. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

f.    There shall be a minimum of twenty-one (21) days between each Temporary Vehicle Sales Event. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

g.    The site for a Temporary Vehicle Sale shall be fully improved, and the subject property shall be located in Zone C-3, C-4, C-5, CD, M-1, M-2, M-4, PF, or OR, or be located within the Trade and Commerce Center Specific Plan or the Auto Center Specific Plan.

2.    Activities Prior to the Event

a.    Each participating auto dealer shall have a current City business license prior to the commencement of vehicle sales. Each participating auto dealer must also obtain all other necessary State or local permits, including but not limited to permits issued by the Department of Motor Vehicles, and said permits are required to be available for inspection on site for the duration of the event. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that each dealer possesses the required permits as set forth above. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    All other vendors or event participants, such as food vendors or entertainers, must possess or obtain all necessary state and local permits, including but not limited to a City business license, sellers permit, or health permit, and copies of said permits are required to be available for inspection on-site for the duration of the event. The applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that each event participant possesses the required permits as set forth above.

c.    A site inspection by City Staff to satisfactorily determine compliance with the approved site plan and conditions of approval is required prior to commencement of vehicle sales. The application fee shall include only one inspection. If additional inspections are required to demonstrate compliance, subsequent inspections shall be subject to the fees as set forth in the City’s fee resolution.

d.    No sales or on-site promotional activities are permitted prior to 10 a.m. the day of the event or to completion of a satisfactory site inspection, whichever occurs later.

3.    Activities During the Event

During a Temporary Vehicle Sales Event, the subject property will be maintained free of trash and debris and in compliance with the approved site plan and conditions of approval. In addition, the following minimum standards shall apply:

a.    Any overhead communication wires shall be installed no less than 14 feet above the underlying grade, and shall be maintained at that height until they are removed. Any temporary power lines shall be extended to the site at ground level and shall be secured in such a manner through the use of temporary ramp covers and/or mat covers so as not to constitute a trip hazard.

b.    Any guy wire supports for tents shall be clearly marked or flagged so as to be visible to pedestrians and shall be surrounded by barricades to preclude pedestrian access.

c.    Up to twenty (20) temporary signs between seven (7) and thirty (30) square feet may be displayed as long as their location is shown on the site plan. An unlimited number of temporary signs of up to six (6) square feet may be displayed during the event and do not need to be shown on the site plan. All temporary signs must be located within the area for the event designated on the site plan and may not be attached to landscaping. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

d.    Any temporary lighting installed for the event shall be shielded, and shall be located in such a manner so as not to shine directly towards adjacent streets, drive aisles or residential uses. Illumination levels from the combination of any permanent lighting, and any temporary lighting structures shall not exceed the maximum average illumination permitted in PMC 17.86.030.

e.    The maximum height of any temporary poles or structures erected for the event shall be 17 feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

f.    Trash receptacles and restrooms, in adequate numbers as determined by the Planning Director, are required and must be maintained in a sanitary condition for the duration of the event. Trash receptacles shall be emptied as needed but in no case any less frequently than twice per day. Any blowing trash or debris emanating from the event shall be collected and removed as soon as possible. Temporary restrooms shall be serviced as necessary. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

g.    At all times, surrounding drive aisles, sidewalks and pedestrian paths must be maintained free of obstructions, including but not limited to sales vehicles, temporary fencing, temporary structures and their supports, or any other activity or structure relating to the event. Within the event area, adequate separation between sales vehicles, temporary fencing, temporary structures and their supports, or any other activity or structure relating to the event shall be provided to ensure adequate pedestrian circulation within the event perimeter. Event design shall avoid creating dead-end drive aisles. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

h.    No signs, promotional devices, fences, guy wires or any other feature relating to the event shall be attached or affixed to on-site landscaping or parking lot light fixtures. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

4.    Activities Following the Event

All structures, fixtures, vehicles, and trash and debris shall be removed from the site and the surrounding area prior to the end of the approved strike-down period. Any damaged or broken curbs or asphalt shall be repaired, and any disturbed landscape areas shall be revegetated to their previous condition.

5.    Standards for Approval (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

a.    The pedestrian and vehicular access to the site may not be adversely affected by the location and/or design of barricades, fencing, vehicles, or structures erected for the event. In addition, the design of the event site must demonstrate adequate pedestrian and vehicular access, including required disabled access. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

b.    The site for the proposed event must accommodate: 1) the vehicle sales and accessory uses proposed in the application, 2) vehicle parking necessary for patrons of the event, and 3) all required vehicle parking and access for any permanent uses occupying the subject property. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

c.    At the conclusion of the event, the site must be left in a clean condition, free of debris. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.27.040 Application Procedure
Applications for any permits to establish temporary uses, as described in this Division, shall be filed with the Planning Department in a manner prescribed by the Planning Director, along with the required fee as established by resolution of the City Council.

17.27.050 Termination of Temporary Uses
A.    No operator of a temporary use shall continue operation of that use beyond the time periods allowed by this Division. If no maximum time period is specified in this Division for the operation of the use, the operator shall not continue operation beyond the period specified in the temporary use permit.

B.    If the Planning Department determines that a temporary use which is being operated pursuant to a Special Event Permit or a Temporary Use Permit is being conducted in violation of this Ordinance or the terms and conditions of such permit, the Planning Director shall provide notice and an opportunity for a hearing to the permit holder before making a decision to revoke or not revoke the permit. If the Planning Director determines, after reviewing the information and considering the information presented during the hearing that sufficient evidence exists of a violation, the Planning Director may revoke the permit or impose additional conditions to ensure compliance. The permittee may appeal the decision by filing an appeal as allowed and specified in PMC 17.20.110. Any suspected violation of a Conditional Use Permit with respect to a temporary use shall be regulated by Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits.

17.27.060 Review Criteria
Standards for approval: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

1.    The temporary use should be compatible with, and not adversely affect, adjacent uses. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

2.    The temporary use must be permitted in the underlying zone and conform with all applicable policies and ordinances of the City of Palmdale. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Chapter 17.28
COMPREHENSIVE DEVELOPMENT PLANS
17.28.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish review procedures and approval requirements for projects which, due to their size, complexity, or the nature of their anticipated impacts, require comprehensive planning in order to meet the goals of the General Plan. A comprehensive development plan may be either a Specific Plan or a Planned Development, depending on the size and complexity of the project as described in this Chapter.

Preparation of a comprehensive development plan is appropriate for large-scale, mixed-use projects which are expected to be built in phases over a long period of time; projects which, because of topographic, environmental or infrastructural constraints, require flexible development standards in order to achieve superior design and minimize adverse impacts; projects in which coordination of multiple owners is required to achieve a long-range development or land use plan; and projects requiring the coordination of land use planning with planning for infrastructure, public safety, circulation, open space, resource conservation, housing, or other development issues as identified in the General Plan policies.

The review process for comprehensive development plans provides a method to identify development constraints and opportunities applicable to a specific site, and to tailor the development regulations to the site in order to achieve a more efficient use of the land and high quality of design. This process would result in adoption of a Specific Plan or Planned Development, as described in this Chapter.

17.28.020 Applicability
A.    Review of a comprehensive development plan shall be required for the following development proposals:

1.    Projects within areas designated on the General Plan Land Use Map as “Special Development (SD).”

2.    Any project proposed to be adopted as a Specific Plan, pursuant to Government Code Section 65450.

3.    Projects which, because of the scale, intensity of use, site constraints, or anticipated impacts on infrastructure, are determined by the Planning Director to require comprehensive planning through the comprehensive development plan process.

B.    A comprehensive development plan may be proposed for residential, commercial or industrial development projects, or for mixed-use projects proposing multiple uses, densities or intensities of land use, provided that all uses are consistent with the underlying General Plan designation.

C.    The City may approve a comprehensive development plan by adoption of a Specific Plan pursuant to PMC 17.28.040; or a Planned Development, pursuant to PMC 17.28.050.

17.28.030 Application Procedures
A.    A comprehensive development plan may be initiated by action of the City Council, or by the owner or the authorized agent of the owner of property within the proposed project area.

B.    A pre-application conference shall be required for any comprehensive development plan, pursuant to PMC 17.20.030.

C.    Any application for a comprehensive development plan shall be made on a form provided for that purpose by the Planning Department, along with the required fee as established by City Council Resolution.

17.28.040 Specific Plan Review
A.    Purpose and applicability

The Specific Plan process is intended to provide a method of comprehensive planning for large scale, mixed use development projects which are anticipated to be built in successive phases over a longer period of time than is typically granted for other development entitlements. Projects for which a Specific Plan would be appropriate would generally meet the following criteria:

1.    The project site is not presently served by infrastructure and community services needed to support the proposed development, nor do comprehensive plans to provide these facilities exist; and

2.    The proposed mix and intensity of land uses, and their relationship to the project site, warrant consideration of special development standards and criteria beyond those otherwise provided in the Zoning Ordinance; and

3.    Specific development plans for each portion of the subject property are not known at the time of project review, but are anticipated to be submitted subsequently as the project develops in conformance with the approved comprehensive development plan; and

4.    Due to the long-term nature of the project and the cost of providing substantial infrastructure improvements, an implementation plan addressing financing, phasing and maintenance of public improvements is necessary to ensure the project is developed in accordance with the General Plan.

B.    General provisions

1.    A Specific Plan may be proposed within any zone district(s), provided that the proposed type and intensity of use is consistent with the General Plan.

2.    A Specific Plan should typically be utilized for projects of over one hundred sixty (160) acres in area. Comprehensive planning for smaller areas may be more appropriately accomplished through the Planned Development Process as described in PMC 17.28.050.

3.    Adoption of a Specific Plan shall constitute a change of zone. Upon adoption, the Official Zoning Map shall be revised to indicate the approved Specific Plan and its identification number.

4.    Applications for a Specific Plan may be accompanied by other applications for entitlements, which may be reviewed concurrently, provided that the effective date of any additional approvals shall be on or after the effective date of the Specific Plan.

5.    Any application for a Specific Plan shall be processed in accordance with Government Code Sections 65450 through 65362 and the provisions of this Section of the Zoning Ordinance.

C.    Required contents of a specific plan

1.    Narrative Report. The purpose of a Specific Plan narrative report is to describe the proposed development, place it within the regional setting, and provide detailed information necessary for plan review. The report may be organized in any manner necessary to present the required information. The report, however, must be clear, concise, and organized in a logical manner to facilitate review and processing. Maps, tables and graphic illustrations shall be required when appropriate. The required report contents shall be included as set forth in the Specific Plan Application provided by the Planning Department, and shall include but not be limited to the following information:

a.    Information regarding the property, developer, owner, representatives and consultants preparing the report.

b.    Table of Contents, including lists of maps and figures.

c.    A discussion of the nature and intent of the proposed development.

d.    A descriptive analysis of the project site.

e.    Quantified information on the impacts of project build-out.

f.    A development plan for all proposed land uses in the project (including open space).

g.    A description of existing infrastructure, projected improvements needed to serve the project, and a plan for providing needed infrastructure, including community facilities.

h.    A circulation plan for the project.

i.    Development standards applicable to development within the specific plan.

j.    Special design standards applicable to the project, including but not limited to signage, landscaping, fences and walls, lighting, and entry monumentation.

k.    Proposed phasing of the project.

l.    An implementation plan for the project.

m.    A discussion of how the project conforms to the General Plan policies and maps.

2.    Maps. The purpose of the Specific Plan maps is to graphically depict characteristics of the project site, its regional setting, the proposed nature and intensity of development, project phasing, and other pertinent information needed for project review. All required maps must be submitted at a reduced scale suitable for inclusion in the narrative report, as well as at a larger scale suitable for display. Required contents of maps shall be as set forth in the Specific Plan Application provided by the Planning Department, and shall include but not be limited to the following information:

a.    Existing conditions of the project site, including topography, natural drainage courses, existing structures, roads, easements, uses, zoning and General Plan designations.

b.    The proposed Development Plan, including phasing.

c.    The proposed Circulation Plan, including phasing, any proposed trails, and connectivity to the regional circulation system.

d.    Any proposed landscape, design or amenity features.

D.    Review procedure

1.    The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each proposal for a Specific Plan. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the Specific Plan is consistent with this Zoning Ordinance and with the General Plan, and may recommend to the City Council that the Specific Plan be approved, or approved in modified form by the City Council, based on the appropriate findings as contained in this Chapter. If the Planning Commission determines that a proposed Specific Plan is not in conformance with the General Plan or that the findings for approval cannot be made, the Planning Commission may deny the application based upon the findings contained in this Chapter, and their action is final unless appealed, pursuant to PMC 17.20.110.

2.    Upon recommendation of the Planning Commission on a proposed Specific Plan, the City Council shall hold a public hearing. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time. Following the closing of the public hearing, the Council shall make specific findings as to whether the Specific Plan is consistent with the Zoning Ordinance and General Plan. The Council may adopt the Specific Plan by ordinance or by resolution, based upon the appropriate findings as contained in this Chapter.

E.    Required findings for approval

Prior to approving a Specific Plan, the following findings supported by adequate evidence shall be made by the City Council:

1.    The distribution, location and extent of land uses, including open space, as depicted in the Specific Plan is consistent with the General Plan.

2.    The Specific Plan provides for adequate public infrastructure and services needed to support the land uses described in the plan, meaning the proposed distribution, location, extent and intensity of transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy, parks, community facilities and other essential facilities.

3.    The standards and development criteria, including requirements for resource utilization, will ensure that development proceeds in an orderly fashion and maintains a high level of quality.

4.    The Specific Plan contains implementation measures, including financing programs, to ensure that development is supported by adequate infrastructure as it occurs.

5.    The site is suitable for the type and intensity of development proposed.

6.    The flexibility in development standards afforded by the Specific Plan process has resulted in a project providing more superior design and amenities than would occur under more traditional zoning practices, and the project provides clear and substantial benefit to the City of Palmdale.

F.    Amendments and modifications to approved Specific Plans

Unless otherwise set forth within the Specific Plan, amendments or modifications to an approved Specific Plan shall be processed as follows:

1.    Minor revisions

A revision or modification to an approved Specific Plan, including but not limited to minor density transfers, minor adjustments to the alignment of roadways or utilities, minor modifications to landscaping, wall materials or streetscape design, which will not increase or change the use or intensity of the site, may be acted on by the Planning Director upon submittal of an application, required materials and applicable fees for a Minor Modification, pursuant to PMC 17.26.040.

2.    Amendments or major revisions

Any request for a revision or modification to an approved Specific Plan which, in the opinion of the Director of Planning, does not constitute a minor revision will be processed as a major revision in the following manner:

a.    An amendment or major revision to the text of an approved Specific Plan will be processed using the application procedures, review process and findings for approval as set forth for Zoning Ordinance Amendments in PMC 17.24.110 and in subsection (F)(2)(c) of this Section.

b.    An amendment or major revision to the land use map or land use exhibits of an approved Specific Plan will be processed using the application procedures, review process and findings for approval as set forth for Zone Changes in PMC 17.24.100 and in subsection (F)(2)(c) of this Section.

c.    In addition to the findings for approval set forth in PMC 17.24.100 and 17.24.110, any approval of an amendment to a Specific Plan text or map shall also be based upon a finding that such amendment conforms to the intent and applicable goals and policies of the Specific Plan.

17.28.050 Planned Development (PD)
A.    Purpose and applicability

The Planned Development is intended to provide a method of comprehensive planning for smaller, less complex development projects than are typically processed with a Specific Plan, which meet the following criteria:

1.    The project site contains topographic constraints, environmental resources, or other features which require special planning consideration; and

2.    A more efficient and desirable design can be achieved through flexible design standards and/or mixed land use patterns than can be attained through the strict adherence to zoning standards; and

3.    Adequate public facilities and infrastructure exist or can be provided to the project site to serve the proposed type and intensity of development; and

4.    Detailed development plans are known at the time the comprehensive development plan is prepared, allowing concurrent review and approval of entitlements for the project area; and

5.    Buildout of the PD project area is anticipated within the term of the concurrent entitlements.

B.    General provisions

1.    A PD may be proposed within any zone district or Specific Plan designation, provided that the type and intensity of uses is consistent with the General Plan, the zoning, or any applicable Specific Plan.

2.    A PD should typically be utilized for projects of between twenty (20) to one hundred sixty (160) acres in area. The project site must be of sufficient size to allow provision of design benefits and site amenities through flexibility of development regulations. Projects of a larger scale are more appropriately evaluated through the Specific Plan process.

3.    When adopted by the Planning Commission, a PD shall be depicted on the Official Zoning Map with an identification number, for purposes of disclosure. However, adoption of a PD does not, in itself, constitute a Zone Change. Upon termination or expiration of a previously-approved PD, the Planning Director shall remove the PD identification number from the Official Zoning Map. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

4.    All applications for PD approval shall be accompanied by the appropriate applications for land use entitlements necessary for project implementation, including but not limited to subdivision maps, Site Plan Review, Conditional Use Permit or other applications.

5.    Initial approval of a PD shall be for the period of five (5) years. One or more extensions of time may be granted by the Planning Commission up to an additional five (5) years from the original expiration date. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

C.    Application requirements

The Planned Development application shall consist of a text and set of maps, in the required number of copies as specified in the application form provided by the Planning Department, which depict the exact nature of the intended development. At a minimum, the submittal package must contain the following elements:

1.    Map exhibits

a.    A Development Feasibility Map showing development opportunities and constraints which could affect the project design. Information to be included on this exhibit may include but not be limited to slope gradients, drainage courses, seismic hazard zones, floodplain designations, easements and utility corridors, viewsheds, significant ridgelines, existing structures, natural or cultural resources and other similar features which must be considered in reviewing the project. This map shall also include such features offsite or adjacent to the project site, if they will impact the project design.

b.    A Development Plan showing the project site as well as five hundred (500) feet around the site boundaries, showing the type and intensity of proposed land uses (including open space) within the project site, and existing and planned uses adjacent to the site (including General Plan and Zoning designations).

c.    A Circulation Map for the project site showing proposed locations, widths and grades of all proposed public and/or private streets, and their relationship to existing or planned streets outside of the project boundary. The area outside of the project site to be included on the exhibit shall be appropriate to clearly demonstrate how the proposed circulation pattern integrates with the existing and proposed circulation system in the vicinity of the site.

d.    Infrastructure Plan, showing how the project will be provided with sewer and water, its relationship to master drainage facilities, and how the project will be served by school, park and fire services (if applicable).

e.    Exhibits a, b and c above shall be prepared at the same scale on a topographic base map with a contour interval of no greater than five (5) feet or as otherwise approved by the Planning Director. Exhibit d may be prepared at a smaller scale to show the relationship of the project site to regional infrastructure and community facilities.

2.    Text

The text submitted with the Planned Development application shall clearly explain the proposed project, including type, intensity and phasing of development. The text shall contain the following information.

a.    Site information, including names, addresses and telephone numbers of owner, developer and/or builder, and consultants; legal description; description of existing site condition; total site area; slope density analysis (if applicable); and description of opportunities and constraints as depicted on the Development Feasibility Map.

b.    Project description, including proposed uses and percent of site area by use, including open space; proposed building footprints, including location and lot coverage; proposed floor area ratio (for commercial and industrial uses); proposed gross density (for residential uses); proposed Circulation Plan; proposed Infrastructure Plan; description of any special considerations in the project design (such as affordable or senior housing, hillside development restrictions, etc.); proposed phasing, including tabulation of uses or units by phase; and proposed development schedule.

c.    Special development standards, including a description of any development standards used within the PD which vary from those in the Zoning Ordinance or any applicable Specific Plan, including but not limited to setbacks, landscaping, parking, building height, lot coverage, signs or other standards. This section need only address those standards which are different from those that would pertain to the site without approval of the PD.

d.    Implementation, including a description of procedures for implementation and administration of the project, including on-going maintenance of common areas and facilities.

e.    Appendices, including any special studies or supporting documentation prepared for the project.

D.    Review procedure

The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on each proposal for a Planned Development. The hearing shall be set and notice given as prescribed in PMC 17.20.020. The hearing may be continued from time to time. The Planning Commission shall determine whether the Planned Development is consistent with the Zoning Ordinance and General Plan, and shall approve or deny the proposal based upon the findings contained in subsection E of this Section.

E.    Findings for approval

Prior to approving a Planned Development, the following findings supported by adequate evidence shall be made by the Planning Commission:

1.    The distribution, location and extent of land uses is consistent with the General Plan.

2.    The site is suitable for the type and intensity of development.

3.    Adequate access is provided in accordance with the General Plan Circulation Element.

4.    The project site is or will be provided with adequate public services and facilities to support the proposed development.

5.    The flexibility in site development regulations contained in the Planned Development has resulted in a project demonstrating clear and substantial benefits to the City of Palmdale.

F.    Amendments and modifications to approved Planned Developments

Revisions or modifications of Planned Developments may be requested by the applicant and shall be processed as follows.

1.    Minor revisions

A revision or modification to an approved Planned Development, including but not limited to minor changes in the site design, parking or building placement, which will not increase or change the use or intensity of the site, may be acted on by the Planning Director upon submittal of an application, required materials and applicable fees for Minor Modification, pursuant to PMC 17.26.040.

2.    Major revisions

A major revision or modification to an approved Planned Development, including but not limited to change in conditions, expansions, intensification, location, or hours of operation shall be processed through application of a Major Modification or new Planned Development, as determined by the Director of Planning based on the extent and scope of the proposed revision.

Chapter 17.29
NON-CONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
17.29.010 Purpose
This Chapter provides for the regulation, modification and orderly termination of uses and structures (other than signs and billboards) which were lawfully established but which are no longer in conformance with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. This Chapter is intended to limit non-conforming uses and structures by preventing the expansion of such uses and structures to the maximum extent feasible, by establishing criteria under which they may be continued or expanded, and by providing for the correction or removal of these uses and structures in an equitable, reasonable and timely manner. In addition, this Chapter is intended to limit the number and extent of non-conforming structures by prohibiting their relocation, alteration or enlargement in a manner that would increase the disparity between existing conditions and applicable City regulations, codes or ordinances.

Regulations pertaining to non-conforming signs and billboards are contained in Chapter 17.88 PMC.

17.29.020 General Provisions
A.    A use lawfully occupying a structure or a site, that does not conform with the use provisions and development standards for the zone district in which the use is located, shall be deemed to be a legal non-conforming use and may be continued, except as otherwise limited in this Division.

B.    A structure lawfully occupying a site, that does not conform with the development standards contained in this Ordinance, including but not limited to standards for front yards, side yards, rear yards, height, lot coverage, distances between structures, and parking facilities for the zone district in which the structure is located, shall be deemed to be a legal non-conforming structure and may be used and maintained, except as otherwise limited in this Division.

C.    Any use or structure which has been unlawfully established and which does not conform to the use provisions or development standards of the zone district in which it is located is in violation of the City’s Zoning Ordinance, and shall be subject to all available measures for abatement and correction of the code violation(s) pursuant to the Municipal Code.

D.    Any portion of a legal non-conforming structure or use which is altered or changed to a conforming structure or use, may not thereafter be used for a non-conforming use.

E.    Routine maintenance and repairs may be performed on a legal non-conforming use or structure.

F.    Alterations and repairs which are necessary to maintain public health, safety and welfare, as determined necessary by the Director of Building and Safety, may be performed on a non-conforming use or structure.

17.29.030 Existing Approvals
A.    Approved entitlements. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to prevent the ultimate development of a project site which has been approved or conditionally approved by the City prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto, provided that actions necessary to inaugurate such development, as defined in PMC 17.20.120(A), have occurred prior to the expiration of the original entitlement or any subsequent approved time extension to the project.

B.    Facilities under construction. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed or construed to prevent the completion and use, in accordance with this Chapter, of any building or structure under construction before the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto, provided:

1.    That such construction or the proposed use of such building or structure is not, at the effective date, in violation of any other law or regulation; and

2.    That applicable grading and building permits have been issued and construction of such building or structure is initiated. For the purposes of this Section, the issuance of a grading permit alone shall not constitute a vested right to develop and where the grading plan would result in a non-conformity, said permit shall be null and void on the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance; and

3.    That all applicable permits remain valid, reasonable progress toward completion is being made and that work has not been ceased for a continuous period of more than 180 days.

C.    Time extensions. Time extension applications filed or under consideration after the effective date of the Zoning Ordinance or any amendment thereto, shall be subject to the procedures, standards and regulations contained within this Zoning Ordinance, as amended.

D.    Non-conformity under construction. Any non-conformity existing in any building or structure completed in accordance with this Section, shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

E.    Density non-conformity. In the R-2, R-3 and MX zone districts, a lawfully established multi-family structure which becomes non-conforming with respect to the density of dwelling units, but is otherwise a permitted use, shall be permitted to continue indefinitely in accordance with this Chapter, provided there is no further increase in the number of units or any proposed change of use.

17.29.040 Legal Non-Conforming Structures
A.    Alteration

1.    A non-conforming non-residential structure shall not be enlarged or expanded in such a way as to occupy any part or space on the site which it did not occupy at the time it became legal non-conforming use, except as permitted in this Chapter.

2.    The habitable living area of a non-conforming residential structure shall not be enlarged or expanded in such a way as to occupy any part or space which it did not occupy at the time it became legal non-conforming, except as permitted in this Chapter.

3.    No non-conforming structure shall be altered or reconstructed so as to increase the disparity between existing conditions and the development standards contained in this Ordinance, including but not limited to standards for front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of structures, lot coverage, and distances between structures in the regulations for the zoning district in which the structure is located.

4.    Any proposed expansions or alterations of a nonresidential legal nonconforming structure shall be reviewed through the submittal of a Site Plan Review pursuant to Chapter 17.21 PMC and found to conform with the standards contained in PMC 17.29.050. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

5.    No permitted change or alteration of a legal non-conforming structure shall be construed as authorizing an extension of any time limit established for termination of said structure.

B.    Restoration of a damaged non-conforming structure

1.    Whenever a structure which does not comply with the development standards contained in this Ordinance, including but not limited to front yard, side yards, rear yard, height of structures, distances between structures, densities and parking facilities as prescribed in the regulations for the district in which it is located, or the use of which does not conform with the regulations for the district in which it is located, is destroyed by fire or other calamity, by act of nature, or by the public enemy to the extent of fifty (50%) percent or less, the structure may be restored and the non-conforming use may be resumed, provided that restoration is started within one year and diligently pursued to completion. When the destruction exceeds fifty (50%) percent or the structure is voluntarily razed or is required by law to be razed, the structure shall not be restored except in full conformity with the regulations for the district in which it is located, and the non-conforming use shall not be resumed.

2.    A single family residential structure damaged beyond fifty (50%) percent may be rebuilt in substantially the same manner and to the same square footage as previously legally permitted, provided the structure does not further encroach into the existing setback area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

3.    The extent of damage or partial destruction shall be based upon the ratio of the estimated cost of restoring the structure to its condition prior to such damage or partial destruction, to the estimated cost of duplicating the entire structure as it existed prior thereto. Estimates for this purpose shall be made by or shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Building & Safety and shall be based on the minimum cost of construction in compliance with the Uniform Building Code.

4.    The repair of buildings or structures pursuant to this Section shall not be construed as authorizing an extension of any time limit for the termination of a non-conformity.

C.    Off-site relocation

When a building or structure is relocated to another site, it shall be made conforming in all respects with the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance and all other applicable laws and regulations.

17.29.050 Findings for Approval of Alteration of a Legal Non-Conforming Structure
A.    The following requirements shall pertain to the alteration of a legal nonconforming structure: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

1.    The alteration of a non-residential structure will result in expansion of a structure by no more than ten (10) percent of the total floor area within the structure, or the alteration of a residential structure will result in the expansion of a structure by no more than seventy-five (75%) percent of the total floor area of the structure or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less; and (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

2.    The use within the legal non-conforming structure is similar in nature to the use originally allowed and is not of greater intensity with regard to traffic, noise, density, parking demand, odor, light, or other similar development or performance standard; and

3.    The proposed alteration will not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to adjoining properties; and

4.    The proposed alteration complies with all applicable City policies, codes and ordinances; and

5.    The proposed changes are limited to minor alterations, improvements, or repairs which do not increase the degree of non-conformity present and do not constitute or produce an expansion or intensification of a non-conforming use.

B.    Any alterations required by governmental or court action shall be exempt from conditions of PMC 17.29.040 and this Section which are determined by the Planning Director not to apply to the project site.

17.29.060 Abatement of Non-Conforming Structures
A.    Non-conforming structures

A lawfully constructed structure which becomes non-conforming shall be terminated and such buildings, structures or facilities shall be removed or made conforming in all respects within the time period specified in Table 17.2.29.1.

B.    Site development non-conformities

1.    Non-conformity requiring capital expenditure to conform

Lawfully established site improvements, buildings and structures which become non-conforming with respect to site development regulations, and which cannot be made conforming without incurring a capital expenditure or loss, either shall be made conforming or allowed to continue as indicated in Table 17.2.29.2, unless otherwise provided in this Division.

2.    Non-conformity involving only non-capital expenditure or loss to conform

Unless otherwise specified, lawfully established facilities, operations or other circumstances which become non-conforming, but which can be made conforming without a capital expenditure or capital loss, shall be made conforming within one year from the date of non-conformance.

 

TABLE 17.2.29.1

TIME PERIODS FOR ABATEMENT OF

NON-CONFORMING STRUCTURES

Type of Structure*

Classification

Use

Allowable Life

Light metal or wood frame

II (1-hour)

II-N, V

Non-residential

23 years (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-03, adopted by City Council July 2, 2014)

Light metal or wood frame

II (1-hour)

II-N, V

Residential except

single-family dwellings.

20 years

Heavy timber,

masonry, concrete

II (Fire Resistive)

III, IV

All

30 years

Fire resistive heavy steel and/or

concrete

I

All

40 years

*    Building Code classification shall take precedence over type of material in case of conflict.

TABLE 17.2.29.2

TIME PERIODS FOR ABATEMENT OF

SITE DEVELOPMENT NON-CONFORMITIES

Non-Conformity

Requirement

Existing wall, fence or hedge of excess height, nonconforming placement, design, etc.

Shall be removed or made conforming within 3 years from the date of non-conformance.

Outdoor storage areas for vehicles, equipment or materials lacking required screening and/or enclosures.

Shall be made conforming within 1 year from the date of non-conformance.

Parking (non-residential), including number and size of space, lot layout, lot improvement and landscaping.

Allow to continue indefinitely, except that any expansion of use or intensity by more than twenty-five (25) percent shall require that all truck loading and maneuvering areas be made conforming to the extent feasible in the opinion of the Reviewing Authority. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Parking (residential), including number of spaces and type of enclosure.

Allowed to continue indefinitely where no change of use or density is proposed. An addition to a dwelling may be made without making the parking conforming provided the number of dwelling units is not increased and the addition does not occupy the only available space on the lot which could be used to meet the parking requirement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Truck loading and maneuvering areas and truck stacking and parking spaces.

Shall be provided in a conforming manner within 1 year from the date of non-conformance.

Utilities.

Allowed to continue indefinitely, except that any replacement of an existing line shall be made in a conforming manner to the extent feasible.

17.29.070 Legal Non-Conforming Uses
A.    Alteration of Legal Non-conforming Non-residential Uses

1.    Any proposed expansion or change to a legal non-conforming use shall be reviewed through the submittal of a Conditional Use Permit and found to conform with the findings contained in PMC 17.29.080. In the case where a non-conforming use occupies a non-conforming structure, any alteration to either the use or the structure shall require approval of a Conditional Use Permit based on the findings contained in PMC 17.29.080.

B.    Alteration of Legal Non-conforming Residential Uses

1.    Any expansion of a single family residential use shall conform to the Standards for Development contained in PMC 17.41.090. No expansion of a multiple family residential use shall be permitted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

2.    No permitted change or alteration of a legal non-conforming use shall be construed as authorizing an extension of any time limit established for termination of said use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

C.    Discontinuation of a legal non-conforming use

Whenever a non-residential non-conforming use has been changed to a conforming use, or has been discontinued for a continuous period of 180 days or more, the non-conforming use shall not be reestablished, and use of the structure or site thereafter shall be in conformity with the regulations for the zone district in which it is located. A residential legal non-conforming use shall be determined to be discontinued when all residential units on a parcel of land have been changed to a conforming use or as set forth in Table 17.2.29.3. Thereafter, the use of the parcel shall be in conformance with the regulations for the zone district in which it is located. Discontinuance of a use shall include termination of a use regardless of intent to resume the use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

17.29.080 Findings for Approval of Alteration of a Non-Conforming Use
A.    The following requirements shall pertain to the alteration of a legal nonconforming use: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

1.    The proposed alteration will not prolong the normal remaining life of the non-conforming use.

2.    The proposed alteration of the non-conforming use will not be detrimental to or prevent the attainment of goals, objectives, and policies specified in the General Plan.

3.    The proposed alteration will not be detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and district in which the use is located.

4.    The proposed alteration will not change the primary use of the land or increase the intensity of that use.

5.    The existing non-conforming use and proposed alteration complies with all of the applicable City policies, codes and ordinances regulating operation of such uses.

B.    Any alterations required by governmental or court action shall be exempt from conditions of PMC 17.29.070 and this Section which are determined by the Planning Commission not to apply to the project site.

17.29.090 Abatement of Non-Conforming Uses
A lawfully established use which becomes a non-conforming use under the provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, shall be terminated within the time period specified in Table 17.2.29.3:

 

TABLE 17.2.29.3

TIME PERIODS FOR ABATEMENT OF

NON-CONFORMING USES

USE

ALLOWABLE LIFE

A non-conforming use which does not occupy a structure.

1 year

A non-conforming use involving only buildings or structures which would not require a building permit to replace such buildings or structures.

3 years

A non-conforming use housed in a conforming structure designed to serve a use permitted in the zone.

5 years

A non-conforming use involving buildings or structures which would require a construction of a building specifically designed for that use, due to the specialized needs or functions of said use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6, adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

20 years*

A non-conforming residential use which, through neglect, vandalism or deterioration, has become uninhabitable or unsafe to occupy. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6, adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

180 days from the date the structure is deemed unsafe/ uninhabitable.

*    Provided that the structure has a useful remaining life of at least 20 years. In the event that the structure does not have a useful remaining life of at least 20 years, as determined by the Building Official, then the Planning Director may establish a shorter amortization period for the non-conforming use and shall notify the owner of this determination in writing. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6, adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

 

Chapter 17.30
LIGHT AGRICULTURE (ZONE A-1)
17.30.010 Intent and Purpose
The Light Agriculture (A-1) Zone is intended to ensure that the rural character of portions of the planning area is maintained. Typical uses in this zone include truck farming, field and tree crops, and low density residential uses. Residential development permitted in this zone consists of large lot single family homes which may involve limited agriculture, including equestrian and other animal uses.

17.30.020 Locational Criteria
The A-1 zone designation is appropriate for areas having a predominant lot size of approximately one or more acres and where rural residential and limited agricultural uses are existing or desired. This designation would be consistent with the ER (Equestrian Residential) and the LDR (Low Density Residential) General Plan land use designations.

17.30.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
The following uses are allowed in the A-1 Zone without zoning clearance or other planning approval, except as required by State law.

A.    Field, tree, bush, berry and row crops, including nursery stock, provided that no sludge and/or biosolid material shall be applied to any land as a soil amendment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.)

B.    Riding, hiking and bicycle trails and appurtenant facilities.

C.    Keeping of permitted animals as an accessory use on the same lot or on lots or parcels of land adjoining a lot containing a primary residential use under the same ownership, provided that the ratio of such animals to the total land area of all such parcels does not exceed the ratios specified for animals as an accessory use as specified within PMC 17.89.030; that any animal enclosures meet the required setbacks as specified within PMC 17.89.030; and that all such animals are predominantly kept or maintained for the private use of members of the family residing in the primary residence. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

D.    Storage, temporary, of materials and equipment used in construction of public or private improvements, provided that all such items are stored on the construction site and pose no traffic hazard or other adverse impact on surrounding properties.

E.    Temporary and permanent facilities for detention, retention and conveyance of stormwater runoff.

F.    Small-scale solar energy systems as an accessory use on a parcel containing a permitted principal use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011.)

17.30.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Planning Director
The following uses are permitted in the A-1 zone, subject to the applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

A.    Additional permitted animals in excess of the allowed number, pursuant to PMC 17.26.080 and 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

B.    Day care facility, large family, pursuant to PMC 17.26.090.

C.    Exotic animals, pursuant to PMC 17.26.070 and 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

D.    Home occupation permits, pursuant to PMC 17.26.060.

E.    In-tract model homes, pursuant to PMC 17.27.030(B)(5).

F.    Special events pursuant to PMC 17.27.030(A).

G.    Minor communication facility pursuant to PMC 17.95.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

H.    Single family dwellings on lots of a minimum of one (1) net acre in area, except that single family dwellings may be permitted on existing lots of record provided that all minimum residential standards as contained in PMC 17.41.090 are provided. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

I.    Temporary office modules on active construction sites, pursuant to PMC 17.27.030(B)(4).

J.    Trailer coaches, motorhomes or manufactured homes on active construction sites, pursuant to PMC 17.27.030(B)(3).

K.    Accessory dwelling units on individual parcels containing one (1) single-family dwelling unit; provided, that each unit adheres to the minimum residential standards contained in PMC 17.41.090(G) and 17.91.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

L.    Residential sports courts, pursuant to PMC 17.91.090. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012.)

M.    Cottage food operations, pursuant to PMC 17.91.020. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-002, adopted by City Council May 1, 2013)

N.    Small residential wind generator systems (SRWGS), pursuant to PMC 17.99.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-001, adopted by City Council December 4, 2013.)

17.30.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
The following uses shall require approval, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.21 PMC, Site Plan Review.

A.    Agricultural workers’ living quarters for persons employed and deriving the major portion of their income from employment on the premises. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

B.    Parks and playgrounds (excluding lighted playfields).

17.30.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Premises in Zone A-1 may be used for the following purposes, provided that a permit has first been obtained, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits.

A.    Camps, youth.

B.    Cemeteries, excluding mortuaries.

C.    Clubs (fraternal) and lodges. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

D.    Convents, monasteries and retreat centers.

E.    Country clubs.

F.    Day care facilities, commercial, including pre-schools and nursery schools.

G.    Electric distribution substations, electric transmission substations and electric generating facilities pursuant to PMC 17.95.010.

H.    Guest ranches.

I.    Golf courses and driving ranges pursuant to PMC 17.94.020.

J.    Kennels, catteries or other commercial boarding facility for small animals pursuant to PMC 17.92.030.

K.    Museums, cultural heritage areas, nature exhibits with trails and similar uses. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

L.    Playgrounds and playfields, lighted.

M.    Religious assembly uses pursuant to PMC 17.94.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

N.    Riding academies and commercial stables.

O.    Road construction and maintenance yards

P.    Schools from kindergarten through grade twelve (12), excluding trade or commercial schools. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

Q.    Solid fill projects.

R.    Transit related facilities, including train boarding areas (such as for Metrolink) and park and ride lots.

S.    Utility facilities, building and equipment, including but not limited to water, natural gas, and sewage facilities, but excluding sewage pump stations or treatment plants and major communication facility pursuant to PMC 17.95.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

T.    Veterinary clinics, in accordance with PMC 17.92.040.

17.30.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses are permitted in the A-1 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Animal keeping, subject to the provisions specified within PMC 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

1.    Educational agricultural projects, provided that such project is under the direction of an active member of a bona fide organization and that the premises are maintained in a sanitary condition and do not pose any nuisance to adjacent properties.

B.    Accessory dwelling units

1.    Guest house in accordance with PMC 17.91.010 and accessory dwelling unit in accordance with PMC 17.91.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

2.    Caretaker’s residence, where the legally established use requires the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

C.    Incidental uses

1.    Day care facility, small family, in accordance with applicable state and county requirements.

2.    Residential care facility, in accordance with applicable state and county requirements.

3.    Garage sales conducted in accordance with PMC 17.91.080.

4.    Seasonal display and sale of agricultural products lawfully produced on the property, subject to the following conditions:

a.    Not more than one (1) stand is permitted on any lot or parcel of land; and

b.    Floor area of the stand shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet.

D.    Accessory structures

The following accessory structures are permitted in the A-1 zone, provided that requirements for building setbacks, height and other development standards are adhered to pursuant to PMC 17.30.090.

1.    Private garages and carports.

2.    Separate structure containing children’s play space, office space or other use, provided that there is no kitchen, that such space is not intended or utilized for a separate living facility, and that the building is architecturally compatible with the primary residence.

3.    Covered or uncovered decks and patios; gazebos.

4.    Tool houses, greenhouses, tack rooms, and feed storage facilities.

5.    Water wells, water reservoirs and storage tanks.

6.    Buildings and structures for the housing, nurture, confinement or storage of animals lawfully permitted on the premises.

7.    Accessory signs, as permitted in Chapter 17.88 PMC.

8.    Satellite dishes and Amateur Radio Antenna, in accordance with PMC 17.95.020 and 17.95.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-02, adopted by City Council September 9, 2011)

9.    Small Residential Wind Generator Systems (SRWGS) such as; Vertical Axis Wind Turbine Systems Windmills (VAWTS), small conventional blade generators, windmills and wind generators, pursuant to PMC 17.99.030. (Zoning Ordinance 13-001, adopted by City Council December 4, 2013.)

10.    Recreational amenities, including pool, spa, jacuzzi, and appurtenant equipment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

17.30.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the A-1 Zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.30.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone A-1 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in the A-1 Zone shall have a minimum lot area of not less than one (1) acre net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width and depth

Each lot or parcel of land created in the A-1 zone shall have a minimum lot width of one hundred fifty (150) feet. The lot depth to width ratio shall not exceed 4:1.

C.    Yards

1.    Front yard

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone A-1 shall have a front yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet in depth.

2.    Side yards

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone A-1 shall have a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet in width, except on the street side of corner or reversed corner lots, which shall have a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in width.

3.    Rear yard

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone A-1 shall maintain a minimum rear yard of not less than thirty (30) percent of the lot depth or thirty-five (35) feet, whichever is greater, except that attached and detached patio covers and decks may encroach into the rear yard setback a maximum of ten (10) feet.

D.    Building height and setbacks

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed two (2) stories or fifty (50) feet.

2.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020, PMC 17.89.030, and the following: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

a.    Toolhouses and greenhouses.

b.    Accessory signs shall be located according to the standards established in Chapter 17.88 PMC.

c.    All other accessory structure permitted in the A-1 zone shall not be located in a required front yard and shall be located no closer than five (5) feet from any side or rear property line.

E.    Off-street parking

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone A-1 shall have off-street parking facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading.

F.    Minimum construction standards for single family homes

All single family homes constructed in the A-1 zone shall comply with the minimum residential construction standards contained in PMC 17.41.090(G).

G.    Rural development standards

The following standards may be utilized in the A-1 zone to create and maintain a rural lifestyle, where applicable.

1.    Interior local streets within the A-1 zone shall utilize rural street standards, except as otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Such street sections may include, but are not limited to reduced pavement width, rolled curbs, graded shoulders, multi-use recreational trails in lieu of sidewalks, or sidewalks on one side of the street only. The location and type of rural street improvement is subject to the approval of the Los Angeles County Fire Department and the City.

2.    Modified street lighting standards shall be utilized to reduce ambient night light levels in rural areas, provided that adequate lighting is provided to maintain safety at intersections and crosswalks, as approved by the City and Los Angeles County. This provision may be modified as approved by the City Engineer.

Chapter 17.40
RESIDENTIAL ZONES
17.40.010 Designation of Residential Zones
As used in this Ordinance, residential zones means Zones:

R-1    (Single Family Residential)

R-2    (Medium Residential)

R-3    (Multiple Residential)

R-4    (High Density Residential) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.40.020 Intent and Purpose
The purpose of this Division is to achieve the following:

A.    Reserve adequate land within the City for residential uses having a range of dwelling unit densities to serve all economic and demographic segments of the population, in conformance with the General Plan and appropriate standards of public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics; and

B.    Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling unit; and

C.    Protect residential neighborhoods from excessive noise, light and glare, unsightliness, odor, smoke, and other objectionable influences; and

D.    Establish development standards and requirements to facilitate the retention of existing residential neighborhoods; the maintenance and upgrade of transitional residential neighborhoods; and the establishment of new residential neighborhoods in accordance with General Plan policies.

Chapter 17.41
SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (ZONE R-1)
17.41.010 Intent and Purpose
The Single Family Residential (R-1) Zone is established for the development of single family detached dwellings at gross densities ranging from 0 to 6 dwelling units per acre and a minimum lot size of seven thousand (7,000) square feet. Development within the R-1 Zone generally consists of single-family residential neighborhoods of a suburban type and density. Accessory uses of a rural residential nature may be permitted where lot sizes and community character warrant such uses. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary to and not detrimental to the residential neighborhood.

17.41.020 Locational Criteria
The R-1 zoning designation is appropriate for areas which are, or are anticipated to be utilized for single family residential development. Lot size and density within the R-1 zone is determined by the underlying General Plan designation, as it may be modified due to topographical, environmental and physical constraints. This designation would be consistent with the SFR (Single Family Residential) General Plan Land Use designations; however, the designation may also be utilized with the LDR (Low Density Residential) land use designation for larger residential lots, where accessory animal and light agricultural uses are less intensive than in the A-1 zone.

17.41.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-003, adopted by City Council October 2, 2013. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.41.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-002, adopted by City Council May 1, 2013. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.41.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require Site Plan Review approval pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.21 PMC, Site Plan Review. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.41.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council Jun 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.41.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses are permitted in the R-1 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal dwelling unit and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of any permitted principal use:

A.    Animal keeping, subject to the provisions specified within PMC 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

B.    Accessory dwelling units

1.    Guest house in accordance with PMC 17.91.010 and accessory dwelling unit in accordance with PMC 17.91.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

C.    Incidental uses

1.    Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility, licensed, in accordance with applicable state and county requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

2.    Day care facility, small family, in accordance with applicable state and county requirements.

3.    Garage sales conducted in accordance with PMC 17.91.080.

4.    Small residential care facility, in accordance with applicable state and county requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

D.    Accessory structures

The following accessory structures are permitted in the R-1 zone, provided that requirements for building setbacks, height, and other development standards are adhered to pursuant to PMC 17.82.020, Location of Accessory Buildings in Yards.

1.    Accessory signs, as permitted in Chapter 17.88 PMC.

2.    Buildings and structures for the housing, nurture, confinement, or storage of animals lawfully permitted on the premises, pursuant to PMC 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

3.    Covered or uncovered decks and patios; gazebos. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

4.    Doghouses pursuant to PMC 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

5.    Personal offices and workshops. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

6.    Pool house or cabana. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

7.    Recreational amenities, including pool, spa, jacuzzi, and appurtenant equipment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

8.    Tool houses, storage sheds, greenhouses, tack rooms and feed storage facilities. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

9.    Satellite dishes and amateur radio antenna, in accordance with PMC 17.95.020 and 17.95.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-2, adopted by City Council September 9, 2011)

10.    Water wells, water reservoirs, and storage tanks.

11.    Small residential wind generator systems (SRWGS) such as; vertical axis wind turbine systems (VAWTS), small conventional blade generators, windmills, and wind generators pursuant to PMC 17.99.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-001, adopted by City Council December 4, 2013.)

17.41.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the R-1 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.41.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone R-1 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in the R-1 Zone shall have a minimum lot area of not less than 7,000 square feet net, or the number following the zone symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

1.    Flag lots shall adhere to the standards contained in PMC 17.81.030(B). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    Each lot or parcel of land that is siding onto a designated arterial street or onto a more intensive land use or designation shall increase the minimum required lot width based on the table below by an additional ten (10) feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

3.    Lots or parcels siding onto a railroad right-of-way shall increase the minimum required lot width based on the table below by an additional forty (40) feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

4.    All other lots or parcels of land in Zone R-1 shall have a minimum lot width of not less than that shown on the table below. Lot width shall be measured at the front yard setback. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

REQUIRED AREA

(square feet)

MINIMUM REQUIRED WIDTH

(feet)

 

Interior

Corner

Reverse

End of a Cul-de-sac

 

Lots

Lots

Corner Lots

or Street Knuckles

7,000 – 8,999

70

75

80

65

9,000 – 9,999

75

75

85

70

10,000 – 12,499

80

80

90

70

12,500 – 14,499

90

90

100

70

15,000 and OVER

100

100

110

70

C.    Lot depth

1.    Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-1 shall have a minimum lot depth of not less than one hundred (100) feet. The lot depth to width ratio shall not exceed 3:1. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    Each lot or parcel of land that is backing onto a designated arterial street or onto a more intensive land use or designation shall have a minimum lot depth of not less than one hundred and ten (110) feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

3.    Each lot or parcel of land that is backing onto a railroad right-of-way shall have a minimum lot depth of not less than one hundred and thirty (130) feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

D.    Yards

1.    Front yard

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-1 shall have a front yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet in depth measured from the edge of the public right-of-way to the closest portion of the principal structure, provided that driveway parking shall accommodate a full car length of twenty (20) feet from the edge of the public right-of-way. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

a.    For lots of record, created and recorded prior to the effective date of this Zoning Ordinance for which the alternate section was specifically permitted, the front yard setback may include the landscaped parkway located between the edge of the sidewalk and the property line.

b.    For lots of record of 40,000 square feet or greater, a front yard of not less than thirty-five (35) feet in depth measured from the property line to the closest portion of the principal structure shall be provided.

c.    Lots which front onto a private street or drive shall have a front yard of not less than thirty-two (32) feet in depth measured from the face of curb or edge of easement to the closest portion of the principal structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    Side yards

a.    Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-1 shall have one side yard of not less than five (5) feet in width, and one side yard of not less than ten (10) feet in width, except on corner or reversed corner lots, both side yards shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width. The side yard of not less than ten (10) feet shall be located on the same side of the structure as the driveway and/or garage. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

b.    Maintenance and revegetation of downslopes to exterior side yard property lines shall be ensured through use of slopes no greater than 3:1, which may be used in combination with retaining walls. Where necessary, additional lot width may be required to meet this policy.

c.    Lots which side onto a private street or drive, a setback of at least twenty-two (22) feet shall be provided from the face of curb or edge of easement to the closest portion of the principal structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

d.    Each lot or parcel of land that is siding onto a designated arterial street or onto a more intensive land use or designation shall have a minimum side yard setback for the habitable residential structure(s) on the lot of twenty (20) feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

e.    Where a railroad right-of-way is located along the side yard of a lot, the minimum side yard setback for the habitable residential structure(s) on the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

f.    A minimum four (4) foot wide flat surface shall be maintained between any slope break and the primary structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

3.    Rear yard

Each lot or parcel in Zone R-1 shall maintain a minimum rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet, except as otherwise provided, in accordance with the following standards: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

a.    The portion of the rear yard which is not encroached upon with any building or structure shall be at least 1,000 square feet in area, unless as otherwise provided. If the required garage is located within the rear yard, the portion of the rear yard which is not encroached upon with any building or structure shall be at least five hundred (500) square feet in area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

b.    Where manufactured slopes in rear yards exceed twenty (20) feet in height, lot depth shall be increased to create additional flat lot area and minimize the visual effect of these slopes. For every foot of slope height over twenty (20) feet, the flat portion of rear yard area shall be increased by five (5) percent.

c.    Manufactured slopes in rear yards may be used to calculate no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the required rear yard setback.

d.    Manufactured slopes in rear yards may not exceed thirty (30) feet in height.

e.    Where lot depth is one hundred ten (110) feet due to lot backing onto an arterial street or more intensive use, rear yard setback for the habitable residential structure(s) on the lot shall be thirty (30) feet.

f.    Where lot depth is one hundred and thirty (130) feet due to backing onto a railroad right-of-way, the rear yard setback for the habitable residential structure(s) on the lot shall be fifty (50) feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

g.    A minimum fifteen (15) foot setback from rear dwelling wall to any slope break in excess of a 3:1 ratio shall be provided. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

h.    Setbacks for accessory buildings and accessory structures are set forth in PMC 17.82.020. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

E.    Building height and lot coverage (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

1.    Primary building heights in the R-1 Zone shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. Accessory building heights in the R-1 Zone shall not exceed one (1) story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Lot coverage within Zone R-1 shall not exceed forty (40) percent. For the purpose of this Section, lot coverage shall include principal building(s), accessory dwelling units, and enclosed accessory structures which exceed three (3) feet in height. The figure shall not include walls, fences, patio covers, animal enclosures, tennis courts, play courts, or below ground pools/spas. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

F.    Off-street parking

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-1 shall have off-street parking facilities as required in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking. Parking and storage of recreation vehicles shall be permitted pursuant to PMC 17.82.050. Light auto repair and maintenance activities on vehicles owned and operated by the resident of a dwelling unit are permitted only within the dwelling unit’s garage, and shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 8.36 PMC. Any waste oil, automobile fluids or automobile parts shall be disposed of as prescribed by state law and local ordinance. No vehicle repair or maintenance activities, or storage of inoperable vehicles, are permitted within driveway areas, front yard setbacks or in rear or side yard areas which are visible from a public right-of-way. No commercial auto repair activities are permitted in the R-1 zone. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

G.    Minimum construction standards for single family homes

The following standards shall be applied to all permitted construction or installation within the City of all detached single family structures, additions thereto and all accessory structures including but not limited to garages, guest houses, and second dwelling units, except as otherwise authorized by State law. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

1.    All dwelling units shall be placed on permanent foundations in accordance with City Building and Safety Department requirements.

2.    Siding material shall consist of stucco, wood, brick, stone, or decorative concrete block. Synthetic products of a similar appearance, equivalent durability and providing equivalent fire resistance may be permitted. Metal siding, if utilized, shall be non-reflective and horizontally overlapping. The exterior covering material shall extend to a point at or near grade except that if an approved solid wood, metal, concrete or masonry perimeter foundation is used, the exterior covering material need not extend below the top of the foundation.

3.    Accessory structures over one hundred twenty (120) square feet such as detached garages, porches, pergolas, and other similar structures shall be architecturally compatible with the primary residential structure with respect to colors, materials, design and roof materials. Attached solid patio covers with a 3:12 pitch or greater shall substantially match the existing roof material and color. If a pitch less than 3:12 is proposed, the roof shall only be required to match the color of the primary structure roof. If open lattice is proposed, it shall match the existing trim color of the primary structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

4.    All residential structures shall have eave and gable overhangs of not less than twelve (12) inches measured from the vertical side of the residential structure, unless overhangs are architecturally incompatible with the design of the structure as approved by the Planning Director or his/her designee. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

5.    Roof materials shall be non-combustible; shake and composite shingles shall not be allowed on any new single-family residential structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

6.    Architectural Treatments (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

The intent of this Section is to ensure that new residential development enhances the character and livability of Palmdale through development of high quality residential neighborhoods. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

a.    Single family residential structures shall be designed so as to break up long walls by the use of offsets, shadow lines, façade treatments, and other similar means. When the side or rear elevation of a structure is more than five hundred (500) square feet in surface area, the elevation must be divided up into distinct planes of five hundred (500) square feet or less. This division can be accomplished by: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

1.    A covered porch or patio cover; or (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    A balcony that is at least two (2) feet deep; or (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

3.    A bay window that projects at least two (2) feet; or (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

4.    An offset of a section of the façade by at least two (2) feet; the section must be at least four (4) feet wide; or (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

5.    A fireplace chimney of at least four (4) feet in width that continues up the entire height of the structure; or (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

6.    Windows that are recessed at least one (1) foot; or (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

7.    Window awnings that project at least two (2) feet; (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

8.    Or other similar means, as approved by the Director of Planning. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

In no case, shall any side or rear elevation be a solid blank wall with no articulation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

b.    The architectural theme on the front of the house shall be continued on the sides and rear of the structure in order to maintain the integrity of design throughout the structure. The sides and rear of the building may have a reduced level of embellishment than the front of the house; however, said embellishment shall be situated in a manner to be most visible from surrounding streets and properties. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

c.    Articulation shall be provided on all windows on all sides of the building, through use of shutters, stucco foam wraps around the entire window, recessed windows, decorative wrought iron, window awnings, and other similar means, compatible with the theme of the house. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

d.    Building design shall incorporate multiple roof types and levels as architectural enhancements, such as utilizing gables, hips, and dormers, where compatible with the style or architecture of the house. The front elevation shall have a minimum of three (3) roof types or levels. Rear elevations shall have a minimum of two (2) roof types or levels. For the purpose of this requirement, a dormer that is at least four (4) feet wide is considered a separate roofline. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

7.    The main entrance of each primary residential structure shall provide architectural emphasis from the street through use of a courtyard; or columns; or tower element; or a covered porch having a minimum depth of six (6) feet and minimum square footage of forty-eight (48) square feet; or other similar means as approved by the Director of Planning. All entries/exits shall be completed in accordance with the City Building & Safety Department requirements. All entries/exits shall be completed in accordance with the City Building & Safety Department requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

8.    Minimum habitable floor area of principal structures shall be seven hundred twenty-five (725) square feet measured from the exterior of the structure. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with all applicable requirements of PMC 17.91.030, Accessory Dwelling Unit Standards. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

9.    Minimum floor width and depth shall each average twenty (20) feet measured from the exterior of the structure excluding garages, porches, patio, eaves, and pop-outs. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

10.    Garages (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

a.    A fully enclosed two-car garage with a clear and free minimum interior dimension of twenty (20) feet wide and twenty-two (22) feet long shall be provided, except on lots having a width of fifty (50) feet or less, a fully enclosed tandem garage with a clear and free minimum interior dimension of twelve (12) feet wide by forty-four (44) feet long may be provided. All garages shall be constructed in compliance with the City Building & Safety Department requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

b.    Such structures shall be architecturally compatible with the principal structure, and shall be provided with decorative sectional roll-up doors constructed of a durable material, such as wood or metal, as approved by the Planning Director. No wood doors constructed of plywood sheeting shall be permitted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

c.    When the width of the driveway five (5) feet in front of the garage exceeds twenty (20) feet in width, a decorative driveway, which may consist of paver treatments, colored concrete, decorative concrete finishes, or other treatments as approved by the Director of Planning, shall be required. Stamped concrete shall not be permitted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

d.    The garage portion(s) of any new primary single-family residential structure shall be designed to comply with at least one of the following criteria: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

1.    The garage doors shall not extend across more than 40% of the street facing façade of the primary residential structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    The garage is attached to the primary residential structure through a breezeway or other portion of the primary structure, and is located in the rear of the lot. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

3.    The garage is detached from the primary residential structure and located within the rear of the lot. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

4.    The garage is designed with side-on entry, with decorative windows facing the street. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

5.    The garage doors shall not extend across more than 50% of the street facing façade of the primary residential structure, and shall comply with at least one of the following criteria: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

i.    The entire area above the garage is developed as habitable space. Any garage bays that are in excess of 40% of the street facing façade shall be recessed at least two (2) feet from the rest of the garage; or (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

ii.    Any garage bay that is in excess of 40% of the street facing façade shall be recessed at least ten (10) feet from the rest of the garage door façade. A decorative trellis a minimum of eight (8) feet in depth shall be provided above the entire width of the recessed garage bay; or (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

iii.    The habitable portion of the house or a covered porch shall project a minimum of six (6) feet in front of all garage doors. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

6.    Other alternative designs as reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.

11.    Utility hookups and an area to accommodate installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided within the primary structure or within an enclosed accessory structure.

12.    No new roof mounted air conditioning equipment or evaporative coolers visible from the public right-of-way shall be permitted. Push through air conditioning units or evaporative coolers may be permitted on any side or rear elevation, as long as it is not visible from any public right-of-way. Air conditioning equipment shall be ground mounted and setback a minimum of five (5) feet from any side or rear property line and shall not be located within the required front yard setback. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

13.    Except as otherwise provided within this Code, any manufactured home installed or constructed in accordance with the provisions of this Section shall be allowed where this Code allows the construction of a detached single family structure.

14.    A building permit for the installation of a manufactured home not within an approved and properly licensed manufactured home development shall not be issued, if more than ten (10) years have elapsed between the date of manufacture and the date of the application for the issuance of the permit to install such manufactured home.

15.    Every dwelling unit must conform to height, setback, lot coverage and other applicable provisions of the zone in which it is located.

H.    Landscaping

1.    Every single family residential lot shall be required to have one (1) street tree installed per street frontage; corner lots shall have one (1) tree planted in the front yard parkway and two (2) trees planted in the sideyard parkway for a total of three (3) trees. Within the public right-of-way, the species of trees and the standards for installation shall conform with the City’s Engineering Design Standards. Trees planted beyond the public right-of-way are recommended but not required to conform with the City’s Engineering Design Standards.

2.    Landscaping provided between the back of sidewalk, or where no sidewalk exists, from the back of curb and any perimeter subdivision wall abutting an arterial street shall be installed in accordance with the City’s Engineering Design Standards and approved by the City Engineer. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-003, adopted by City Council October 2, 2013.)

3.    Front Yards and Street Sideyards: The following standards apply to all developed lots with a required lot area of less than one acre.

a.    The entire front yard shall be landscaped, except for that portion covered by a paved driveway, as permitted by PMC 17.82.050 and 17.87.050(C)(2)(a). Landscaping shall mean any combination permitted pursuant to subsection (H)(4) of this Section of trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, gravel, stones, decomposed granite, mulch or other hardscape materials. Bare dirt will not be permitted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-003, adopted by City Council October 2, 2013.)

b.    Any portion of a street side yard located between the back of curb and any perimeter fence, wall or structure, and visible from the right-of-way shall be landscaped.

4.    Landscape standards: Front yard landscaping associated with new construction shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 14.05 PMC, Water Efficient Landscape. The following standards shall apply to all substantially modified front yard landscaping for existing single family residential development: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-003, adopted by City Council October 2, 2013.)

a.    A maximum of 40 percent of the front yard, excluding the driveway, shall be covered with impervious surfaces.

b.    A minimum of one shrub of any container size per 50 square feet of landscape area, excluding the driveway, shall be provided.

c.    No living turf is permitted. Artificial turf may be utilized within a maximum of 5% of the front yard as an “accent point only” and shall be maintained and replaced when weathered or worn.

d.    The use of bark mulch is not allowed in the public right of way and is to be used as an accent up near the house only. The use of stabilized decomposed granite, rock and cobble are highly encouraged. A porous fabric weed barrier shall be installed beneath all rock or mulched areas with the exception of the stabilized decomposed granite.

e.    All required landscape areas and landscape materials shall be installed and continuously maintained pursuant to the standards set forth in PMC 8.36.062 and 17.86.010.

f.    The irrigation system shall be limited to drip emitters, bubblers, micro sprinklers and micro sprayers utilizing polyethylene drip hose or PVC pipe. No spray heads are permitted. The irrigation system shall include an automatic anti-siphon irrigation valve.

Chapter 17.42
MEDIUM RESIDENTIAL (ZONE R-2)
17.42.010 Intent and Purpose
The Medium Residential (R-2) Zone is intended to allow the development of housing at a gross density of between 6.1 and 10 dwelling units per acre. This zone permits a mix of dwelling unit densities and structure types, including single family detached and attached; zero lot line and wide-shallow subdivisions; duplexes, triplexes, condominium and townhouse developments; and moderate density apartment and manufactured housing development. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary to and not detrimental to the residential character of development in this zone.

17.42.020 Locational Criteria
The R-2 zoning designation is appropriate for areas which are relatively flat; are served or will be provided with urban level infrastructure; are accessible by collector or arterial streets; are or will be served by public transit; and are supported by community facilities and appropriate commercial services within a reasonable distance. This designation would be appropriate where there is a transition between single family detached housing and uses of a higher density or intensity. This designation would be consistent with the MR (Medium Residential) General Plan land use designation.

17.42.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.42.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-01, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-002, adopted by City Council May 1, 2013. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.42.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require Site Plan Review approval pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.21 PMC, Site Plan Review. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.42.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6, adopted by City Council April 10, 1996 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.42.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses are permitted in the R-2 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal dwelling unit and that such accessory uses are incidental to, and do not substantially alter the character of any permitted principal use.

A.    Animal keeping, subject to the provisions specified within PMC 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

B.    Accessory dwelling units

1.    Guest house in accordance with PMC 17.91.010 and accessory dwelling unit in accordance with PMC 17.91.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

C.    Incidental uses

1.    Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility, licensed, in accordance with applicable state and county requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

2.    Day care facility, small family in accordance with applicable state and county requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 04-02, adopted by City Council July 12, 2004.)

3.    Garage sales conducted in accordance with PMC 17.91.080.

4.    Small residential care facility in accordance with applicable state and county requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 04-02, adopted by City Council July 12, 2004.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

D.    Accessory structures

The following accessory structures are permitted in the R-2 zone, provided that requirements for building setbacks, height, and other development standards are adhered to pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

1.    Accessory signs, as permitted in Chapter 17.88 PMC.

2.    Covered or uncovered decks and patios; gazebos.

3.    Doghouses, pursuant the specifications within PMC 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

4.    Enclosed structure containing children’s play space, office space or other use on a lot containing a single family residence, provided that there is no kitchen, that such space is not intended to be utilized for a separate living facility, and that the building is architecturally compatible with the primary residence.

5.    Private garage and carports.

6.    Recreational amenities, including pool, spa, jacuzzi, and appurtenant equipment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

7.    Tool houses, storage sheds and greenhouses.

8.    Satellite dishes and amateur radio antenna, in accordance with PMC 17.95.020 and 17.95.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-2, adopted by City Council September 9, 2011)

E.    Areas designated for the temporary storage and sorting of recyclable materials, in accordance with PMC 17.85.030.

17.42.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the R-2 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.42.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone R-2 shall be subject to the development standards contained in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-2 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than the following. For the purpose of calculating the permitted number of dwelling units per lot, rounding up shall not be allowed.

1.    For single family detached dwelling units established as a primary use, the minimum lot area shall be seven thousand (7,000) square feet.

2.    For single family attached or multiple family structures, the minimum project or lot area shall total no less than four thousand (4,000) square feet of net lot area per dwelling unit, except that nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to allow a dwelling unit density in excess of that permitted by the underlying General Plan land use designation.

3.    For manufactured home subdivisions, the minimum lot area for each manufactured home lot shall be no less than three thousand five hundred (3,500) square feet, provided that the gross density of the subdivision shall not exceed that permitted by the General Plan.

4.    A number following the zoning symbol may modify the minimum lot size requirement, pursuant to PMC 17.13.020(B).

B.    Project/lot width

1.    Single family detached dwelling units proposed on seven thousand (7,000) square foot minimum lots within Zone R-2 shall have lot widths pursuant to PMC 17.41.090, Standards of Development for Zone R-1.

2.    All other projects in Zone R-2 shall have a minimum project/lot width of one hundred (100) feet.

C.    Yards

Except as otherwise required by Chapter 17.83 PMC, setbacks in Zone R-2 shall be as follows.

1.    Front yard

a.    Single family detached dwelling units proposed on seven thousand (7,000) square foot minimum lots within Zone R-2 shall be developed in accordance with PMC 17.41.090, Standards of Development for Zone R-1.

b.    The front yard building setback for all other dwelling unit types in Zone R-2 shall be twenty (20) feet.

2.    Side yards

a.    Single family detached dwelling units proposed on seven thousand (7,000) square foot minimum lots within Zone R-2 shall be developed in accordance with PMC 17.41.090, Standards of Development for Zone R-1.

b.    The building setback for all other dwelling unit types in Zone R-2 shall not be less than five (5) feet for each story.

3.    Rear yard

a.    Single family detached dwelling units proposed on seven thousand (7,000) square foot minimum lots within Zone R-2 shall be developed in accordance with PMC 17.41.090, Standards of Development for Zone R-1.

b.    The building setback for all other dwelling unit types in Zone R-2 shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet.

D.    Building height and setbacks

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed one (1) story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

3.    Maximum lot coverage

Maximum lot coverage within Zone R-2 shall not exceed fifty percent (50%). For the purpose of this Section, building lot coverage shall include principal structure(s) and all accessory structures which exceed 3.5 feet in height. The figure shall not include walls, fences or below ground pools and spas.

E.    Off-street parking

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-2 shall have off-street parking facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

F.    Multiple family dwelling size standards

The following minimum dwelling areas are computed by calculating the living areas as measured from the outside walls and excludes garages, carports, exterior courtyards, patios and balconies, except as otherwise approved in conjunction with a housing project for low income households or seniors.

 

Livable Area

in Square Feet

Bedrooms

Maximum Number

Baths

Minimum Number

500

Bachelor

1

600

1

1

800

2

1

1,000

3

2

1,200 and over

3 or more

2

G.    Housing construction standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

1.    All single family detached units proposed on seven thousand (7,000) square foot minimum lots within Zone R-2 shall be subject to the Minimum Construction Standards contained in PMC 17.41.090, Development Standards for Zone R-1.

2.    All multiple-family housing proposed within Zone R-2 shall be constructed in the following manner, except as otherwise approved in conjunction with a housing project for low income households, seniors, or assisted living facilities: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

a.    All multiple family developments with five (5) or more dwelling units shall provide thirty percent (30%) usable common open space for passive and active recreational uses. For purposes of meeting this requirement, usable open space areas shall not include public or private rights-of-way; vehicle parking areas; areas adjacent to or between any structures less than fifteen (15) feet apart; required building setback areas; private patios or yards; or areas having a slope of greater than 3:1. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

b.    Each dwelling unit shall have a private (walled) patio or balcony. Each (walled) patio or balcony must maintain a minimum or seven (7) feet in depth. The required square footage of the patios and balconies may be averaged among the units within each building, provided a minimum average of two hundred (200) square feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the average dwelling unit size, whichever is less, is maintained. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

c.    All multiple family developments with five (5) or more dwelling units shall provide recreational amenities within the site which may include but are not limited to a swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter – barbecue area; court game facilities (in accordance with PMC 17.91.090, such as tennis, basketball, or racquetball); improved softball or baseball fields; or day care facilities. The type of amenities required shall be dependent upon the nature of the development, and shall be approved by the reviewing authority in accordance with the following schedule. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 199; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999; and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.):

 

Units

Amenities

0-4

0

5-50

1

51-100

2

101-200

3

201-300

4

Add 1 amenity for each 100 additional units or fraction thereof.

d.    Climatic conditions shall be considered in locating common spaces; they should be screened from prevailing southwest winds, provided with shade from the high summer sun and open to winter sunshine.

e.    Off-street parking spaces for multi-family residential developments shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet walking distance of the dwelling unit (front or rear door) for which the parking space is provided.

f.    Each dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet of private enclosed storage space within the garage, carport, or immediately adjacent to the dwelling unit.

g.    Driveway approaches within multiple family developments shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, decorative concrete, landscaped medians or similar features.

h.    Dead end driveways of over one hundred (100) feet in length should be avoided.

i.    All parts of all structures shall be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of emergency access for single story and fifty (50) feet for multi-story.

j.    Each dwelling unit shall be equipped with connections for installation of a standard-sized washer and dryer or common laundry facilities shall be provided containing a minimum of one (1) washing machine and one (1) dryer for every five (5) dwelling units or fraction thereof. If common laundry facilities are provided, they shall be dispersed throughout the project as approved by the reviewing authority. If individual facilities are provided, the proposed floor plans shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

k.    Management and security plans shall be submitted for review and approval for multifamily developments with ten (10) or more dwelling units. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

l.    Trash areas shall be dispersed throughout the complex. Trash areas not located within a building shall be paved and located a minimum of five (5) feet from the private street or drive aisle. Such areas shall be consistent with the standards contained in PMC 17.85.010. One (1) trash area shall be provided for every ten (10) dwelling units or fraction thereof. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

m.    Adequate internal and external lighting within all publicly accessible areas of the development, including walkways, shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the residential neighborhood. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

n.    Placement of buildings and open space areas shall be designed to facilitate visibility by residents, passers-by and law enforcement personnel. Passageways having dead ends or lacking visibility from adjacent buildings, walkways and/or streets will not be allowed. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

o.    Roof access from all buildings shall be internal; no outside ladders attached to buildings are permitted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

p.    All rooftop equipment shall be screened with architectural means such as parapet walls or rooftop wells; drainage downspouts, roof vents and other equipment shall be painted to match the surface to which they are attached. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

q.    Screening of equipment, utilities and service areas shall be provided in accordance with PMC 17.86.020. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

r.    Units shall be pre-wired to accommodate cable reception. Satellite dish antennas shall be prohibited on roofs, and shall be screened in a manner which is compatible with adjacent structures. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

s.    Where common mailboxes are provided, they should be located close to the project entry and near recreational facilities; the location must be approved by the U.S. Postal Service. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

t.    Multiple residential structures shall be designed so as to break up long wall or roofline planes by offsets, shadow lines, facade treatments and other similar means. Architectural treatments shall be included on all sides of structures. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

u.    Carports, garages, trash enclosures and other accessory structures shall be designed to reflect the architecture of the primary buildings with respect to style, colors and materials, and shall be screened with landscaping wherever possible. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

v.    Individual garages with parking aprons of less than twenty (20) feet in length shall have automatic garage door openers and sectional roll-up doors; in no case shall the drive approach in front of individual garages be less than five (5) feet in length. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

w.    Bicycle racks shall be provided in secure locations throughout the project. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

Chapter 17.43
MULTIPLE RESIDENTIAL (ZONE R-3)
17.43.010 Intent and Purpose
The Multiple Residential (R-3) Zone is intended to promote the development of grouped housing such as townhouses, condominiums and apartments at a density of up to sixteen (16) dwelling units per gross acre. This designation permits the development of self contained residential communities which provide adequate on-site recreational facilities and open space to meet the immediate needs of its residents. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary and not detrimental to the residential character of development in this zone.

17.43.020 Locational Criteria
The R-3 zoning designation is appropriate for those properties which are relatively flat, having a general gradient of less than ten (10) percent; which are served or will be provided with urban level infrastructure; are accessible by arterial streets or highways; are, or will be, served by public transit; and are supported by community facilities and appropriate commercial services within a reasonable distance. This designation would be appropriate where there is a transition between single family detached or medium density housing and uses of a greater density or intensity. Zone R-3 would be consistent with the MFR (Multi-Family Residential) General Plan land use designation.

17.43.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.43.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-01, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-002, adopted by City Council May 1, 2013. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.43.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require Site Plan Review approval pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.21 PMC, Site Plan Review. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.43.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council Jun 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.43.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses are permitted in the R-3 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal dwelling unit(s) and that such accessory uses are incidental to, and do not substantially alter the character of any permitted principal use.

A.    Animal keeping, subject to the provisions specified within PMC 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

B.    Accessory dwelling units

1.    Accessory dwelling unit in accordance with PMC 17.91.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

C.    Incidental uses

1.    Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility, licensed, in accordance with applicable state and county requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

2.    Garage sales conducted in accordance with PMC 17.91.080.

3.    Day care facility, small family, in accordance with the applicable state and county requirements.

4.    Small residential care facility, in accordance with the applicable state and county requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

D.    Accessory structures

The following accessory structures are permitted in the R-3 zone, provided that requirements for building setbacks, height, and other development standards are adhered to pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

1.    Private garage and carports.

2.    Accessory structures typically associated with multi-family residential uses and intended for the use of residents only, including but not limited to children’s playgrounds, swimming pools, playfields (excluding lighted playfields), laundry facilities, storage lockers, club rooms, recreation rooms and day care facilities.

3.    Tool houses, storage sheds and greenhouses.

4.    Accessory signs, as permitted in Chapter 17.88 PMC.

5.    Satellite dishes and Amateur Radio Antenna, as permitted in PMC 17.95.020 and 17.95.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-2, adopted by City Council September 9, 2011)

6.    Information kiosks, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

E.    Areas designated for the temporary storage and sorting of recyclable materials, in accordance with PMC 17.85.030.

17.43.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the R-3 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.43.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone R-3 shall be subject to the development standards contained in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-3 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than the following. For purposes of calculating the permitted number of dwelling units per lot, rounding up shall not be allowed.

1.    Each lot or parcel of land in R-3 Zone created after the effective date of this ordinance shall have a minimum lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except as approved with a Conditional Use Permit in conjunction with a manufactured home subdivision.

2.    Notwithstanding the minimum lot area requirement, a multiple family residential development shall have a minimum net lot area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet per dwelling unit, except that nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to allow a dwelling unit density in excess of that permitted by the underlying General Plan land use designation.

3.    For manufactured home subdivisions, the minimum lot area for each manufactured home lot shall be no less than two thousand two hundred (2,200) square feet, except that nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to allow a dwelling unit density in excess of that permitted by the underlying General Plan land use designation.

4.    For manufactured home parks and subdivisions, the minimum lot area shall be five (5) acres.

5.    A number following the zoning symbol may modify the minimum lot size requirement, pursuant to PMC 17.13.020(B).

B.    Project area width

A minimum lot/project area width of one hundred (100) feet shall be required within Zone R-3.

C.    Building setbacks

Except as otherwise required by Chapter 17.83 PMC, setbacks in Zone R-3 shall be provided as follows:

1.    Front building setback.

The front yard building setback for structures in Zone R-3 shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.

2.    Side building setback

a.    The street side building setback for a principal structure in Zone R-3 shall be not less than twenty (20) feet.

b.    The interior side building setback for a principal structure in Zone R-3 shall be not less than five (5) feet for each story.

3.    Rear building setback

The rear building setback for principal structures in Zone R-3 shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed one (1) story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

Maximum lot coverage within the R-3 Zone shall not exceed fifty (50) percent. For the purpose of this Section, building lot coverage shall include principal structure(s) and all accessory structures which exceed 3.5 feet in height. The figure shall not include below ground pools, spas, walls, fences, parking lots and access drives.

3.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

E.    Off-street parking

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-3 shall have off-street parking facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

F.    Multiple family dwelling size standards

The following minimum dwelling areas are computed by calculating the living areas as measured from the outside walls and excluding garages, carports, exterior courtyards, patios and balconies, except as otherwise approved in conjunction with a housing project for low income households or seniors.

 

Livable Area

in Square Feet

Bedrooms

Maximum Number

Baths

Minimum Number

500

Bachelor

1

600

1

1

800

2

1

1,000

3

2

1,200 and over

3 or more

2

G.    Multiple-family housing standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

All multiple-family housing proposed within Zone R-3 shall conform to the following standards:

1.    All multiple-family housing proposed within Zone R-3 shall be constructed in the following manner, except as otherwise approved in conjunction with a housing project for low-income households, seniors, or assisted living facilities: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

a.    All multiple family developments with five (5) or more dwelling units shall provide thirty percent (30%) usable common open space for passive and active recreational uses. For purposes of meeting this requirement, usable open space areas shall not include public or private rights-of-way; vehicle parking areas; areas adjacent to or between any structures less than fifteen (15) feet apart; required building setback areas; private patios or yards; or areas having a slope of greater than 3:1. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

b.    Each dwelling unit shall have a private (walled) patio or balcony. Each (walled) patio or balcony must maintain a minimum or seven (7) feet in depth. The required square footage of the patios and balconies may be averaged among the units within each building, provided a minimum average of two hundred (200) square feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the average dwelling unit size, whichever is less, is maintained.

c.    All multiple family developments with five (5) or more dwelling units shall provide recreational amenities within the site which may include but are not limited to a swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter – barbecue area; court game facilities (in accordance with PMC 17.91.090, such as tennis, basketball, or racquetball); improved softball or baseball fields; or day care facilities. The type of amenities required shall be dependent upon the nature of the development, and shall be approved by the reviewing authority in accordance with the following schedule. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

 

Units

Amenities

0-4

0

5-50

1

51-100

2

101-200

3

201-300

4

Add 1 amenity for each 100 additional units of fraction thereof.

d.    Climatic conditions shall be considered in locating common spaces; they should be screened from prevailing southwest winds, provided with shade from the high summer sun and open to winter sunshine.

e.    Off-street parking spaces for multi-family residential developments shall be located within one hundred fifty (150) feet walking distance of the dwelling unit (front or rear door) for which the parking space is provided.

f.    Each dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet of private enclosed storage space within the garage, carport, or immediately adjacent to the dwelling unit.

g.    Driveway approaches within multiple family developments shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, decorative concrete, landscaped medians or similar features.

h.    Dead end driveways of over one hundred (100) feet in length should be avoided.

i.    All parts of all structures shall be within one hundred fifty (150) feet of emergency access for single story and fifty (50) feet for multi-story.

j.    Each dwelling unit shall be equipped with connections for installation of a standard-sized washer and dryer or common laundry facilities shall be provided containing a minimum of one (1) washing machine and one (1) dryer for every five (5) dwelling units or fraction thereof. If common laundry facilities are provided, they shall be dispersed throughout the project as approved by the reviewing authority. If individual facilities are provided, the proposed floor plans shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

k.    Management and security plans shall be submitted for review and approval for multifamily developments with ten (10) or more dwelling units. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

l.    Trash areas shall be dispersed throughout the complex. Trash areas not located within a building shall be paved and located a minimum of five (5) feet from the private street or drive aisle. Such areas shall be consistent with the standards contained in PMC 17.85.010. One (1) trash area shall be provided for every ten (10) dwelling units or fraction thereof. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

m.    Adequate internal and external lighting within all publicly accessible areas of the development, including walkways, shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the residential neighborhood. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

n.    Placement of buildings and open space areas shall be designed to facilitate visibility by residents, passers-by and law enforcement personnel. Passageways having dead ends or lacking visibility from adjacent buildings, walkways and/or streets will not be allowed. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

o.    Roof access from all buildings shall be internal; no outside ladders attached to buildings are permitted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

p.    All rooftop equipment shall be screened with architectural means such as parapet walls or rooftop wells; drainage downspouts, roof vents and other equipment shall be painted to match the surface to which they are attached. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

q.    Screening of equipment, utilities and service areas shall be provided in accordance with PMC 17.86.020. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

r.    Units shall be pre-wired to accommodate cable reception. Satellite dish antennas shall be prohibited on roofs, and shall be screened in a manner which is compatible with adjacent structures. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

s.    Where common mailboxes are provided, they should be located close to the project entry and near recreational facilities; the location must be approved by the U.S. Postal Service. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

t.    Multiple residential structures shall be designed so as to break up long wall or roofline planes by offsets, shadow lines, facade treatments and other similar means. Architectural treatments shall be included on all sides of structures. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

u.    Carports, garages, trash enclosures and other accessory structures shall be designed to reflect the architecture of the primary buildings with respect to style, colors and materials, and shall be screened with landscaping wherever possible. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

v.    Individual garages with parking aprons of less than twenty (20) feet in length shall have automatic garage door openers and sectional roll-up doors; in no case shall the drive approach in front of individual garages be less than five (5) feet in length. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

w.    Bicycle racks shall be provided in secure locations throughout the project. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

Chapter 17.44
HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (ZONE R-4)
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012)

17.44.010 Intent and Purpose
The High Density Residential (R-4) Zone is intended to promote the development of apartments at a density of between thirty (30) to fifty (50) and fifty (50) to sixty (60) dwelling units per gross acre. This designation permits the development of self-contained residential communities that provide adequate on-site recreational facilities and open space to meet the immediate needs of its residents. Additional uses are permitted that are complementary and not detrimental to the residential character of development in this zone. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.44.020 Locational Criteria
The R-4 zoning designation is appropriate for those properties which are relatively flat, having a general gradient of less than ten (10) percent; which are served or will be provided with urban level infrastructure; are accessible by arterial streets or highways; are, or will be, served by public transit; and are supported by community facilities and appropriate commercial services within a reasonable distance. This designation would be appropriate where there is a transition between multi-family housing and uses of a greater intensity. Density within the R-4 zone is determined by the underlying General Plan designation. This designation would be consistent with the MHDR (Medium High Density Residential) and the HDR (High Density Residential) General Plan land use designations.

17.44.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.44.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance 13-002, adopted by City Council May 1, 2013.Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.44.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require Site Plan Review approval pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.21 PMC, Site Plan Review. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.44.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.44.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses are permitted in the R-4 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the principal dwelling unit(s) and that such accessory uses are incidental to, and do not substantially alter the character of any permitted principal use.

A.    Animal keeping, subject to the provisions specified within PMC 17.89.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

B.    Incidental uses

1.    Alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility, licensed, in accordance with applicable state and county requirements.

2.    Garage sales conducted in accordance with PMC 17.91.080.

3.    Day care facility, small family, in accordance with the applicable state and county requirements.

4.    Small residential care facility, in accordance with the applicable state and county requirements.

C.    Accessory structures

The following accessory structures are permitted in the R-4 zone, provided that requirements for building setbacks, height, and other development standards are adhered to pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

1.    Private garage and carports.

2.    Accessory structures typically associated with multi-family residential uses and intended for the use of residents only, including but not limited to children’s playgrounds, swimming pools, playfields (excluding lighted playfields), laundry facilities, storage lockers, club rooms, recreation rooms, day care facilities.

3.    Tool houses, storage sheds and greenhouses.

4.    Accessory signs, as permitted in Chapter 17.88 PMC.

5.    Satellite dishes and Amateur Radio Antenna, as permitted in PMC 17.95.020 and 17.95.030.

6.    Information kiosks, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

D.    Areas designated for the temporary storage and sorting of recyclable materials, in accordance with PMC 17.85.030.

17.44.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the R-4 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.44.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone R-4 shall be subject to the development standards contained in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development. The ‘Required Yards’ contained within PMC 17.82.010(B) and the ‘Building Heights’ restrictions contained within PMC 17.83.030(B) shall not apply to multi-family residential development located within the R-4 zone. Building height and setbacks shall conform to the requirements set forth within this Section.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-4 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than the following. For purposes of calculating the permitted number of dwelling units per lot, rounding up shall not be allowed.

1.    Each lot or parcel of land in R-4 Zone created after the effective date of this ordinance shall have a minimum lot area of forty thousand (40,000) square feet.

2.    Notwithstanding the minimum lot area requirement, a multiple family residential development within the R-4 (30) zone shall have a minimum net lot area of eight hundred seventy (870) square feet per dwelling unit and a residential development within the R-4 (50) zone shall have a minimum net lot area of seven hundred twenty-five (725) square feet per dwelling unit, except that nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to allow a dwelling unit density in excess of that permitted by the underlying General Plan land use designation.

B.    Project area width

A minimum lot/project area width of one hundred (100) feet shall be required within Zone R-4.

C.    Building setbacks

Setbacks in Zone R-4 shall be provided as follows:

1.    Front building setback.

The front yard building setback for structures in Zone R-4 shall be not less than five (5) feet.

2.    Side building setback

a.    The street side building setback for a principal structure in Zone R 4 shall be not less than five (5) feet.

b.    The interior side building setback for a principal structure in Zone R-4 shall be not less than five (5) feet for each story, with a maximum of fifteen (15) feet.

3.    Rear building setback

The rear building setback for principal structures in Zone R-4 shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed five (5) stories or sixty (60) feet. The maximum height of accessory structure(s) shall not exceed one (1) story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

Maximum lot coverage within the R-4 Zone shall not exceed eighty (80) percent. For the purpose of this Section, building lot coverage shall not include below ground pools, spas, walls, fences, parking lots and access drives. Features such as front porches, overhangs, porticos, balconies, loggias, arcades, pergolas, and similar architectural features placed on the front side of the building shall be exempt from the lot coverage requirement.

3.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

E.    Off-street parking

a.    Each lot or parcel of land in Zone R-4 shall have off-street parking facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

b.    At-grade, above-, or below grade parking structures shall be permitted.

c.    Surface parking lots shall be placed between the structure(s) and an interior side or rear lot line.

d.    A six (6) foot high wall or fence shall separate parking lots from abutting residential uses with a minimum of four (4) foot wide landscaped buffer. Walls and fences shall be consistent with the character of the development.

e.    Where gates are utilized, guest spaces shall be accessible without passing through a security entrance.

F.    Multiple family dwelling size standards

The following minimum dwelling areas are computed by calculating the living areas as measured from the outside walls and excluding garages, carports, exterior courtyards, patios and balconies, except as otherwise approved in conjunction with a housing project for low income households or seniors.

 

Livable Area

in Square Feet

Bedrooms

Maximum Number

Baths

Minimum Number

500

Studio

1

600

1

1

800

2

1

1,000

3

2

1,200 and over

3 or more

2

G.    Multiple-family housing standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

All multiple family housing proposed within Zone R-4 shall conform to the following standards and the Goals, Policies and Objectives of the Community Design Element of the General Plan:

1.    All multiple-family housing proposed within Zone R-4 shall be constructed in the following manner, except as otherwise approved in conjunction with a housing project for low-income households, seniors, or assisted living facilities: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

a.    All multiple family developments with five (5) or more dwelling units shall provide fifteen percent (15%) usable common open space for passive and active recreational uses. For purposes of meeting this requirement, usable open space areas shall not include public or private rights-of-way; vehicle parking areas; areas adjacent to or between any structures less than fifteen (15) feet apart; required building setback areas; private patios or yards; or areas having a slope of greater than 3:1.

b.    All multiple family developments with five (5) or more dwelling units shall provide recreational amenities within the site which may include but are not limited to a clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter – barbecue area; court game facilities (in accordance with PMC 17.91.090, such as tennis, basketball, or racquetball); swimming pool; landscaped park-like quiet area; day care facilities or similar as approved by the Director of Planning. The type of amenities required shall be dependent upon the nature of the development, and shall be approved by the reviewing authority in accordance with the following schedule.

 

Units

Amenities

0 – 4

0

5 – 50

1

51 -100

2

101 – 200

3

201 – 300

4

Add 1 amenity for each 100 additional units of fraction thereof.

c.    Each dwelling unit shall have a private (walled) patio or balcony, subject to staff concurrence based upon Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles. Each (walled) patio or balcony must maintain a minimum of seven (7) feet in depth. The required square footage of the patios and balconies may be averaged among the units within each building, provided a minimum average of two hundred one hundred fifty (150) square feet or twenty-five (25) percent of the average dwelling unit size, whichever is less, is maintained.

d.    Each dwelling unit shall be provided a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) cubic feet of private enclosed storage space within the garage or carport, within the dwelling unit or immediately adjacent to the dwelling unit.

e.    Each dwelling unit shall be equipped with connections for installation of a standard-sized washer and dryer or common laundry facilities shall be provided containing a minimum of one (1) washing machine and one (1) dryer for every five (5) dwelling units or fraction thereof. If common laundry facilities are provided, they shall be dispersed throughout the project as approved by the reviewing authority. If individual facilities are provided, the proposed floor plans shall demonstrate compliance with this requirement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

f.    Management and security plans shall be submitted for review and approval for multifamily developments with four (4) or more dwelling units. On-site management shall be required for all developments with sixteen (16) or more units or as permitted by State law. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

g.    Trash areas shall be dispersed throughout the complex. Trash areas not located within a building shall be paved and located a minimum of five (5) feet from the private street or drive aisle. Such areas shall be consistent with the standards contained in PMC 17.85.010. One (1) trash area shall be provided for every ten (10) dwelling units or fraction thereof. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

h.    Roof access from all buildings shall be internal; no outside ladders attached to buildings are permitted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

i.    All rooftop equipment shall be screened with architectural means such as parapet walls or rooftop wells; drainage downspouts, roof vents and other equipment shall be painted to match the surface to which they are attached. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

j.    Screening of equipment, utilities and service areas shall be provided in accordance with PMC 17.86.020. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

k.    Units shall be pre-wired to accommodate cable reception. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

l.    Where common mailboxes are provided, they should be located close to the project entry and near recreational facilities; the location must be approved by the U.S. Postal Service. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

m.    Carports, garages, trash enclosures and other accessory structures shall be designed to reflect the architecture of the primary buildings with respect to style, colors and materials, and shall be screened with landscaping wherever possible. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

n.    Bicycle racks shall be provided in secure locations throughout the project. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

o.    Any required parking space that is enclosed must be available for parking and shall not be utilized for storage purposes. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

Chapter 17.50
COMMERCIAL ZONES
17.50.010 Designation of Commercial Zones
As used in this Ordinance, commercial zones means Zones:

C-1    (Light Commercial)

C-2    (Office Commercial) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C-3    (General Commercial)

C-4    (Commercial Center)

C-5    (Service Commercial)

17.50.020 Intent and Purpose
The commercial zones are established to provide areas in which business may be conducted, goods sold and distributed, and services rendered, along with other activities which are ancillary to and supportive of the primary commercial activities. The following commercial zones are intended to fulfill the need for shopping areas which range in size and composition from neighborhood stores to regional shopping centers. The standards of development are designed to assure quality of design and compatibility with adjacent uses.

Chapter 17.51
LIGHT COMMERCIAL (ZONE C-1)
17.51.010 Intent and Purpose
The Light Commercial (C-1) Zone is established to create, preserve and enhance areas for convenience shopping, where residents can purchase daily or frequently used necessities, household goods and personal services in relative proximity to their neighborhood. Commercial establishments in this zone include food stores, drugstores, small specialty stores, and personal services. Some professional and government offices may be appropriate where these uses would either serve the surrounding residential neighborhood or would generate a limited amount of traffic. The Neighborhood Commercial Zone should be located and designed so as to be compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods.

17.51.020 Locational Criteria
The C-1 zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area consists or will consist of a compact group of stores or offices which will generally be located on fifteen (15) or less acres and will provide convenience goods and services to meet the short term needs of households in nearby neighborhoods.

B.    The area is located on an arterial street at the periphery of a neighborhood or at an intersection which carries substantial neighborhood traffic.

C.    The area can physically accommodate shopping and service facilities and all required parking, loading, circulation and landscape requirements; is suitable for the concentration of large numbers of persons; and is supported by adequate infrastructure.

D.    New designations of Light Commercial zoned districts should be located at least one half (1/2) mile from any other shopping area or commercial designation.

E.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan commercial siting criteria and other applicable policies, and the land use designation of NC (Neighborhood Commercial).

17.51.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.51.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.51.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require Site Plan Review approval pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.21 PMC, Site Plan Review. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 5, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 18-002, adopted by City Council July 10, 2018. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.51.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 07-01, adopted by City Council January 2, 2008. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-001, adopted by City Council May 2, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 5, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.51.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the C-1 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Structures and features associated with pedestrian or customer seating or amenity areas, including but not limited to gazebos, arcades, fountains, seats or benches, outdoor eating areas, trash receptacles, art works or other landscape focal points, pursuant to PMC 17.92.020.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040.

3.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050.

4.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

C.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the C-1 zone, except that no amusement machines may be permitted within a convenience store.

D.    Information kiosks, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

E.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

F.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

G.    Massage, when permitted with the primary business of a barber and beauty shop, a suntan parlor, or physician’s medical practice, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

H.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station or automobile service station. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

17.51.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the C-1 Zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.51.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone C-1 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone C-1 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in PMC 17.81.020, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

Except as otherwise required in Chapter 17.83 PMC, setbacks in Zone C-1 shall be as follows:

1.    Setbacks along public and private streets for commercial buildings. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

All commercial, public/institutional, and office buildings shall maintain a minimum building setback measured from the public right-of-way (or the edge of the curb for private streets) to the nearest edge of the building as follows except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or in an adopted comprehensive development plan:

a.    Arterials: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty feet (20') of landscaping along all designated arterials. Arterials are defined by the General Plan Circulation Element and indicated on the City’s Circulation Plan Map.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private. Except where a commercial use is separated from a residential use or district by a local or collector street, then the minimum building setback from such street shall be twenty (20') feet and shall include a minimum landscape setback of fifteen (15') feet.

c.    Freeway: Within commercial zones, a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, which shall be landscaped, shall be provided along a freeway frontage.

2.    Interior side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-1 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along side property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030

3.    Interior rear yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-1 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along rear property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone C-1 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of fifty (50) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio

The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed .5 (fifty percent).

E.    Off-street parking and loading

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-1 shall have off-street parking and loading facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the need of each development, in accordance with PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Special development standards

1.    Each use in this zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    All display and storage in Zone C-1 shall be located wholly within an enclosed area except for the following:

a.    Florist shops

3.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Landscaping and screening shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC.

Chapter 17.52
OFFICE COMMERCIAL (ZONE C-2)
17.52.010 Intent and Purpose
The Office Professional (C-2) Zone is established to create, preserve and enhance areas for businesses and professions which provide services primarily from offices and maintain no stock of goods for retail trade. This district provides an opportunity for the grouping of businesses, professions and other services having related and compatible functions, which may serve a local, community or regional market area. The number of customer visits would be less frequent and traffic generation more moderate than for retail commercial uses. This district is also intended to provide a transition or buffer between more intensive retail and service centers and residential land uses or between major arterials and adjacent residential neighborhoods.

17.52.020 Locational Criteria
The C-2 zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is substantially occupied or will be occupied by a relatively contiguous grouping of service establishments which conduct their operations in offices. The designation is not intended for “spot” zoning of single uses or parcels.

B.    The area is located on the edge of a more intensive commercial district, along major streets, or between highways and adjacent residential uses.

C.    The area can physically accommodate office facilities and all required parking, loading, circulation and landscape requirements, is suitable for the concentration of large numbers of persons, and is supported by adequate infrastructure.

D.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan commercial siting criteria and other applicable policies, and the land use designation of OC (Office Commercial). In some cases, the C-2 zone may be found consistent with the BP (Business Park) designation, provided that comprehensive planning has been approved in accordance with the General Plan policies for the BP designation.

17.52.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, amended by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.52.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.52.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-03, adopted by City Council August 2, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.52.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-001, adopted by City Council May 2, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.52.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the C-2 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Structures and features associated with pedestrian seating or amenity areas, including but not limited to gazebos, arcades, fountains, seats or benches, trash receptacles, art works or other landscape focal points, and kiosks providing directions or public information, in accordance with PMC 17.92.020.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050.

3.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

4.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the C-2 zone, except that no amusement machines may be permitted within a convenience store.

D.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

E.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

F.    Health facilities, mobile.

G.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

H.    Information kiosks, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

I.    Massage, when permitted with the primary business of a health club, fitness center and gymnasium, a hotel with over one hundred (100) rooms, a barber and beauty shop, or physician’s, surgeon’s, chiropractor’s, osteopath’s, or physical therapist’s medical practice, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140.

J.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary commercial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140.

K.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station or automobile service station. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

L.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

17.52.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the C-2 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.52.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone C-2 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone C-2 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in PMC 17.81.020, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

Except as otherwise required in Chapter 17.83 PMC, setbacks in Zone C-2 shall be as follows:

1.    Setbacks along public and private streets for commercial buildings. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

All commercial, public/institutional, and office buildings shall maintain a minimum building setback measured from the public right-of-way (or the edge of the curb for private streets) to the nearest edge of the building as follows except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or in an adopted comprehensive development plan:

a.    Arterials: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty feet (20') of landscaping along all designated arterials. Arterials are defined by the General Plan Circulation Element and indicated on the City’s Circulation Plan Map.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private. Except where a commercial use is separated from a residential use or district by a local or collector street, then the minimum building setback from such street shall be twenty (20') feet and shall include a minimum landscape setback of fifteen (15') feet.

c.    Freeway: Within commercial zones, a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, which shall be landscaped, shall be provided along a freeway frontage.

2.    Interior side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-2 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along side property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

3.    Interior rear yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-2 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along rear property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed one story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone C-2 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of eighty (80) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio

The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed 1.0 (one hundred percent).

E.    Off-street parking and loading

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-2 shall have off-street parking and loading facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC (Off-Street Parking and Loading).

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, in accordance with PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Special development standards

1.    Each use in this zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    All display and storage in Zone C-2 shall be located wholly within an enclosed building except for the following:

a.    Florist shops

3.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Landscaping and screening shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC.

Chapter 17.53
GENERAL COMMERCIAL (ZONE C-3)
17.53.010 Intent and Purpose
The General Commercial (C-3) Zone is established to create, preserve and enhance areas for businesses which provide a wide variety of goods and services serving a community-wide market area. The zone provides for the grouping of retail and service uses that are compatible with respect to the type of commodity sold or services offered, operational requirements, market area and land use intensity. The zone is appropriate for major retail outlets as well as community shopping centers. Smaller businesses which may benefit from the customer drawing power of the larger stores and which provide specialty goods and services may also be located in this zone. The creation of a pleasant and efficient environment for general retail shopping and business is a primary function of this zone.

17.53.020 Locational Criteria
The C-3 zone designation is appropriately applied based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is occupied or will be occupied by stores and businesses which provide retail sales and services for a wide range of consumer needs, characterized by relatively long-term utility.

B.    The area is located either at the intersection of major streets or along major streets and highways.

C.    The area is environmentally and topographically suited to large-scale commercial development, with slopes of under ten (10) percent, no safety constraint to accommodating large numbers of persons, adequate area to sustain all accessory uses and development requirements, and infrastructure of adequate capacity to support the permitted uses.

D.    The area is typically at least five (5) to twenty (20) acres in size to facilitate general commercial development; however, aggregations of general commercial uses may result in designations encompassing larger areas.

E.    New designations of C-3 zoned districts should be located at least one (1) mile from any other shopping area or commercial designation.

F.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan commercial siting criteria and other applicable policies, and the land use designation of CC (Community Commercial).

17.53.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.53.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.53.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-2 adopted by City Council October 11, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-4 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-001, adopted by City Council May 2, 2012. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.53.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-02, adopted by City Council July 2, 2014. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.53.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the C-3 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the C-3 zone, except that no amusement machines may be permitted within a convenience store.

 

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040.

3.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050.

4.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

C.    Caretaker’s residence, where legally established use requires the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

D.    Health facilities, mobile.

E.    Information kiosks, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

F.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

G.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

H.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

I.    Structures and features associated with pedestrian or customer seating or amenity areas, including but not limited to gazebos, arcades, fountains, seats or benches, outdoor eating areas, trash receptacles, art works or other landscape focal points, pursuant to PMC 17.92.020.

J.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

K.    Massage, when permitted with the primary business of a health club, fitness center and gymnasium, a hotel with over one hundred (100) rooms, a barber or beauty shop, a suntan parlor, or physician’s, surgeon’s, chiropractor’s, osteopath’s, or physical therapist’s medical practice, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140.

L.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary commercial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140.

M.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station, automobile service station, or other automotive related use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

N.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

17.53.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the C-3 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.53.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone C-3 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone C-3 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.81 PMC, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

Except as otherwise required in Chapter 17.83 PMC, setbacks in Zone C-3 shall be as follows:

1.    Setbacks along public and private streets for commercial, buildings. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

All commercial, public/institutional, and office buildings shall maintain a minimum building setback measured from the public right-of-way (or the edge of the curb for private streets) to the nearest edge of the building as follows except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or in an adopted comprehensive development plan:

a.    Arterials: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty feet (20') of landscaping along all designated arterials. Arterials are defined by the General Plan Circulation Element and indicated on the City’s Circulation Plan Map.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private. Except where a commercial use is separated from a residential use or district by a local or collector street, then the minimum building setback from such street shall be twenty (20') feet and shall include a minimum landscape setback of fifteen (15') feet.

c.    Freeway: Within commercial zones, a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, which shall be landscaped, shall be provided along a freeway frontage.

2.    Interior side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-3 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along side property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

3.    Interior rear yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-3 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along rear property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed one story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone C-3 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of ninety (90) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio

The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed 1.0 (one hundred percent).

E.    Off-street parking and loading

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-3 shall have off-street parking and loading facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, in accordance with PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Special development standards

1.    Each use in this zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    All display and storage in Zone C-3 shall be located wholly within an enclosed area except for the following, provided that all outdoor display areas are paved, landscaped, and lighted in accordance with an approved development plan:

a.    Automobile service stations, but excluding outside display of other than automobile tires, batteries and similar equipment and accessories or petroleum products.

b.    Boat sales.

c.    Florist shops

d.    Parking lots

e.    Recreational vehicle sales.

3.    All auto repair work shall be conducted within an enclosed building only.

4.    Delivery hours may be limited by the Planning Commission pursuant to an approved Conditional Use Permit.

5.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

6.    Landscaping and screening shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC.

Chapter 17.54
COMMERCIAL CENTER (ZONE C-4)
17.54.010 Intent and Purpose
The Commercial Center (C-4) Zone is intended to create and preserve certain commercial areas for development as regional retail centers. Typical uses in this zone would include a regional mall, major retail outlets, office complexes, hotels and convention facilities, entertainment centers, and supportive commercial and service uses. The intended market area for goods and services provided in this zone would include the Antelope Valley region as well as users from outside the area. The zone is intended for large-scale commercial uses which are developed pursuant to a comprehensive plan. Although smaller businesses such as auto-related and food service uses are permitted in conjunction with larger developments in this zone, the intent is to achieve unified and cohesive commercial centers rather than allowing piece-meal development or land subdivisions which could preclude future attraction of major users.

17.54.020 Locational Criteria
The C-4 zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is occupied or will be occupied by stores and businesses which provide retail sales and services for a wide range of consumer needs, characterized by relatively long-term utility, and a regional service area.

B.    The area is located at the intersection of major arterials or highways and is easily accessible to users throughout the region.

C.    The area is relatively flat, free from environmental constraints and public safety hazards, has physical conditions which can sustain large-scale commercial development, and has adequate infrastructure to support the proposed intensity of uses.

D.    The area contains adequate area to accommodate regional commercial uses (typically forty (40) or more acres within the zone designation).

E.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan commercial siting criteria and other applicable policies, and the land use designation of RC (Regional Commercial).

17.54.030 Special Development Requirements
A.    In order to meet the intent and purpose of the C-4 zone as stated in PMC 17.54.010, provisions should be made in the planning process for integrated development plans which coordinate the efforts of multiple property owners and discourage piecemeal development. Master planning of the C-4 zoned property is required to avoid development in a manner which would prevent or preclude future development of surrounding land in accordance with General Plan policies for Regional Commercial development. Therefore, development in the C-4 zone shall be processed in accordance with a master plan, which may take one of the following forms:

1.    A Specific Plan or a Planned Development, pursuant to PMC 17.28.040 or 17.28.050.

2.    A comprehensive Conditional Use Permit, pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC.

3.    An area plan or other comprehensive development program determined by the Planning Director to meet the intent of the C-4 zone district.

B.    Regardless of the procedure by which a master plan for development is processed in the C-4 zone, such a plan shall address the following considerations:

1.    The area of the master plan should be based on logical planning boundaries and site conditions, rather than limited by individual parcel lines.

2.    The master plan should consider shared access, reciprocal parking, shared open space and amenity areas, the relationship of buildings to each other on adjacent parcels, and other design features to optimize use of the entire planning area as a functional unit.

3.    At a minimum the master plan should address conceptual building locations, heights and footprints; overall circulation, ingress and egress; parking layout; conceptual grading and drainage; and areas for common use.

4.    A statement of intent regarding building design and/or conceptual elevations should be provided to indicate architectural style, product types, form and materials.

5.    For larger projects, design guidelines should be developed to guide future individual building developers and maintain the integrity of the master plan concept.

C.    Future development within the area of a master plan may vary from the provisions of the plan, provided that the proposed project is compatible with the overall plan concept or develops an acceptable alternative master plan.

17.54.040 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.54.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.54.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-004, adopted by City Council May, 7, 2014. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.54.070 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.54.080 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the C-4 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the C-4 zone.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

3.    Small Collection Facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050.

4.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

C.    Child care facilities to serve customers or patrons of the primary use.

 

D.    Health facilities, mobile.

E.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

F.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

G.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

H.    Structures and features associated with pedestrian seating or amenity areas, including but not limited to gazebos, arcades, fountains, seats or benches, trash receptacles, art works or other landscape focal points, and kiosks providing directions or public information.

I.    Wire services for money transfer and ATM machines.

J.    Massage, when permitted with the primary business of a health club, fitness center, and gymnasium, a hotel with over one hundred (100) rooms, a barber and beauty shop, or physician’s, surgeon’s, chiropractor’s, osteopath’s, or physical therapist’s medical practice, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

K.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary commercial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

L.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station or automobile service station. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

M.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

N.    Firearms and related accessories, sales and service, as an accessory use to the retail sales of sporting equipment. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-03, adopted by City Council July 2, 2014.)

17.54.090 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the C-4 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.54.100 Standards of Development
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Premises in Zone C-4 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development, except as these standards may be modified by an approved master plan for development pursuant to PMC 17.54.030.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone C-4 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.81 PMC, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

1.    Setbacks along public and private streets for commercial, buildings

All commercial, public/institutional, and office buildings shall maintain a minimum building setback measured from the public right-of-way (or the edge of the curb for private streets) to the nearest edge of the building as follows except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or in an adopted comprehensive development plan:

a.    Arterials: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty feet (20') of landscaping along all designated arterials. Arterials are defined by the General Plan Circulation Element and indicated on the City’s Circulation Plan Map.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private. Except where a commercial use is separated from a residential use or district by a local or collector street, then the minimum building setback from such street shall be twenty (20') feet and shall include a minimum landscape setback of fifteen (15') feet.

c.    Freeway: Within commercial zones, a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, which shall be landscaped, shall be provided along a freeway frontage.

2.    Interior side yards

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-4 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along side property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

3.    Interior rear yard

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-4 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along rear property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed four (4) stories or fifty-five (55) feet. Additional height may be granted with approval of a Conditional Use Permit. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed one (1) story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone C-4 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of ninety (90) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio

The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed 1.0 (one hundred percent). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 18-001, adopted by City Council September 4, 2018.)

E.    Off-street parking and loading

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-4 shall have off-street parking and loading facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, in accordance with PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Special development standards

1.    Each use in this zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    All display and storage in Zone C-4 shall be located wholly within an enclosed area except for the following, provided that all outdoor display areas are paved, landscaped, and lighted in accordance with an approved development plan:

a.    Automobile service stations, but excluding outside display of other than automobile tires, batteries and similar equipment and accessories or petroleum products.

b.    Florist shops

c.    Parking lots

3.    All auto repair work shall be conducted within an enclosed building only.

4.    Delivery hours may be limited by the Planning Commission pursuant to an approved Conditional Use Permit.

5.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040.

6.    Landscaping and screening shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC.

Chapter 17.55
SERVICE COMMERCIAL ZONE (C-5)
17.55.010 Intent and Purpose
The Service Commercial (C-5) Zone is established to create, preserve and enhance areas for businesses which serve a regional market with a wide variety of wholesale, distribution and construction-related activities. Commercial retail and service uses which serve businesses or their employees within the C-5 zone and nearby commercial/industrial areas are also permitted in this zone. Uses and operations in the C-5 zone shall be conducted so as to have no detrimental effect on adjacent properties or on the community environment.

17.55.020 Locational Criteria
The C-5 zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is or will be occupied by businesses which provide goods and services to a local or regional market area, and which may utilize processes, materials or operations which are not compatible with other commercial zones due to the intensity of use permitted.

B.    The area is located in proximity to industrial or business districts which are served by the commodities and services offered in this zone.

C.    The area has access by arterial streets and is or will be served by adequate infrastructure to support the intensity of development.

D.    The area may provide a transition between intensive commercial uses and heavier industrial zones.

E.    The area is free of environmental constraints and has physical conditions which can sustain commercial and light industrial development, including all required parking, circulation and landscaping.

F.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan land use designation of CM (Commercial Manufacturing), and all applicable policies.

17.55.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.55.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.55.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-2 adopted by City Council October 11, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-4, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council on September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.55.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.55.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the C-5 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the C-5 zone, except that no amusement machines may be permitted within a convenience store.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050.

3.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

 

4.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Caretaker’s residence, where legally established use requires the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

D.    Information kiosks, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

E.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

F.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

G.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

H.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

I.    Massage, when permitted with the primary business of a health club, fitness center and gymnasium, a hotel with over one hundred (100) rooms, a barber or beauty shop, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

J.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary commercial or industrial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

K.    Commercial vehicle parking, pursuant to PMC 17.93.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 99-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

L.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station, automobile service station, or other automotive related use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

M.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

17.55.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the C-5 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.55.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone C-5 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone C-5 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.81 PMC, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

Except as otherwise required in Chapter 17.83 PMC, building setbacks in Zone C-5 shall be as follows:

1.    Setbacks along public and private streets for commercial buildings (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

All commercial, public/institutional, and office buildings shall maintain a minimum building setback measured from the public right-of-way (or the edge of the curb for private streets) to the nearest edge of the building as follows except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or in an adopted comprehensive development plan:

a.    Arterials: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty feet (20') of landscaping along all designated arterials. Arterials are defined by the General Plan Circulation Element and indicated on the City’s Circulation Plan Map.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private. Except where a commercial use is separated from a residential use or district by a local or collector street, then the minimum building setback from such street shall be twenty (20') feet and shall include a minimum landscape setback of fifteen (15') feet.

c.    Freeway: Within commercial zones, a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, which shall be landscaped, shall be provided along a freeway frontage.

2.    Interior side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-5 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along side property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

3.    Interior rear yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-5 shall provide a minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback with a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip along rear property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for agricultural, institutional, single-family or multi-family residential uses, pursuant to PMC 17.83.030.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

a.    Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

a.    The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed one story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

a.    No lot or parcel of land in Zone C-5 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of fifty (50) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio

a.    The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed .5 (fifty percent).

E.    Off-street parking and loading

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone C-5 shall have off-street parking and loading facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, in accordance with PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Special development standards

1.    Each use in this zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    All outdoor display and/or storage in Zone C-5 shall be located wholly within an enclosed area or shall be screened from public rights-of-way, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to an approved development plan. Where permitted, such outdoor areas shall be paved, landscaped and lighted in accordance with the applicable sections of this Ordinance.

3.    All vehicle repair work shall be conducted within an enclosed building only.

4.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

5.    Landscaping and screening shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC.

Chapter 17.60
INDUSTRIAL ZONES
17.60.010 Designation of Industrial Zones
As used in this Ordinance, industrial zones means Zones:

M-1    (Light Industrial)

M-2    (General Industrial)

M-3    (Airport Industrial)

M-4     (Planned Industrial)

17.60.020 Intent and Purpose
The industrial zones are established to preserve land within the planning area for manufacturing, processing, assembly, fabrication, distribution, and similar activities related to production and transport of goods. Commercial uses which are compatible with and supportive of the manufacturing uses within these zones are also provided for. Uses which are incompatible with industrial development due to their sensitivity to noise, vibration, light, odors or materials used in manufacturing processes are not appropriate in these zones. Commercial uses providing retail goods and services to the general public, or which are intended to draw customers from residential areas into industrial areas are discouraged. The primary goal of the industrial use zones is to ensure that adequate land area is available in suitable sizes, configurations and locations to accommodate existing and future employment-generating development, and that the future potential of such areas is not inhibited or precluded by the intrusion of incompatible uses.

Chapter 17.61
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (ZONE M-1)
17.61.010 Intent and Purpose
The Light Industrial (M-1) Zone is established to create, preserve and enhance areas for light industrial uses and associated operations, including assembly, fabrication, packaging and transport, where operations are conducted primarily indoors. Heavy industrial uses in which raw materials are converted into products for subsequent assembly or fabrication are not appropriate in Zone M-1. Some construction-related activities may be allowed provided that screening is provided from public rights-of-way and adjacent, less intensive zoned properties. Limited commercial retail and service uses which serve businesses or their employees within the immediate area may be allowed, provided that they do not detract from the primary industrial operations within the M-1 Zone.

17.61.020 Locational Criteria
The M-1 zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is or will be occupied by limited manufacturing, wholesale, research and development, storage, transportation and similar or related activities.

B.    The area has access from highways or arterial streets, and such access does not traverse residential neighborhoods or land use designations. The area may also have access to rail service.

C.    The area is or will be served with adequate infrastructure to support light industrial uses.

D.    The area has slopes of less than ten (10) percent; is free or environmental constraints to industrial development; is adequately buffered from residential and other less intensive use designations; and has parcels of adequate size and shape to accommodate industrial structures and all required setbacks and accessory uses.

E.    Zone M-1 may be determined to be consistent with the Commercial Manufacturing (CM) or Industrial (IND) General Plan Land Use designations, and shall be consistent with all General Plan policies for siting and development of industrial land uses.

17.61.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.61.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.61.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-2 adopted by City Council October 11, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-4 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.61.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 16-01, adopted by City Council September 7, 2016. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.61.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the M-1 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the M-1 zone, except that no amusement machines may be permitted within a convenience store.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030

2.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

3.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Caretaker’s residence, where legally established use requires the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

D.    Information kiosk, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

E.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

F.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

G.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

H.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

I.    Massage, when permitted with the primary business of a health club, fitness center and gymnasium, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

J.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary industrial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

K.    Retail sales and service incidental to a principally permitted use are allowable provided that the following standards are met: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    The operations are contained within the main structure which houses the primary use;

2.    Retail sales occupy no more than 15% of the total building square footage;

3.    No retail sales or display of merchandise occur(s) outside the structure(s); and

4.    All products offered for retail sales on the site are manufactured, warehoused, or assembled on the premises.

L.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station, automobile service station, or other automotive related use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

M.    Commercial vehicle parking, pursuant to PMC 17.93.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 99-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

N.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

Chapter 17.61
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (ZONE M-1)
17.61.010 Intent and Purpose
The Light Industrial (M-1) Zone is established to create, preserve and enhance areas for light industrial uses and associated operations, including assembly, fabrication, packaging and transport, where operations are conducted primarily indoors. Heavy industrial uses in which raw materials are converted into products for subsequent assembly or fabrication are not appropriate in Zone M-1. Some construction-related activities may be allowed provided that screening is provided from public rights-of-way and adjacent, less intensive zoned properties. Limited commercial retail and service uses which serve businesses or their employees within the immediate area may be allowed, provided that they do not detract from the primary industrial operations within the M-1 Zone.

17.61.020 Locational Criteria
The M-1 zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is or will be occupied by limited manufacturing, wholesale, research and development, storage, transportation and similar or related activities.

B.    The area has access from highways or arterial streets, and such access does not traverse residential neighborhoods or land use designations. The area may also have access to rail service.

C.    The area is or will be served with adequate infrastructure to support light industrial uses.

D.    The area has slopes of less than ten (10) percent; is free or environmental constraints to industrial development; is adequately buffered from residential and other less intensive use designations; and has parcels of adequate size and shape to accommodate industrial structures and all required setbacks and accessory uses.

E.    Zone M-1 may be determined to be consistent with the Commercial Manufacturing (CM) or Industrial (IND) General Plan Land Use designations, and shall be consistent with all General Plan policies for siting and development of industrial land uses.

17.61.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.61.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.61.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-2 adopted by City Council October 11, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-4 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.61.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 16-01, adopted by City Council September 7, 2016. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.61.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the M-1 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the M-1 zone, except that no amusement machines may be permitted within a convenience store.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030

2.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

3.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Caretaker’s residence, where legally established use requires the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

D.    Information kiosk, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

E.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

F.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

G.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

H.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

I.    Massage, when permitted with the primary business of a health club, fitness center and gymnasium, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

J.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary industrial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

K.    Retail sales and service incidental to a principally permitted use are allowable provided that the following standards are met: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    The operations are contained within the main structure which houses the primary use;

2.    Retail sales occupy no more than 15% of the total building square footage;

3.    No retail sales or display of merchandise occur(s) outside the structure(s); and

4.    All products offered for retail sales on the site are manufactured, warehoused, or assembled on the premises.

L.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station, automobile service station, or other automotive related use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

M.    Commercial vehicle parking, pursuant to PMC 17.93.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 99-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

N.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

17.61.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the M-1 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.61.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone M-1 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone M-1 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.82 PMC, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

Except as otherwise required by Chapter 17.83 PMC, building setbacks in Zone M-1 shall be as follows:

1.    Front yard and street side yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Minimum front yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-1 shall be measured from the property line as follows:

a.    Arterial streets: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty (20) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along arterial streets as indicated in the General Plan Circulation Element, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private, except as provided in paragraph d. below. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

c.    Adjacent to residential: Where an industrial use is proposed to be separated from a residentially used or designated property by a local or collector street, the minimum building setback from each street shall be thirty (30) feet and shall include a minimum landscaped setback of twenty (20) feet, except as provided in paragraph d. below. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

d.    Exceptions to minimum front yard setbacks:

(i)    Buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height: The front yard setback for buildings which are more than thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be established by the reviewing authority during development review to mitigate any adverse impacts on neighboring properties, but in no case shall be less than the minimum as set forth in subsection (C)(1)(a), (b), or (c) of this Section. As a guideline, the reviewing authority may require an additional one (1) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along an arterial or collector street, and one-half (1/2) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along a local street. This increased setback may be applied to individual building elements, rather than the entire building footprint, to lessen the effect of building mass abutting the street. Total building setback need not exceed seventy (70) feet regardless of height.

(ii)    Infill development: For proposed uses on lots or parcels within substantially developed industrial areas, in which a pattern of building setbacks has been established, the reviewing authority may establish setbacks which are compatible with adjacent uses as part of the development review and approval process, without a variance, provided that the minimum landscaped setback area adjacent to any street shall be no less than ten (10) feet.

e.    Fences, walls, and planters over three (3) feet in height shall maintain the setbacks set forth in this Section.

2.    Rear and side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Minimum rear and side yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-1 shall not be required, except in the following cases:

a.    Where a side or rear yard abuts an arterial street or expressway, the provisions of PMC 17.61.090(C)(1) shall apply.

b.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a freeway, the following shall apply:

(i)    A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet shall be required, of which at least ten (10) feet must be landscaped, except where the Reviewing Authority determines that architectural enhancements and/or special site design features that are proposed warrants an exception to the standard setback. However, in no instance shall an approved building setback be less than ten (10) feet from the freeway right-of-way.

(ii)    For rear and side yards abutting freeways where such yards are visible from the freeway travel lanes, landscaped areas adjacent to the freeway shall average twenty (20) feet, and be not less than ten (10) feet wide, and the entire freeway frontage of the site may be used to compute average landscaping.

c.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for residential uses, a building setback of no less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of ten (10) feet or landscaping adjacent to the residential property, as specified in PMC 17.83.030(C). For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setbacks from residential properties and landscaping, as needed to mitigate visual impacts from the height and mass of the building. In establishing this setback, sun angle should be considered to avoid allowing a tall industrial building to block solar access to an adjacent residential use.

d.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for less intensive non-residential uses, such as office, commercial, or public/institutional uses, a building setback of no less than ten (10) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of five (5) feet of landscaping adjacent to the neighboring property. For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setback and landscaping, as needed to mitigate impacts on less intensive uses, including visual and aesthetic impacts as well as solar access.

e.    The reviewing authority may require a greater setback where needed to mitigate impacts from noise or other operations of use.

3.    Projections (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Eaves, roof projections, awnings, stair landings, and similar architectural features may project into the building setback a maximum distance of five (5) feet, provided that such appendages are supported only at, or behind, the building setback line, and further provided such appendages do not project beyond the property line or into the public right-of-way.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, except as permitted through approval of a conditional use permit (CUP). In approving a CUP for additional building height, the reviewing authority shall find that adequate setbacks are provided on the project site to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties; that adequate fire protection is provided for the subject buildings; that all FAA clearance requirements are met; that maximum floor area ratio requirements are not exceeded; and that the height, bulk, massing, design, and placement of the building on the subject site will not adversely impact adjacent properties or the general public.

b.    The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

c.    No windows, balconies, stairways, or other areas where people could look out onto adjacent residential properties shall be permitted above the first floor on the side of a building which faces property designated for single-family residential use.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone M-1 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of fifty (50) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed .5 (fifty percent), excluding amenities which may be approved by the reviewing authority, which may include but are not limited to child care facilities and employee fitness areas.

E.    Off-street parking and loading (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone M-1 shall have adequate off-street parking and loading facilities. Location and design of parking and loading facilities shall conform to applicable General Plan Community Design Element policies and to Chapter 17.87 PMC.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the need of each development, and shall be located and designed in accordance with applicable General Plan Community Design Element policies and PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Landscaping (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

At least ten (10) percent of the site shall be landscaped, in accordance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.010 and applicable General Plan Community Design Element policies, except that the reviewing authority may reduce this requirement to no less than five (5) percent of the site, provided that areas visible from public rights-of-way and non-industrial uses or districts are adequately landscaped.

I.    Sidewalks (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Sidewalks shall be provided within the public right-of-way along all major and regional arterial streets, as depicted in the General Plan. Sidewalks may be required along secondary arterial, collector and local streets, or this requirement may be waived by the reviewing authority as part of the development review process.

J.    Special development standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    Each use in this Zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040 and the applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

3.    Any portion of a lot or parcel used for outdoor storage, loading, parking, or other permitted outside use shall be paved according to the standards provided in PMC 17.87.050, except that the reviewing authority may approve a reduction in the area required to be paved where it is determined that such area will be adequately screened and dust-proofed, and that construction of additional improvements is unnecessary.

4.    All outdoor display and/or storage in Zone M-1 shall be located wholly within an enclosed area or shall be screened from public rights-of-way, and adjacent properties pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element. Where permitted, such outdoor areas shall be paved, landscaped and lighted in accordance with the applicable sections of this Ordinance.

5.    Screening shall be provided in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

6.    All business and manufacturing operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building unless specifically permitted by the reviewing authority and adequately screened from public view pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

7.    Architectural design shall conform to the applicable Community Design policies contained in the General Plan.

K.    Rail Service Standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Lot division and building layouts for properties which adjoin existing or proposed lead and spur lines shall be designed so as to ensure full potential of future rail access to other properties adjacent to such rail lines. Subdivision proposals which could reduce a property’s capacity to accommodate potential rail-served development may not be approved.

17.61.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the M-1 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.61.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone M-1 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone M-1 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.82 PMC, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

Except as otherwise required by Chapter 17.83 PMC, building setbacks in Zone M-1 shall be as follows:

1.    Front yard and street side yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Minimum front yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-1 shall be measured from the property line as follows:

a.    Arterial streets: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty (20) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along arterial streets as indicated in the General Plan Circulation Element, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private, except as provided in paragraph d. below. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

c.    Adjacent to residential: Where an industrial use is proposed to be separated from a residentially used or designated property by a local or collector street, the minimum building setback from each street shall be thirty (30) feet and shall include a minimum landscaped setback of twenty (20) feet, except as provided in paragraph d. below. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

d.    Exceptions to minimum front yard setbacks:

(i)    Buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height: The front yard setback for buildings which are more than thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be established by the reviewing authority during development review to mitigate any adverse impacts on neighboring properties, but in no case shall be less than the minimum as set forth in subsection (C)(1)(a), (b), or (c) of this Section. As a guideline, the reviewing authority may require an additional one (1) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along an arterial or collector street, and one-half (1/2) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along a local street. This increased setback may be applied to individual building elements, rather than the entire building footprint, to lessen the effect of building mass abutting the street. Total building setback need not exceed seventy (70) feet regardless of height.

(ii)    Infill development: For proposed uses on lots or parcels within substantially developed industrial areas, in which a pattern of building setbacks has been established, the reviewing authority may establish setbacks which are compatible with adjacent uses as part of the development review and approval process, without a variance, provided that the minimum landscaped setback area adjacent to any street shall be no less than ten (10) feet.

e.    Fences, walls, and planters over three (3) feet in height shall maintain the setbacks set forth in this Section.

2.    Rear and side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Minimum rear and side yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-1 shall not be required, except in the following cases:

a.    Where a side or rear yard abuts an arterial street or expressway, the provisions of PMC 17.61.090(C)(1) shall apply.

b.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a freeway, the following shall apply:

(i)    A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet shall be required, of which at least ten (10) feet must be landscaped, except where the Reviewing Authority determines that architectural enhancements and/or special site design features that are proposed warrants an exception to the standard setback. However, in no instance shall an approved building setback be less than ten (10) feet from the freeway right-of-way.

(ii)    For rear and side yards abutting freeways where such yards are visible from the freeway travel lanes, landscaped areas adjacent to the freeway shall average twenty (20) feet, and be not less than ten (10) feet wide, and the entire freeway frontage of the site may be used to compute average landscaping.

c.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for residential uses, a building setback of no less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of ten (10) feet or landscaping adjacent to the residential property, as specified in PMC 17.83.030(C). For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setbacks from residential properties and landscaping, as needed to mitigate visual impacts from the height and mass of the building. In establishing this setback, sun angle should be considered to avoid allowing a tall industrial building to block solar access to an adjacent residential use.

d.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for less intensive non-residential uses, such as office, commercial, or public/institutional uses, a building setback of no less than ten (10) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of five (5) feet of landscaping adjacent to the neighboring property. For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setback and landscaping, as needed to mitigate impacts on less intensive uses, including visual and aesthetic impacts as well as solar access.

e.    The reviewing authority may require a greater setback where needed to mitigate impacts from noise or other operations of use.

3.    Projections (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Eaves, roof projections, awnings, stair landings, and similar architectural features may project into the building setback a maximum distance of five (5) feet, provided that such appendages are supported only at, or behind, the building setback line, and further provided such appendages do not project beyond the property line or into the public right-of-way.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, except as permitted through approval of a conditional use permit (CUP). In approving a CUP for additional building height, the reviewing authority shall find that adequate setbacks are provided on the project site to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties; that adequate fire protection is provided for the subject buildings; that all FAA clearance requirements are met; that maximum floor area ratio requirements are not exceeded; and that the height, bulk, massing, design, and placement of the building on the subject site will not adversely impact adjacent properties or the general public.

b.    The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

c.    No windows, balconies, stairways, or other areas where people could look out onto adjacent residential properties shall be permitted above the first floor on the side of a building which faces property designated for single-family residential use.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone M-1 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of fifty (50) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed .5 (fifty percent), excluding amenities which may be approved by the reviewing authority, which may include but are not limited to child care facilities and employee fitness areas.

E.    Off-street parking and loading (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone M-1 shall have adequate off-street parking and loading facilities. Location and design of parking and loading facilities shall conform to applicable General Plan Community Design Element policies and to Chapter 17.87 PMC.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the need of each development, and shall be located and designed in accordance with applicable General Plan Community Design Element policies and PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Landscaping (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

At least ten (10) percent of the site shall be landscaped, in accordance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.010 and applicable General Plan Community Design Element policies, except that the reviewing authority may reduce this requirement to no less than five (5) percent of the site, provided that areas visible from public rights-of-way and non-industrial uses or districts are adequately landscaped.

I.    Sidewalks (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Sidewalks shall be provided within the public right-of-way along all major and regional arterial streets, as depicted in the General Plan. Sidewalks may be required along secondary arterial, collector and local streets, or this requirement may be waived by the reviewing authority as part of the development review process.

J.    Special development standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    Each use in this Zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040 and the applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

3.    Any portion of a lot or parcel used for outdoor storage, loading, parking, or other permitted outside use shall be paved according to the standards provided in PMC 17.87.050, except that the reviewing authority may approve a reduction in the area required to be paved where it is determined that such area will be adequately screened and dust-proofed, and that construction of additional improvements is unnecessary.

4.    All outdoor display and/or storage in Zone M-1 shall be located wholly within an enclosed area or shall be screened from public rights-of-way, and adjacent properties pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element. Where permitted, such outdoor areas shall be paved, landscaped and lighted in accordance with the applicable sections of this Ordinance.

5.    Screening shall be provided in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

6.    All business and manufacturing operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building unless specifically permitted by the reviewing authority and adequately screened from public view pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

7.    Architectural design shall conform to the applicable Community Design policies contained in the General Plan.

K.    Rail Service Standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Lot division and building layouts for properties which adjoin existing or proposed lead and spur lines shall be designed so as to ensure full potential of future rail access to other properties adjacent to such rail lines. Subdivision proposals which could reduce a property’s capacity to accommodate potential rail-served development may not be approved.

Chapter 17.62
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (ZONE M-2)
17.62.010 Intent and Purpose
The General Industrial (M-2) Zone is established to create, preserve and enhance areas for a full range of manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, warehousing, and distribution uses associated with heavy industrial land uses. Outdoor operations and storage are permitted, provided that such areas are generally screened from public rights-of-way. Commercial and businesses uses which are supportive to industrial activities, or which serve daily needs of employees in the vicinity, are also allowed. The zone is intended to create an environment in which industrial and allied uses may be conducted with a minimum of land use conflicts, through exclusion of residential and general retail uses.

17.62.020 Locational Criteria
The M-2 zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria:

A.    The area is or will be occupied by a wide variety of light to heavy industrial uses and ancillary or supportive activities.

B.    The area has access from highways or arterial streets, and such access does not traverse residential neighborhoods or land use designations. The area may also have access to rail service.

C.    The area is or will be served with adequate infrastructure to support heavy industrial uses.

D.    The area has slopes of less than ten (10) percent; is free or environmental constraints to industrial development; is adequately buffered from residential and other less intensive use designations; and has parcels of adequate size and shape to accommodate all industrial structures and all required setbacks and accessory uses.

E.    Zone M-2 shall be consistent with the Industrial (IND) General Plan Land Use designation and all General Plan policies for siting and development of industrial land uses.

17.62.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.62.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.62.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.62.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 16-01, adopted by City Council September 7, 2016. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.62.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the M-2 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the M-2 zone, except that no amusement machines may be permitted within a convenience store.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

3.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Caretaker’s residence, where legally established use requires the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

D.    Information kiosk, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

E.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

F.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

G.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

H.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

I.    Massage, as an accessory use when permitted with the primary business of a health club, fitness center and gymnasium, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

J.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary industrial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3, adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

K.    Retail sales and service incidental to a principally permitted use are allowable provided that the following standards are met: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    The operations are contained within the main structure which houses the primary use;

2.    Retail sales occupy no more than 15% of the total building square footage;

3.    No retail sales or display of merchandise occur(s) outside the structure(s); and

4.    All products offered for retail sales on the site are manufactured, warehoused, or assembled on the premises.

L.    Commercial vehicle parking, pursuant to PMC 17.93.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 99-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

M.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station, automobile service station, or other automotive related use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

N.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

17.62.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the M-2 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.62.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone M-2 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone M-2 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.81 PMC, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

1.    Front yard and street side yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Minimum front yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-2 shall be measured from the property line as follows:

a.    Arterial streets: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty (20) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along arterial streets as indicated in the General Plan Circulation Element, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private, except as provided in paragraph d. below. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

c.    Adjacent to residential: Where an industrial use is proposed to be separated from a residentially used or designated property by a local or collector street, the minimum building setback from each street shall be thirty (30) feet and shall include a minimum landscaped setback of twenty (20) feet, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

d.    Exceptions to minimum front yard setbacks:

(i)    Buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height: The front yard setback for buildings which are more than thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be established by the reviewing authority during development review to mitigate any adverse impacts on neighboring properties, but in no case shall be less than the minimum as set forth in subsection (C)(1)(a), (b), or (c) of this Section. As a guideline, the reviewing authority may require an additional one (1) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along an arterial or collector street, and one-half (1/2) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along a local street. This increased setback may be applied to individual building elements, rather than the entire building footprint, to lessen the effect of building mass abutting the street. Total building setback need not exceed seventy (70) feet regardless of height.

(ii)    Infill development: For proposed uses on lots or parcels within substantially developed industrial areas, in which a pattern of building setbacks has been established, the reviewing authority may establish setbacks which are compatible with adjacent uses as part of the development review and approval process, without a variance, provided that the minimum landscaped setback area adjacent to any street shall be no less than ten (10) feet.

e.    Fences, walls, and planters over three (3) feet in height shall maintain the setbacks set forth in this Section.

2.    Rear and side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 199 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Minimum rear and side yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-2 shall not be required, except in the following cases:

a.    Where a side or rear yard abuts an arterial street or expressway, the provisions of PMC 17.62.090(C)(1) shall apply.

b.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a freeway, the following shall apply:

(i)    A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet shall be required, of which at least ten (10) feet must be landscaped, except where the Reviewing Authority determines that architectural enhancements and/or special site design features that are proposed warrants an exception to the standard setback. However, in no instance shall an approved building setback be less than ten (10) feet from the freeway right-of-way.

(ii)    For rear and side yards abutting freeways where such yards are visible from the freeway travel lanes, landscaped areas adjacent to the freeway shall average twenty (20) feet, and be not less than ten (10) feet wide, and the entire freeway frontage of the site may be used to compute average landscaping.

c.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for residential uses, a building setback of no less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping adjacent to the residential property, as specified in PMC 17.83.030(C). For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setbacks from residential properties and landscaping, as needed to mitigate visual impacts from the height and mass of the building. In establishing this setback, sun angle should be considered to avoid allowing a tall industrial building to block solar access to an adjacent residential use.

d.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for less intensive non-residential uses, such as office, commercial, or public/institutional uses, a building setback of no less than ten (10) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of five (5) feet of landscaping adjacent to the neighboring property. For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setback and landscaping, as needed to mitigate impacts on less intensive uses, including visual and aesthetic impacts as well as solar access.

e.    The reviewing authority may require a greater setback where needed to mitigate impacts from noise or other operations of use.

3.    Projections (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Eaves, roof projections, awnings, stair landings, and similar architectural features may project into the building setback a maximum distance of five (5) feet, provided that such appendages are supported only at, or behind, the building setback line, and further provided such appendages do not project beyond the property line or into the public right-of-way.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building heights (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet except as permitted through approval of a conditional use permit (CUP. In approving a CUP for additional building height, the reviewing authority shall find that adequate setbacks are provided on the project site to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties; that adequate fire protection is provided for the subject buildings; that all FAA clearance requirements are met; that maximum floor area ratio requirements are not exceeded; and that the height, bulk, massing, design, and placement of the building on the subject site will not adversely impact adjacent properties or the general public.

b.    The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

c.    No windows, balconies, stairways, or other areas where people could look out onto adjacent residential properties shall be permitted above the first floor on the side of a building which faces property designated for single-family residential use.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone M-2 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of fifty (50) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed .5 (fifty percent), excluding amenities which may be approved by the reviewing authority, which may include but are not limited to child care facilities and employee fitness areas.

E.    Off-street parking and loading (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone M-2 shall have off-street parking and loading facilities. Location and design of parking and loading facilities shall conform to applicable General Plan policies and to Chapter 17.87 PMC.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, and shall be located and designed in accordance with applicable General Plan Community Design policies and PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Landscaping (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

At least ten (10) percent of the site shall be landscaped, in accordance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.010 and applicable General Plan policies, except that the reviewing authority may reduce this requirement to no less than five (5) percent of the site, provided that areas visible from public rights-of-way and non-industrial uses or districts are adequately landscaped.

I.    Sidewalks (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Sidewalks shall be provided within the public right-of-way along all major and regional arterial streets, as depicted in the General Plan. Sidewalks may be required along secondary arterial, collector and local streets, or this requirement may be waived by the reviewing authority as part of the development review process.

J.    Special development standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    Each use in this Zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040 and the applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

3.    Any portion of a lot or parcel used for outdoor storage, loading, parking, or other permitted outside use shall be paved according to the standards provided in PMC 17.87.050(F), except that the reviewing authority may approve a reduction in the area required to be paved where it is determined that such area will be adequately screened and dust-proofed, and that construction of additional improvements is unnecessary.

4.    All outdoor display and/or storage in Zone M-2 shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element. Where permitted, such outdoor areas shall be paved, landscaped, and lighted in accordance with the applicable sections of this Ordinance.

5.    Screening shall be provided in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

6.    All business and manufacturing operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building unless specifically permitted by the reviewing authority and adequately screened from public view pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

7.    Architectural design shall conform to the applicable Community Design policies contained in the General Plan.

K.    Rail Service Standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Rail access and design requirements shall be as provided in PMC 17.61.090(K).

Chapter 17.63
AIRPORT INDUSTRIAL (ZONE M-3)
17.63.010 Intent and Purpose
The Airport Industrial (M-3) Zone is established to provide an area for expansion of Palmdale Regional Airport and related facilities, and for activities associated with aircraft development, assembly, and testing. Activities conducted in this zone may include public and private airports; manufacture, assembly, testing, modification, repair and storage of aircraft, missiles, space craft and components; freight and distribution services ancillary to airport operations; and limited commercial or service uses needed to support the primary activities and/or employees within the area. Uses which would restrict or impede aircraft operations or the primary airport activities for which this zone was created are not allowed.

17.63.020 Locational Criteria
The M-3 zone designation is appropriately located based on the following criteria:

A.    The area is owned by the City of Los Angeles Department of Airports, Air Force Plant 42, or other entity involved in airport operations or aircraft assembly and/or testing.

B.    The area is within reasonable proximity to an existing or future airfield or airport.

C.    The area has adequate access and has or will be provided with circulation, public services and infrastructure to support airport-related development.

D.    The area has slopes of less than ten (10) percent; is free of environmental constraints to industrial development; is adequately buffered from residential and other less intensive use designations; and has parcels of adequate size and shape to accommodate industrial and airport-related structures and all required setbacks and accessory uses. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

E.    Zone M-3 shall be consistent with the Airfield and Related Use (A&R) General Plan designation and policies for siting and development of industrial land uses.

17.63.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.63.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.63.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.63.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 16-01, adopted by City Council September 7, 2016. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.63.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the M-3 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the M-3 zone.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

3.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Caretaker’s residence, where legally established use requires the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

D.    Day care facilities, on-site to serve employees of the primary use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

E.    Emergency first aid stations.

F.    Information kiosk, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

G.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

H.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

I.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

J.    Structures and features associated with pedestrian seating or amenity areas, including but not limited to gazebos, arcades, fountains, seats or benches, trash receptacles, art works or other landscape focal points, and kiosks providing directions or public information.

K.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s) machines.

L.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary industrial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

M.    Retail sales and service incidental to a principally permitted use are allowable provided that the following standards are met. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    The operations are contained within the main structure which houses the primary use;

2.    Retail sales occupy no more than 15% of the total building square footage;

3.    No retail sales or display of merchandise occur(s) outside the structure(s).

N.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station, automobile service station, or other automotive related use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

O.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

17.63.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the M-3 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.63.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone M-3 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone M-3 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any).

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.81 PMC, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

Except as otherwise required by Chapter 17.83 PMC, building setbacks in Zone M-3 shall be as follows:

1.    Front yard and street side yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Minimum front yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-3 shall be measured from the property line as follows:

a.    Arterial streets: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty (20) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along arterial streets as indicated in the General Plan Circulation Element, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

c.    Adjacent to residential: Where an industrial use is proposed to be separated from a residentially used or designated property by a local or collector street, the minimum building setback from each street shall be thirty (30) feet and shall include a minimum landscaped setback of twenty (20) feet, except as provided in paragraph d. below. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

d.    Exceptions to minimum front yard setbacks:

(i)    Buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height: The front yard setback for buildings which are more than thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be established by the reviewing authority during development review to mitigate any adverse impacts on neighboring properties, but in no case shall be less than the minimum as set forth in subsection (C)(1)(a), (b), or (c) of this Section. As a guideline, the reviewing authority may require an additional one (1) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along an arterial or collector street, and one-half (1/2) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along a local street. This increased setback may be applied to individual building elements, rather than the entire building footprint, to lessen the effect of building mass abutting the street. Total building setback need not exceed seventy (70) feet regardless of height.

(ii)    Infill development: For proposed uses on lots or parcels within substantially developed industrial areas, in which a pattern of building setbacks has been established, the reviewing authority may establish setbacks which are compatible with adjacent uses as part of the development review and approval process, without a variance, provided that the minimum landscaped setback area adjacent to any street shall be no less than ten (10) feet.

e.    Fences, walls, and planters over three (3) feet in height shall maintain the setbacks set forth in this Section.

2.    Rear and side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Minimum rear and side yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-3 shall not be required, except in the following cases:

a.    Where a side or rear yard abuts an arterial street or expressway, the provisions of PMC 17.63.090(C)(1) shall apply.

b.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a freeway, the following shall apply:

i.    A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet shall be required, of which at least ten (10) feet must be landscaped, except where the Reviewing Authority determines that architectural enhancements and/or special site design features that are proposed warrants an exception to the standard setback. However, in no instance shall an approved building setback be less than ten (10) feet from the freeway right-of-way.

ii.    For rear and side yards abutting freeways where such yards are visible from the freeway travel lanes, landscaped areas adjacent to the freeway shall average twenty (20) feet, and be not less than ten (10) feet wide, and the entire freeway frontage of the site may be used to compute average landscaping.

c.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for residential uses, a building setback of no less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping adjacent to the residential property, as specified in PMC 17.83.030(C). For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setbacks from residential properties and landscaping, as needed to mitigate visual impacts from the height and mass of the building. In establishing this setback, sun angle should be considered to avoid allowing a tall industrial building to block solar access to an adjacent residential use.

d.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for less intensive non-residential uses, such as office, commercial, or public/institutional uses, a building setback of no less than ten (10) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of five (5) feet of landscaping adjacent to the neighboring property. For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setback and landscaping, as needed to mitigate impacts on less intensive uses, including visual and aesthetic impacts as well as solar access.

e.    The reviewing authority may require a greater setback where needed to mitigate impacts from noise or other operations of use.

3.    Projections (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Eaves, roof projections, awnings, stair landings, and similar architectural features may project into the building setback a maximum distance of five (5) feet, provided that such appendages are supported only at, or behind, the building setback line, and further provided such appendages do not project beyond the property line or into the public right-of-way.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed six (6) stories or seventy-five (75) feet, except as permitted through approval of a conditional use permit (CUP). In approving a CUP for additional building height, the reviewing authority shall find that adequate setbacks are provided on the project site to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties; that adequate fire protection is provided for the subject buildings; that all FAA clearance requirements are met; that maximum floor area ratio requirements are not exceeded; and that the height, bulk, massing, design, and placement of the building on the subject site will not adversely impact adjacent properties or the general public.

b.    The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

c.    No windows, balconies, stairways, or other areas where people could look out onto adjacent residential properties shall be permitted above the first floor on the side of a building which faces property designated for single-family use.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone M-3 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of ninety (90) percent of the lot area.

E.    Off-street parking and loading (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone M-3 shall have adequate off-street parking and loading facilities. Location and design of parking and loading facilities shall conform to the applicable General Plan policies and to Chapter 17.87 PMC.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, and shall be located and designed in accordance with applicable General Plan Community Design policies and PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Landscaping (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

At least ten (10) percent of the site shall be landscaped, in accordance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.010 and applicable General Plan policies, except that the reviewing authority may reduce this requirement to no less than five (5) percent of the site provided that areas visible from public rights-of-way and non-industrial uses or districts are adequately landscaped.

I.    Sidewalks (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Sidewalks shall be provided within the public right-of-way along all major and regional arterial streets, as depicted in the General Plan. Sidewalks may be required along secondary arterial, collector and local streets, or this requirement may be waived by the reviewing authority as part of the development review process.

J.    Special development standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    Each use in this Zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040 and the applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

3.    Any portion of a lot or parcel used for outdoor storage, loading, parking, or other permitted outside use shall be paved according to the standards provided in PMC 17.87.050(F), except that the reviewing authority may approve a reduction in the area required to be paved where it is determined that such area will be adequately screened and dust-proofed, and that construction of additional improvements is unnecessary.

4.    Screening shall be provide in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC and applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

5.    All business and manufacturing operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building unless specifically permitted by the reviewing authority and adequately screened from public view pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable General Plan policies.

6.    Architectural design shall conform to the applicable Community Design policies contained in the General Plan.

K.    Rail Service Standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Rail access and design requirements shall be as provided in PMC 17.61.090(K).

Chapter 17.64
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL (ZONE M-4)
17.64.010 Intent and Purpose
The Planned Industrial (M-4) Zone creates areas for light industrial and associated operations having high standards of performance. Operations are conducted primarily in enclosed buildings, with outdoor storage completely screened. The zone is intended for high-quality industrial parks or manufacturing areas which are developed pursuant to a comprehensive plan. Although smaller businesses are permitted in conjunction with larger developments in this zone, the intent is to achieve unified and cohesive employment centers rather than allowing piece-meal development or land subdivisions which could preclude future attraction of major uses.

17.64.020 Locational Criteria
The M-4 zone designation is appropriately located based on the following criteria.

A.    The area is or will be occupied by master-planned industrial or business parks containing a variety of research and development, fabrication, assembly and supportive uses.

B.    The area has access from highways or arterial streets, and such access does not traverse residential neighborhoods or land use designations.

C.    The area is or will be served with adequate infrastructure to support light industrial uses.

D.    The area has slopes of less than ten (10) percent; is free of environmental constraints to industrial development; is adequately buffered from residential and other less intensive use designations; and has parcels of adequate size and shape to accommodate industrial structures and all required setbacks and accessory uses. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

E.    Zone M-4 shall be consistent with the Business Park (BP) General Plan designation and policies for siting and development of industrial land uses.

17.64.030 Special Development Requirements
A.    In order to meet the intent and purpose of the M-4 zone as stated in PMC 17.64.010, provisions should be made in the planning process for integrated development plans which coordinate the efforts of multiple property owners and discourage piecemeal development. Master planning of M-4 zoned property is required to avoid development in a manner which would prevent or preclude future development of surrounding land in accordance with General Plan policies for Business Park development. Therefore, development in the M-4 zone shall be processed in accordance with a master plan, which may take one of the following forms:

1.    A Specific Plan or a Planned Development, pursuant to Chapter 17.28 PMC.

2.    A comprehensive Conditional Use Permit, pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC.

3.    An area plan or other comprehensive development program determined by the Planning Director to meet the intent of the M-4 zone.

B.    Regardless of the procedure by which a master plan for development is processed in the M-4 zone, such a plan shall address the following considerations:

1.    The area of the master plan should be based on logical planning boundaries and site conditions, rather than limited by individual parcel lines.

2.    The master plan should consider shared access, reciprocal parking, shared open space and amenity areas, the relationship of buildings to each other on adjacent parcels, and other design features to optimize use of the entire planning area as a functional unit.

3.    At a minimum the master plan should address conceptual building locations, heights and footprints; overall circulation, ingress and egress; parking layout; conceptual grading and drainage; and areas for common use.

4.    A statement of intent regarding building design and/or conceptual elevations should be provided to indicate architectural style, product types, form and materials.

5.    For larger projects, design guidelines should be developed to guide future individual building developers and maintain the integrity of the master plan concept.

C.    Future development within the area of a master plan may vary from the provisions of the plan, provided that the proposed project is compatible with the overall plan concept or develops an acceptable alternative master plan.

17.64.040 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.64.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.64.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Section 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-03, adopted by City Council August 2, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.64.070 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council Jun 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 16-01, adopted by City Council September 7, 2016. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.64.080 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the M-4 zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines

Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the C-3 zone, except that no amusement machines may be permitted within a convenience store.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

3.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Caretaker’s residence, where legally established use requires the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

D.    Information kiosk, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(E).

E.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

F.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

G.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

H.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

I.    Massage, when permitted with the primary business of a health club, fitness center and gymnasium, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

J.    Corporate Massage, when permitted with a primary industrial business, pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and 17.92.140. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

K.    Retail sales and service incidental to a principally permitted use are allowable provided that the following standards are met: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

1.    The operations are contained within the main structure which houses the primary use;

2.    Retail sales occupy no more than 15% of the total building square footage;

3.    No retail sales or display of merchandise occur(s) outside the structure(s); and

4.    All products offered for retail sales on the site are manufactured, warehoused, or assembled on the premises.

L.    Car washes, automated as an accessory use to a gas station or automobile service station. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

M.    Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems pursuant to PMC 17.99.010. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

17.64.090 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the M-4 zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.64.100 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone M-4 shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in Zone M-4 shall have a minimum lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet net, or the number following the zoning symbol (if any), whichever is greater.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise provided in Chapter 17.81 PMC, Lot Width.

C.    Building setbacks

1.    Front yard and street side yard (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Minimum front yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-4 shall be measured from the property line as follows:

a.    Arterial streets: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty (20) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along arterial streets as indicated in the General Plan Circulation Element, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section.

b.    Local and collector streets: A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping, shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

c.    Adjacent to residential: Where an industrial use is proposed to be separated from a residentially used or designated property by a local or collector street, the minimum building setback from each street shall be thirty (30) feet and shall include a minimum landscaped setback of twenty (20) feet, except as provided in subsection (C)(1)(d) of this Section. Where a sidewalk is not required, the landscaping requirement may be reduced by five (5) feet.

d.    Exceptions to minimum front yard setbacks:

(i)    Buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height: The front yard setback for buildings which are more than thirty-five (35) feet in height shall be established by the reviewing authority during development review to mitigate any adverse impacts on neighboring properties, but in no case shall be less than the minimum as set forth in subsection (C)(1)(a), (b), or (c) of this Section. As a guideline, the reviewing authority may require an additional one (1) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along an arterial or collector street, and one-half (1/2) foot of setback for every one (1) foot of height over 35 feet along a local street. This increased setback may be applied to individual building elements, rather than the entire building footprint, to lessen the effect of building mass abutting the street. Total building setback need not exceed seventy (70) feet regardless of height.

(ii)    Infill development: For proposed uses on lots or parcels within substantially developed industrial areas, in which a pattern of building setbacks has been established, the reviewing authority may establish setbacks which are compatible with adjacent uses as part of the development review and approval process, without a variance, provided that the minimum landscaped setback area adjacent to any street shall be no less than ten (10) feet.

e.    Fences, walls, and planters over three (3) feet in height shall maintain the setbacks set forth in this Section.

2.    Rear and side yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Minimum rear and side yard setbacks for uses in Zone M-4 shall not be required, except in the following cases:

a.    Where a side or rear yard abuts an arterial street or expressway, the provisions of PMC 17.64.100(C)(1) shall apply.

b.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a freeway, the following shall apply:

i.    A minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet shall be required, of which at least ten (10) feet must be landscaped, except where the Reviewing Authority determines that architectural enhancements and/or special site design features that are proposed warrants an exception to the standard setback. However, in no instance shall an approved building setback be less than ten (10) feet from the freeway right-of-way.

ii.    For rear and side yards abutting freeways where such yards are visible from the freeway travel lanes, landscaped areas adjacent to the freeway shall average twenty (20) feet, and be not less than ten (10) feet wide, and the entire freeway frontage of the site may be used to compute average landscaping.

c.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for residential uses, a building setback of no less than twenty (20) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping adjacent to the residential property, as specified in PMC 17.83.030(C). For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setbacks from residential properties and landscaping, as needed to mitigate visual impacts from the height and mass of the building. In establishing this setback, sun angle should be considered to avoid allowing a tall industrial building to block solar access to an adjacent residential use.

d.    Where a side or rear yard abuts a property used or designated for less intensive non-residential uses, such as office, commercial, or public/institutional uses, a building setback of no less than ten (10) feet shall be provided, with a minimum of five (5) feet of landscaping adjacent to the neighboring property. For buildings over thirty-five (35) feet in height, the reviewing authority may require additional building setback and landscaping, as needed to mitigate impacts on less intensive uses, including visual and aesthetic impacts as well as solar access.

e.    The reviewing authority may require a greater setback where needed to mitigate impacts from noise or other operations of use.

3.    Projections (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Eaves, roof projections, awnings, stair landings, and similar architectural features may project into the building setback a maximum distance of five (5) feet, provided that such appendages are supported only at, or behind, the building setback line, and further provided such appendages do not project beyond the property line or into the public right-of-way.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet, except as permitted through approval of a conditional use permit (CUP). In approving a CUP for additional building height, the reviewing authority shall find that adequate setbacks are provided on the project site to mitigate adverse impacts on adjacent properties; that adequate fire protection is provided for the subject buildings; that all FAA clearance requirements are met; that maximum floor area ratio requirements are not exceeded; and that the height, bulk, massing, design, and placement of the building on the subject site will not adversely impact adjacent properties or the general public.

b.    The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet.

c.    No windows, balconies, stairways, or other areas where people could look out onto adjacent residential properties shall be permitted above the first floor on the side of a building which faces property designated for single-family residential use.

2.    Maximum lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone M-4 shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of fifty (50) percent of the lot area.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed .5 (fifty percent), excluding amenities which may be approved by the reviewing authority, which may include, but are not limited to child care facilities and employee fitness areas.

E.    Off-street parking and loading (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone M-4 shall have adequate off-street parking and loading facilities. Location and design of parking and loading facilities shall conform to applicable General Plan policies and to Chapter 17.87 PMC.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, and shall be located and designed in accordance with applicable General Plan Community Design policies and PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Landscaping (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

At least ten (10) percent of the site shall be landscaped, in accordance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.010 and applicable General Plan policies.

I.    Sidewalks (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Sidewalks shall be provided within the public right-of-way along all major and regional arterial streets, as depicted in the General Plan. Sidewalks may be required along secondary arterial, collector and local streets, or this requirement may be waived by the reviewing authority as part of the development review process.

J.    Special development standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    Each use in this Zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040 and the applicable policies of the General Plan Community Design Element.

3.    Any portion of a lot or parcel used for outdoor storage, loading, parking, or other permitted outside use shall be paved according to the standards provided in PMC 17.87.050(F), except that the reviewing authority may approve a reduction in the area required to be paved where it is determined that such area will be adequately screened and dust-proofed, and that construction of additional improvements is unnecessary.

4.    All outdoor display and/or storage in Zone M-4 shall be located wholly within an enclosed area or shall be screened from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable General Plan policies. Where permitted, such outdoor areas shall be paved, landscaped and lighted in accordance with the applicable sections of this Ordinance.

5.    Screening shall be provided in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC.

6.    All business and manufacturing operations shall be conducted within an enclosed building unless specifically permitted by the reviewing authority and adequately screened from public view pursuant to Divisions 8 and 9 of this Zoning Ordinance and applicable General Plan policies.

7.    Architectural design shall conform to the applicable Community Design policies contained in the General Plan.

K.    Rail Service Standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Rail access and design requirements shall be provided in PMC 17.61.090(K).

Chapter 17.70
SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONES
17.70.010 Designation of Special Purpose Zones
As used in this Ordinance, special purpose zones mean Zones:

PF    (Public Facilities)

QR    (Quarry and Reclamation)

MX    (Mixed Use Overlay)

OR    (Open Space and Recreation)

C-D    (Downtown Commercial) (Zoning Ordinance amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council April 10, 1997.)

17.70.020 Intent and Purpose
The special purpose zones are established to provide for unique or specialized uses or standards that may not, as a matter of course, fall into one of the four major categories of zones, (agricultural, residential, commercial or manufacturing zones). The special purpose zones are also intended to aid in the conservation of resources, to encourage the development of recreational areas and to provide facilities or standards to complement other zones consistent with the goals, policies and objectives of the General Plan.

Chapter 17.71
PUBLIC FACILITIES (ZONE PF)
17.71.010 Intent and Purpose
The Public Facilities (PF) Zone is intended to provide for the continued use and the future development of public and quasi-public uses, including but not limited to schools, government administrative facilities, police and fire stations, libraries, park and recreational uses, community facilities and public open space areas. Due to the broad service function of this district and the difficulty of planning all public uses in advance, the PF zone may be designated throughout the planning area, provided the use does not conflict with other established uses and conforms to the General Plan.

17.71.020 Locational Criteria
A.    The PF zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria:

B.    The area is occupied, or will be occupied, by public or quasi-public uses or facilities.

C.    The area can physically accommodate the proposed use and adequate infrastructure is or will be available to support the intended use.

D.    The location shall be consistent with either the PF (Public Facilities) land use designation or OS (Open Space) designation on the General Plan land use map, and shall conform to applicable General Plan goals and policies

17.71.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.71.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.71.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.71.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.71.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the PF zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Accessory buildings or structures required for the storage of equipment or uses lawfully permitted.

B.    Boat rentals.

C.    Composting Facility, provided that all composting activities are conducted in an enclosed structure or vessel and that biosolid materials or sludge are not a constituent component of the material to be composted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.)

D.    Concessions, gift shops and similar limited retail sale of souvenirs and sundries related to the primary use.

E.    Day care facility.

F.    First aid stations.

G.    Information kiosk, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

H.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

I.    Restaurants and other eating establishments; refreshment stands for the sale of ice cream, beverages and similar items.

J.    Other uses which function as incidental to a permitted primary use and which are similar to and not more objectionable that those accessory uses specifically listed above, as determined by the reviewing authority.

17.71.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare that those uses specifically listed in the PF Zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.71.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone PF shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

1.    Each lot or parcel of land in Zone PF shall have a minimum lot area sufficient to accommodate all required parking, setbacks, landscaping, loading, trash enclosures and access requirements.

B.    Lot width

1.    None required except as other wise provided in this Ordinance.

C.    Yards

1.    Front yard

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone PF shall have a front yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth.

2.    Side yards

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone PF shall have a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet in depth, except:

a.    Where a public facility abuts single family residentially designated property, a minimum 20-foot building setback shall be required from said property line.

3.    Rear yard

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone PF shall have a rear yard of not less than ten (10) feet in depth, except:

a.    Where a public facility abuts single family residentially designated property, a minimum 20-foot building setback shall be required from said property line.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet. The maximum height of accessory structures shall not exceed one story or seventeen (17) feet.

2.    Lot coverage

No lot parcel of land in Zone PF shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of ninety (90) percent.

3.    Maximum floor area ratio

The ratio of total floor area to total lot area shall not exceed 1.0 (one hundred percent).

E.    Off-street parking and loading

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone PF shall have off-street parking and loading facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

F.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

G.    Trash enclosures

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, in accordance with PMC 17.85.010.

H.    Special development standards

1.    Each use in this zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

3.    In the event that the permitted or conditionally permitted uses as listed in this Division are not conducted wholly within an enclosed building, the lot or parcel of land devoted to the use shall be paved according to the standards provided in PMC 17.87.050(F), except that the Director may approve a reduction in the area required to be paved where it is determined that such area will be adequately screened and dust-proofed, and that construction of additional improvements is unnecessary.

4.    All outdoor display and/or storage in Zone PF shall be located wholly within an enclosed area or shall be screened from public rights-of-way, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to an approved development plan. Where permitted, such outdoor areas shall be paved, landscaped and lighted in accordance with the applicable sections of this Ordinance.

5.    All vehicle repair work shall be conducted in an enclosed building only.

6.    Landscaping and screening shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC.

Chapter 17.72
QUARRY AND RECLAMATION (ZONE QR)
17.72.010 Intent and Purpose
The Quarry and Reclamation (QR) Zone is established to preserve those areas of the City which have been designated by the State of California as Significant Mineral Resource Areas, or which possess market grade mineral resources, in order to ensure long-term availability of these sites for the extraction and processing of rock, sand, gravel, and similar materials. Safeguards and controls are provided to minimize the possibility of quarry and related operations detrimentally affecting adjacent properties.

17.72.020 Locational Criteria
The QR zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria:

A.    The area has been designated by the state as possessing important mineral resources.

B.    The area has been subject to on-going or historic mining activity.

C.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan land use designation of MRE (Mineral Resource Extraction).

D.    The area can physically accommodate mineral extraction activities and is supported by adequate infrastructure.

E.    The area is served by designated truck routes along arterial roadways.

17.72.030 Special Requirements
In order to comply with the provisions of the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (SMARA; P.R.C. Sec. 2710 et seq.), P.R.C. Section 2207, and Title 14, Division 8, Section 3500 et seq. Of the California Code of Regulations, all mining related activities covered under SMARA will require approval of a reclamation plan, pursuant to PMC 17.102.020.

17.72.040 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.72.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.72.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.72.070 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.72.080 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the QR Zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land, are incidental to, and do not substantially alter the character of the permitted principal use.

A.    Equipment and supply storage.

B.    Incidental sales of gravel, sand, decorative stone, or other mineral materials.

C.    Office and repair shop structures.

D.    Scales or weighing equipment.

E.    Truck storage.

F.    Other uses deemed by the reviewing authority which function as incidental to a permitted primary use and which are similar to and not more objectionable than those accessory uses specifically listed above.

17.72.090 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the QR Zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.72.100 Standards of Development
Property in Zone QR shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land created in the QR Zone shall have a minimum lot area of not less than five (5) acres.

B.    Lot width

None required except as otherwise required in this Ordinance.

C.    Yards

There shall be no excavations or structures within fifty (50) feet of:

1.    Any public street, highway or flood control easement.

2.    Any property in any zone other than Zone QR, except as provided in PMC 17.72.100(F)(2)(f).

D.    Building height and coverage

1.    The ratio of total floor area to total lot area in the PF Zone shall not exceed .25 (twenty-five percent).

2.    The height of a structure within the QR Zone shall not exceed one hundred (100) feet.

E.    Off-street parking and loading

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone QR shall have off-street parking and loading facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

F.    Special development and performance standards

1.    Required Signage: The outer boundaries of all property used for quarring operations, involving the extraction and processing of rock, sand, gravel, decomposed granite, clay or similar materials shall be posted with signs carrying the message “QUARRY ZONE” in letters not less than four (4) inches in height, and in letters not less than one (1) inch in height, the message “This property may be used for the extraction and processing of rock, sand, gravel, decomposed granite, clay and similar materials, by Ordinance, City of Palmdale.”

These signs shall be posted not more than five hundred (500) feet apart, with signs placed at each change in direction of the boundary lines of the property and displayed in such manner as to give reasonable notice to passers-by of the message contained thereon.

2.    All mining and quarrying operations, rock crushing plants and aggregate dryers shall be established and operated in accordance with the following standards:

a.    All equipment and premises employed in conjunction with any of the uses permitted in the QR Zone shall, insofar as is practicable and feasible, be constructed, operated and maintained so as to suppress noise and vibration which are or may be injurious or annoying to persons living in the vicinity.

b.    All private roads shall be kept wetted while being used or shall be oiled or hard-surfaced and maintained so as to prevent the emanation of dust.

c.    All private access roads leading off any public street or highway onto property used for any purpose permitted in this zone shall be paved, with asphalt or concrete surfacing not less than three (3) inches in thickness, for the first fifty (50) feet of said access road.

d.    No excavation or production from an open pit quarry shall be permitted which creates a slope steeper than one (1) foot horizontally to one (1) foot vertically.

e.    No excavation or production shall be permitted nearer than fifty (50) feet of the boundary of the QR Zone.

f.    No production shall be permitted nearer than fifty (50) feet of any lot line of adjoining property in any zone or district unless the written consent of the owner in fee of such property is first secured and recorded in the Los Angeles County Recorder’s Office.

g.    Prior to the start of any quarry operations the outer boundaries of the entire property shall be continuously enclosed by a six (6) foot high fence. Where adjacent to a public street or residentially zoned area, required fencing shall be a view obstructing fence, wall or landscaped berm. Elsewhere, the fence may be constructed of chain link, provided however that the reviewing authority may, without notice or hearing, grant a modification to the provisions of this subsection where:

(i)    Such property is located in the bed or flood channel of a wash or water course and such fencing would be impractical, or

(ii)    Topographic features, locational factors or other conditions create an unnecessary hardship or unreasonable situation making it impractical to require compliance with the fencing requirements contained in this subsection.

All such requests for modification shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.102 PMC.

h.    All uses permitted in the QR Zone which are not conducted within an enclosed building shall confine all operations on the property to the hours between 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, except in cases of public emergency or building repairs as are required to be made.

i.    Before commencing operation in any quarry the owner or operator shall secure insurance, to the extent of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000), against liability in tort arising from the production, activities or operations incident thereto conducted or carried on under or by virtue of any law or ordinance, and such insurance shall be kept in full force and effect during the period of such operations.

j.    Comply with the provisions of the State Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA), including preparation of reclamation plans and annual reports, provision of financial assurances, and the conducting of annual inspections, as specified in Chapter 17.102 PMC.

G.    Any signage, fencing, landscaping, parking, loading, trash enclosures or similar requirements shall conform to the applicable provisions of Division 8.

Chapter 17.73
MIXED USE OVERLAY (MX) ZONE
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-1 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

17.73.010 Intent and Purpose
A.    The Mixed Use (MX) Overlay Zone is established to facilitate the coexistence of residential and commercial land uses for the establishment and maintenance of dual use properties in appropriate areas. The designation is intended as a modifier to an underlying commercial zone, which would permit construction and operation of mixed residential/commercial projects within a common area. Where applied, the Mixed Use Overlay (MX) Zone is intended to enliven the business district in which it is applied by bringing additional residents into the business area during the evenings and weekends, and to provide an opportunity for downtown merchants, artisans and craftsmen to live where they work.

17.73.020 Locational Criteria
The MX overlay zone is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is substantially occupied by a mixture of single family or multiple family dwellings, commercial retail storefront shops, or general or professional office space.

B.    The nature of the existing and planned commercial uses are such that they are likely to be compatible with future residential uses.

C.    The area can physically accommodate all permitted uses and the required parking, loading, circulation and landscape requirements, and is supported by adequate infrastructure.

D.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan commercial siting criteria and other applicable policies, and the land use designations of DC (Downtown Commercial), CC (Community Commercial) or OC (Office Commercial).

17.73.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Any uses listed as permitted without Planning Department approval within the zone(s) to which this overlay is attached shall also be permitted within the MX Overlay Zone without Planning Department approval.

17.73.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. Any uses listed as permitted subject to administrative approval within the zone(s) to which this overlay is attached shall also be permitted within the MX Overlay Zone subject to administrative approval. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.73.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses permitted subject to Site Plan Review approval within the underlying zone(s) to which this overlay is attached shall also be permitted within the MX Overlay Zone subject to Site Plan Review approval. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.73.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.73.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses are permitted in the MX overlay zone.

A.    Any accessory use or structure permitted within a single family residence in the R-1 Zone shall be permitted for a single family residence within the MX Overlay Zone, subject to the applicable requirements specified in Chapter 17.41 PMC, Zone R-1.

B.    Any accessory use or structure permitted within the R-2 Zone shall be permitted for a multiple unit within the MX Overlay Zone, subject to the applicable requirements specified in Chapter 17.42 PMC, Zone R-2.

C.    Any accessory use or structure permitted by the base zoning designations shall be permitted within the MX Overlay Zone, subject to the requirements specified in the base zone district.

17.73.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the MX Overlay Zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.73.090 Standards of Development
Any projects in the MX Overlay Zone shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Except as specified in this Section or as may be approved in accordance with a Comprehensive Development Plan (Chapter 17.28 PMC), any commercial office or retail use, or any public, quasi-public or institutional use, shall be developed in conformance with the applicable standards contained in base commercial zone.

B.    Any alteration to an existing single family residential use shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Section.

C.    Any alteration to an existing multiple family use shall conform to the applicable requirements of this Section.

D.    The following standards shall apply to construction of any new residential structures within the MX Overlay Zone or to alterations of existing units as deemed applicable by the reviewing authority.

1.    Construction of new residential units or conversion of existing structures to residential units shall only be approved in conjunction with a mixed use project.

2.    The proportion of residential to commercial floor area within a mixed use project shall not exceed a ratio of 2:1.

3.    Maximum residential density within any mixed use project shall not exceed 10 dwelling units per acre, with the exception of qualifying projects for which a density bonus agreement is approved.

4.    For those areas with base zoning designations primarily characterized by retail sales and service activities (i.e. C-3, C-D), residential units should be located above or behind the principle commercial use, as viewed from an abutting street or pedestrian paseo.

5.    For those areas with base zoning designations primarily characterized by general or professional office uses (C-2), no vertical or horizontal separation between residential uses and office uses is required.

6.    Development standards for residential uses within the Mixed Use Overlay Zone shall be as follows:

a.    Required lot area, lot width and lot depth shall be that listed for the underlying commercial zone.

b.    Maximum building height and minimum building setbacks shall be that listed for the underlying commercial zone.

c.    Minimum building separation between commercial and residential structures shall be ten (10) feet unless attached.

d.    A minimum of 200 sq. ft. of usable private open space, consisting of a private yard, patio, deck, balcony or a combination of the above, shall be provided for each single family unit. Within multi-family residential projects, a minimum of 100 sq. ft. of usable private open space shall be provided.

e.    For projects consisting of more than ten (10) residential units, an area not less than the equivalent of 20 percent of the residential building area shall consist of areas devolted to common recreational or social amenities, including, but not limited to recreation rooms, day care facilities, weight rooms, barbecue areas, etc.

f.    A minimum of one (1) dedicated enclosed parking space shall be required per residential unit. Residential garages shall not be counted towards meeting minimum commercial parking requirements For purposes of this Section, dedicated parking spaces within a parking structure will meet this requirement.

g.    Except where preempted by the development standards contained in this Section, single family residential units within the MX Overlay Zone shall conform with the standards listed in PMC 17.41.090(G), and multiple family housing within the MX Overlay Zone shall conform with the standards provided in PMC 17.42.090(G)(2).

Chapter 17.74
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION (ZONE OR)
17.74.010 Intent and Purpose
The Open Space and Recreation (OR) Zone is intended to preserve areas for passive or active open space and recreational uses, and to limit development in areas which are not suited for permanent occupancy or intensive uses due to some specific characteristic of the land. Such lands may be subject to environmental hazards, may contain resources requiring preservation, or may be suitable for recreational uses. Typical uses within Zone OR include, but are not limited to, natural areas, golf courses, parks and other recreational facilities and open space areas. The OR zone may be designated throughout the planning area, provided the use does not conflict with other established uses.

17.74.020 Locational Criteria
The OR zone designation is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is occupied, or will be occupied, by private, public or quasi-public open space or recreational facilities.

B.    The area may be shown in the General Plan for recreational use, or on the General Plan Overlay Map as possessing sensitive environmental resources.

C.    The area may be subject to environmental hazards which limit or prohibit the use of the area for permanent occupancy.

D.    The area has adequate public services to accommodate the proposed use on a given site.

E.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan OS (Open Space) Land Use designation.

17.74.030 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.74.040 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.74.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.74.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-06, adopted by City Council February 12, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.74.070 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the OR zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Accessory buildings or structures required for the storage of equipment or uses lawfully permitted.

B.    Boat rentals.

C.    Caretakers’ residence, where legally established use requirements the continuous supervision of a caretaker or superintendent, if occupied only by such persons and their families, pursuant to the standards contained in PMC 17.91.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

D.    Composting Facility, provided that all composting activities are conducted in an enclosed structure or vessel and that biosolid materials or sludge are not a constituent component of the material to be composted. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-1, adopted by City Council August 13, 1997.)

E.    Concessions, gift shops, and similar limited retail sale of souvenirs and sundries related to the primary use.

F.    Day care facility.

G.    First aid stations.

H.    Information kiosk, pursuant to PMC 17.88.050(F).

I.    Restaurants and other eating establishments; refreshment stands for the sale of ice cream, beverages and similar items.

J.    Other uses which function as incidental to a permitted primary use and which are similar to and not more objectionable than those accessory uses specifically listed above, as determined by the reviewing authority.

17.74.080 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the OR Zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120.

17.74.090 Standards of Development
Premises in Zone OR shall be subject to the development standards prescribed in this Section and those standards contained in Division 8, General Standards of Development.

A.    Lot area

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone OR shall have a minimum lot area sufficient to accommodate all required parking, setbacks, landscaping, loading, trash enclosures and access requirements.

B.    Lot width

1.    Front yard

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone OR shall have a front yard of not less than twenty-five (25) feet in depth.

2.    Side yards

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone OR shall have a side yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth, except:

a.    Where a public facility abuts single family residentially designated property, a minimum 25-foot building setback shall be required from said property line.

3.    Rear yard

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone OR shall have a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth, except:

a.    Where a public facility abuts single family residentially designated property, a minimum 25-foot building setback shall be required from said property line.

4.    Setbacks for accessory structures

Setbacks for accessory structures shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.82.020.

C.    Building height and coverage

1.    Building height

The maximum height of a primary or secondary structure, as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020, shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet, except with the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit. The height limits specified in this paragraph shall not apply to lighting for outdoor recreational facilities which shall be subject to the height limits specified in PMC 17.86.030(D). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-04, adopted by City Council June 11, 2003.)

2.    Lot coverage

No lot or parcel of land in Zone OR shall have a lot coverage by buildings or structures in excess of 25 (twenty-five percent).

D.    Off-street parking and loading

Each lot or parcel of land in Zone OR shall have off-street parking and loading facilities as prescribed in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking and Loading.

E.    Signs

Signs shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

F.    Trash enclosures

An adequate number of trash enclosures shall be provided on site to meet the needs of each development, in accordance with PMC 17.85.010.

G.    Special development standards

1.    Each use in this zone shall be established and operated in accordance with Chapter 17.84 PMC, Performance Standards.

2.    Fences and walls shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in PMC 17.83.030 and 17.86.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

3.    In the event that the permitted or conditionally permitted uses as listed in this Division are not conducted wholly within an enclosed building, the lot or parcel of land devoted to the use shall be paved according to the standards provided in PMC 17.87.050(F), except that the Director may approve a reduction in the area required to be paved where it is determined that such area will be adequately screened and dust-proofed, and that construction of additional improvements is unnecessary.

4.    All outdoor display and/or storage in Zone OR shall be located wholly within an enclosed area or shall be screened from public rights-of-way, unless otherwise permitted pursuant to an approved development plan. Where permitted, such outdoor areas shall be paved, landscaped and lighted in accordance with the applicable sections of this Ordinance.

5.    Landscaping and screening shall be in conformance with the standards prescribed in Chapter 17.86 PMC.

Chapter 17.75
DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL (ZONE C-D)
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-1 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996)

17.75.010 Intent and Purpose
The Downtown Commercial (C-D) Zone is established to implement the policies and design guidelines described in the Downtown Revitalization Plan. The downtown Commercial Zone is intended to create a pedestrian friendly environment which encourages people to stay and shop, dine and socialize in downtown Palmdale. The pedestrian zone between the street curb line and the entry facades of adjacent buildings should create a series of layers and a variety of visually interesting features that encourage visitors to explore and circulate in and around the retail venues.

17.75.020 Locational Criteria
The Downtown Commercial (C-D) Zone is appropriately located based upon the following criteria.

A.    The area is occupied or will be occupied by stores and businesses which provide a wide variety of goods and services to the adjacent neighborhoods, those employed in the downtown area, and the community at large. The totality of uses within the downtown area should create a lively shopping environment which is primarily pedestrian in nature, particularly within the ground floor store front shops facing the abutting streets or pedestrian paseos.

B.    The area is located within reasonable walking distance of one of the traditional downtown arterial corridors, such as Palmdale Boulevard or Sierra Highway.

C.    The area can physically accommodate the intensity of development necessary to support an active pedestrian shopping environment as well as typical accessory uses such as mixed residential uses where appropriate, with infrastructure of adequate capacity to serve all anticipated uses.

D.    The location shall be consistent with the General Plan Land Use Designation of Downtown Commercial for those areas where the locational criteria listed above are also satisfied.

17.75.030 Special Development Requirements
The following special development requirements shall apply to property within the Downtown Commercial (C-D) Zone.

A.    Standards of Development

1.    Lot Size and Lot Width. Minimum lot size and lot width within the C-D Zone shall be the same as that required for the C-3 Zone.

2.    Building Setbacks

a.    Front: No minimum front yard setback is required, except as required in Chapter 17.83 PMC, or as needed to maintain adequate line-of-sight distance for traffic safety. Maximum front yard setback from the primary building facade footprint shall be 5 feet. Alcoves for doorways, and other types of minor architectural features may be set back a maximum of 7 feet from property line. Maximum front setback limitations shall not be applicable to outdoor dining areas or pedestrian seating areas. All required minimum and maximum building setbacks shall be measured from ultimate property line location. Maximum building setbacks may be increased upon a determination by the City Traffic/Transportation Engineer that additional setback distance is necessary to maintain adequate line-of-site distance for traffic safety in instances where driveways, streets or alleyways occur adjacent to existing or proposed buildings.

b.    Side: None required, except as described in Chapter 17.83 PMC. Downtown commercial structures located on street corners shall maintain the front yard setbacks as described above along both street frontages.

c.    Rear: None required except as described in Chapter 17.83 PMC.

3.    Building Height. The maximum height of primary and secondary structures as measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020 shall not exceed two (2) stories or thirty-five (35) feet, excepting that area to the west of the extended alignment of 9th Street East and north of Avenue Q-6 in which the maximum building height shall not exceed four (4) stories or fifty (50) feet.

4.    Projecting Architectural Features. Cantilevored awnings, canopies or other non-primary architectural features may be permitted to project over the public sidewalk, provided that the sidewalk is not located within a state highway right-of-way, subject to the following restrictions:

a.    A minimum of seven (7) feet vertical clearance shall be maintained.

b.    Projecting architectural features may project a maximum of six (6) feet, and must be set back a minimum of two feet from the face of curb. In those areas where curbs do not exist, projecting architectural features must be set back a minimum of two feet from the street side edge of the sidewalk.

c.    Unless approved as a component of an overall project entitlement, a request for approval of projecting architectural features shall be processed in accordance with PMC 17.26.040, Minor Modification, subject to review and approval of the Planning Director.

d.    Projecting architectural features shall present a consistent theme in terms of style, size, colors and materials within each development, and complementary to adjacent developments.

5.    Signage. All of the commercial signage provisions listed in Chapter 17.88 PMC shall apply, in addition to, or as modified by the following:

a.    Commercial storefronts within the downtown revitalization area shall be permitted under-canopy signage or small projecting signs for those centers with no canopies. Under-canopy/projecting signs shall be limited to one sign per business, a maximum of 4 sq. ft. per side and shall maintain the minimum distance and clearance requirements listed for architectural projections C.1 and C.2 above. Under-canopy or projecting signs shall be non-illuminated, and fabricated of routed or sandblasted wood, unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director. The overall style and color of under-canopy/projecting signs shall be consistent within the Downtown Commercial (C-D) Zone.

b.    Pedestrian oriented downtown establishments (businesses which are not separated from the public sidewalk by a parking lot), shall be permitted to display one free standing portable sign adjacent to, or within the public right of way subject to the following restrictions:

(i)    Signs within the public right of way must not disrupt vehicular or pedestrian access and may not in any way impede handicap accessibility or parking;

(ii)    Freestanding portable signs shall not impede adequate line of sight for traffic safety, and are subject to removal or relocation as deemed necessary by the City Traffic/Transportation Engineer.

(iii)    No more than one (1) portable freestanding sign may be displayed by each establishment. The maximum permitted area of freestanding portable signs shall be five (5) square feet per side (maximum 2 sides) or a height of five feet.

(iv)    Freestanding portable signs shall be placed along the frontage of the business which it advertises, and shall not be placed in such a way as to block permanent signs or to significantly block the view of signage of any adjacent business.

c.    Directory signs shall be permitted at paseo entrances and within municipal parking areas. Directory signage shall not exceed thirty (30) square feet or five (5) feet in height. Within the downtown commercial area, directory signs may be either wall mounted or ground mounted. Location and number of Directory signs shall be subject to approval of a Directory Sign program by the Planning Director pursuant to PMC 17.88.040.

d.    Information kiosks shall be permitted in the Downtown Commercial (C-D) zone per the standards specified in PMC 17.88.050(F).

e.    (Reserved For Future Development Of Off-Site Business Directional Sign Program)

6.    Parking.

a.    The Planning Director may approve a lessor amount of on-site parking than that listed in Chapter 17.87 PMC subject to approval of a Downtown Parking Reduction Study as outlined in Chapter 17.23 PMC, Minor Exception.

b.    The ten (10%) percent limitation on locating parking spaces in the rear lot area shall not apply within the Downtown Commercial (C-D) Zone.

c.    No requirement shall exist within the Downtown Commercial (C-D) zone for parking to be located on the same lot or a contiguous lot to the use being served, provided that the location of the shared parking is not greater than 500 feet from the use being served.

d.    Loading zone requirements shall consist of those listed in Chapter 17.87 PMC except where modified in conjunction with a Downtown Parking Reduction Study as outlined in PMC 17.23.030(B)(12).

7.    Pedestrian Amenities. Provision of pedestrian amenities shall be required with new construction and for major modification to existing construction, except where it is determined by the reviewing authority that location of any such improvements on the site is infeasible. Pedestrian amenities shall consist of one or more of the following in keeping with the quality and character of designs as described in the Downtown Revitalization Plan:

Arcades

Landscaped Open Spaces

Outdoor dining facilities

Outdoor litter receptacles

Paseos

Plazas

Seating Areas

Shade trees

Shade structures

Visual Focal Points

Wind sheltering devices

The number, size, design and type of amenities required on each site will be subject to the review and approval of the reviewing authority for each project.

8.    Building Design. All new project proposals and major modifications to existing structures shall be reviewed for consistency with the architectural guidelines and standards contained within Division 8 of the Downtown Revitalization Plan and the Community Design Element of the General Plan.

9.    Outdoor Display. Outdoor display of merchandise shall be permitted subject to the following restrictions:

a.    Displayed merchandise shall consist of new merchandise only.

b.    Displayed merchandise shall not be located within the public right-of-way.

c.    Displayed merchandise shall not obstruct handicap or fire department access to any doorway or walkway.

d.    Displayed merchandise shall not extend beyond the frontage of the business displaying such merchandise.

e.    Displayed merchandise shall not be placed in such a way as to significantly block visibility of the merchandise or signage of an adjacent business.

17.75.040 Uses Permitted Without Planning Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.75.050 Uses Permitted Subject to Administrative Approval by the Director
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.75.060 Uses Permitted Subject to Site Plan Review Approval
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses are permitted subject to the applicable provisions of the PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.75.070 Uses Permitted Subject to Approval of a Conditional Use Permit
Refer to Chapter 17.76 PMC, Land Use Matrix. All uses require approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.75.080 Accessory Uses and Structures Permitted
The following accessory uses and structures are permitted in the C-D zone, provided that such uses are established on the same lot or parcel of land as the permitted principal use, and that such accessory uses are incidental to and do not substantially alter the character of the principal use.

A.    Amusement machines. Not more than four (4) amusement machines may be permitted as an accessory use within a primary use in the C-D zone.

B.    Areas designated and designed for the temporary storage of trash and recyclable materials, including the following:

1.    Recycling containers, pursuant to PMC 17.85.030.

2.    Reverse vending machines, pursuant to PMC 17.97.040.

3.    Small collection facilities, pursuant to PMC 17.97.050.

4.    Trash compactors, pursuant to PMC 17.85.020.

C.    Car washes, automated, as an accessory use to a gas station. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-01, adopted by City Council November 8, 2000.)

D.    Health facilities, mobile.

E.    Newspaper dispensing devices, pursuant to PMC 12.08.030.

F.    Services provided to meet the needs of employees on site, including employee cafeterias, day care centers, health clubs, exercise tracks, gymnasiums or work out rooms, showers and similar uses. For purposes of calculating permitted floor area ratio, these uses may be exempted from the calculation.

G.    Signs, as permitted by Chapter 17.88 PMC.

H.    Structures and features associated with pedestrian or customer seating or amenity areas, including but not limited to gazebos, arcades, fountains, seats or benches, outdoor eating areas, trash receptacles, art works or other landscape focal points, pursuant to PMC 17.92.020.

I.    Telephones, public, located within the building of a primary use. No freestanding outdoor telephones or telephone booths shall be permitted.

J.    Wire services for money transfer and Automated Teller Machines (ATM’s).

17.75.090 Similar Uses Permitted by Planning Director Determination
The Planning Director may determine that an unlisted use is similar to and not more objectionable to the general welfare than those uses specifically listed in the C-D zone, pursuant to PMC 17.24.120. Any such determination shall be evaluated for conformance with the Downtown Revitalization Plan.

17.75.100 Standards of Development
Ground level store front shops facing public streets shall be occupied by retail users, restaurants, entertainment uses, service oriented commercial uses or other activity producing uses. Within two story structures, general and professional offices should be located primarily on the second story within the downtown district.

Chapter 17.76
LAND USE MATRIX
17.76.010 Land Use Matrix  
 

 

 

 

 

 

CUP = Conditional Use Permit

Table A

 

 

 

 

 

SPR = Site Plan Review Approval

 

 

 

 

 

 

AA = Administrative Approval by the Director

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Agricultural and Residential Zoning Districts

 

 

 

 

 

P = Permitted

 

Permit Required by District

 

 

- = Not Permitted

Land Use

A-1

R-1

R-2

R-3

R-4

Specific Use Regulations

RESIDENTIAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory dwelling units on individual parcels containing one (1) single-family dwelling unit

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

17.41.090(G), 17.91.030

Agricultural workers’ living quarters for persons employed and deriving the major portion of their income from employment on the premises

SPR

-

-

-

-

 

Boarding houses and Rooming houses

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

 

Conversion of apartment complexes from rental to individual ownership (i.e., condominium or co-op), pursuant to the applicable provisions of the City’s Subdivision Ordinance

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Dormitories

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

 

Guest ranches

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

Manufactured home parks and subdivisions

-

-

-

CUP

-

 

Modification of front yard landscaping consistent with the provisions of PMC 17.41.090(H) and 17.86.010 for any existing single-family residence constructed prior to the adoption of Ordinance No. 1362 on October 15, 2008, and any property that has a recorded declaration of substandard property with regard to landscaping

-

P

-

-

-

17.41.090(H), 17.86.010

Multiple family residential uses consisting of five (5) or more residential dwelling units on one (1) lot or project area, including but not limited to apartments, condominiums, and townhouses

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

 

Multiple family residential uses consisting of four (4) or fewer residential dwelling units on one (1) lot or project area, including but not limited to apartments, condominiums, and townhouses

-

-

AA

AA

AA

 

Single-family detached dwellings on lots of a minimum seven thousand (7,000) square feet in area, except that single-family dwellings may be permitted on existing lots of record

-

AA

AA

-

-

17.41.090

Single-family dwellings on lots of a minimum of one (1) net acre in area, except that single-family dwellings may be permitted on existing lots of record

AA

-

-

-

-

17.41.090

Sober living homes

-

AA

AA

-

-

17.91.130

Transitional housing and supportive housing located within four (4) or fewer residential dwelling units, subject to the requirements of Government Code Section 65651

-

AA

AA

AA

-

 

Transitional housing and supportive housing located within five (5) or more residential dwelling units, subject to the requirements of Government Code Section 65651

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

COMMERCIAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

Country clubs

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

 

Bed and breakfast establishments

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Cottage food operations

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

17.91.020

Day care facilities, commercial, including preschools and nursery schools

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Day care facilities, large family

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

17.26.090

Fireworks stands

-

-

AA

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(1)

Golf courses and driving ranges

CUP

-

-

-

-

17.94.020

Golf courses and related facilities, except miniature golf and standalone driving ranges

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

17.94.020

Home occupation permits

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

17.26.060

Riding academies and commercial stables

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PUBLIC, QUASI-PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL

 

 

 

 

 

 

Alcohol and drug treatment facilities

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

17.91.140

Convalescent facilities

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

 

Large Residential Care Facilities, also known as Assisted Living Facilities

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

17.91.110

Museums, cultural heritage areas, nature exhibits with trails and similar uses

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

Schools from kindergarten through grade twelve (12), excluding trade or commercial schools

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Veterinary clinics

CUP

-

-

-

-

17.92.040

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PARKS AND OPEN SPACE

 

 

 

 

 

 

Camps, youth

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

Parks and playgrounds (excluding lighted play fields)

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

 

Playgrounds and playfields, lighted

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Residential sports courts

AA

AA

AA

AA

-

17.91.090

Riding, hiking and bicycle trails and appurtenant facilities

P

P

P

P

P

 

Tennis courts or play courts, public or private, lighted

-

-

CUP

-

-

17.91.090

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION AND SALES

 

 

 

 

 

 

In-tract model home complex

AA

AA

AA

AA

-

17.27.030(B)(5)

Off-site model home sales

-

SPR

SPR

CUP

-

17.27.030(C)(1)

Storage, temporary, of materials and equipment used in construction of public or private improvements; provided, that all such items are stored on the construction site and pose no traffic hazard or other adverse impact on surrounding properties

P

P

P

P

P

 

Temporary office modules on active construction sites

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(4)

Trailer coaches, motorhomes or manufactured homes on active construction sites

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(3)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

UTILITIES

 

 

 

 

 

 

Electric distribution substations, electric transmission substations and electric generating facilities

CUP

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

17.95.010

Minor communication facility

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

17.95.040

Road construction and maintenance yards

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

Small residential wind generator systems (SRWGS)

AA

-

-

-

-

17.99.030

Small-scale solar energy systems as an accessory use on a parcel containing a permitted principal use

P

P

P

P

-

 

Temporary and permanent facilities for detention, retention and conveyance of stormwater runoff

P

P

P

P

P

 

Utility facilities, building and equipment, including but not limited to water, natural gas, and sewage facilities, but excluding sewage pump stations or treatment plants and major communication facilities

CUP

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

17.95.040

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

OTHER

 

 

 

 

 

 

Additional permitted animals in excess of the allowed number

AA

-

-

-

-

17.26.080, 17.89.030

Cemeteries, excluding mortuaries

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

Clubs (fraternal) and lodges

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

Convents, monasteries and retreat centers

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

 

Exotic animals

AA

-

-

-

-

17.26.070, 17.89.030

Field, tree, bush, berry and row crops, including nursery stock; provided, that no sludge and/or biosolid material shall be applied to any land as a soil amendment

P

-

-

-

-

 

Keeping of permitted animals as an accessory use; provided, that the ratio of such animals to the total land area of all such parcels does not exceed the ratios specified for animals as an accessory use as specified within PMC 17.89.030; that any animal enclosures meet the required setbacks as specified within PMC 17.89.030; and that all such animals are predominantly kept or maintained for the private use of members of the family residing in the primary residence

P

P

P

P

P

17.89.030

Kennels, catteries or other commercial boarding facility for small animals

CUP

-

-

-

-

17.92.030

Religious assembly uses

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

17.94.010

Solid fill projects

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

Special events

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

17.27.030(A)

Temporary uses

-

AA

-

-

-

17.27.030

Transit-related facilities, including train boarding areas (such as for Metrolink) and park-and-ride lots

CUP

-

-

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

CUP = Conditional Use Permit

Table B

 

 

 

 

 

 

SPR = Site Plan Review Approval

Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial, Industrial and Special Zoning Districts

 

 

 

 

 

 

AA = Administrative Approval by the Director

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

P = Permitted

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

- = Not Permitted

 

Permit Required by District

 

* Any uses listed as allowed within the zones to which this overlay is attached shall also be allowed within the MX Overlay Zone per the applicable approval type.

 

Land Use

C-1

C-2

C-3

C-4

C-5

M-1

M-2

M-3

M-4

PF

QR

MX

OR

C-D

Specific Use Regulations

AUTOMOTIVE SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Automobile and truck repair, general

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Automobile and truck repair, heavy

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Automobile and truck repair, light

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Automobile rental and leasing

-

CUP

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Automobile repair, general

-

-

CUP

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Automobile repair, light

CUP

CUP

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Automobile repair, light or general, as an accessory use to a department store, general merchandise store or warehouse retail store

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Automobile service stations/Gas stations

CUP

CUP

SPR

CUP

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

CUP

-

-

*

-

CUP

17.92.110

Automobile, truck and trailer rental

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bus and truck washing

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Car washes, automated

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Car washes, express

CUP

CUP

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.92.170

Car washes, full service

-

-

SPR

CUP

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Car washes, self service

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Industrial truck repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Motor vehicle parts and service for zero- to low-emissions vehicles

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Motor vehicles, conversion to zero- or low-emissions engines

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Recreational vehicle rental

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Tire repair and retreading

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Towing service and storage

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Trailer rental

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Trailer rental and vehicle storage

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Truck rental and leasing

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Utility trailer rental

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

BUSINESS SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Administrative offices

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Advertising

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Blueprinting and photocopy

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Brokers, wholesale

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Business and management

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Business and trade associations

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Businesses otherwise permitted in the C-1 and C-2 zones operating twenty-four (24) hours a day

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Collection agencies

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Computer systems design

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Consulting

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Courier services

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Data processing

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Design, decorator and furnishing business primarily serving business customers rather than individuals

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Detective and protective services

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Direct mail and marketing

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Employment agencies

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Equipment rental, business equipment and machines

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Furniture rental, office

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Graphic design services

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Laundries, industrial and wholesale

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Linen and towel supply

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Mail and photocopy services

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Mailing and parcel delivery

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Management and public relations services

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Manufacturers' agents

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Message service

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Packaging and labeling services (bottles, cans, cartons, etc.)

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Parcel delivery, including terminal

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Photographic processing, developing and printing

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Printing, engraving and typesetting

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Printing, lithography, publishing

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Repossession service

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Secretarial, clerical and stenographic

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Sign painting and lettering

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Telephone exchanges, call centers and answering services

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Telephone marketing solicitation

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Uniform rental

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Vending machine operators

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Construction equipment rental and leasing

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Contractors offices, shops and yards; general and special trades contractors

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

*

-

-

 

Heavy construction contractors offices, shops and yards

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

*

-

-

 

Machinery and equipment storage

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Special trade contractors offices, shops and yards

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

*

-

-

 

Storage, temporary, of materials and equipment used in construction of public or private improvements; provided, that all such items are stored on the construction site and pose no traffic hazard or other adverse impact on surrounding properties

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

*

P

P

 

Temporary office modules on active construction sites

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

*

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(4)

Trailer coaches, motor homes or manufactured homes on active construction sites for security personnel

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

*

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(3)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

EDUCATIONAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Arboretums, botanical gardens

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

SPR

-

 

Art galleries

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Business and secretarial schools and colleges

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Civic, social, service and labor organizations

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Colleges and universities

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Construction equipment operation schools

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Cultural heritage areas

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

SPR

-

 

Day care facility, commercial

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

17.92.120

Labor and service organizations

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Museums

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

*

-

SPR

 

Observatories

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Professional membership organizations

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Schools from K-12, excluding trade, technical or vocational schools

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Studios for the performing arts, martial arts or gymnastics

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Trade, technical and vocational schools (excluding truck and large equipment driving schools)

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Trade, technical and vocational schools (including truck and large equipment driving schools)

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Traffic schools

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Traffic schools and drivers training

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Wild animal exhibitions

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Zoos

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adult-oriented businesses

 

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.92.050

Amphitheaters

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

 

Amphitheaters, outdoor

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

CUP

 

Amusement arcades

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Amusement facilities, outdoor, including water slides, miniature golf, go cart tracks, and other similar or appurtenant uses

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Amusement parks

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Aquatic parks

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

CUP

-

 

Archery ranges, public

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Athletic fields, lighted, including baseball and football fields with all necessary grandstands and stadiums

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

 

Athletic fields, lighted or unlighted

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Batting cages (indoor)

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

CUP

-

 

Batting cages (outdoor)

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

CUP

-

 

Bicycle trails and appurtenant facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

*

P

P

 

Billiard and pool halls

-

-

CUP

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bingo, accessory use

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bingo, primary use

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bowling alleys

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Campgrounds, picnic areas, and trails with overnight camping facilities

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

 

Camps, youth

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

 

Country clubs

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

CUP

-

 

Dance halls

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Entertainment uses utilizing parking lot locations, such as street hockey, remote control vehicle racing, etc.

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

17.87.060

Fairgrounds

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

 

Family entertainment centers

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Fishing and casting ponds

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

SPR

-

 

Golf courses and related facilities, excluding miniature golf and standalone driving ranges

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

17.94.020

Golf driving ranges

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Health clubs, fitness centers and gymnasiums

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Indoor recreation centers

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

CUP

-

 

Lighted public recreational facilities and fields

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Motion picture and video tape distribution

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Motion picture and video tape production and allied services

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Natural areas, open space areas, biological preserves

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

P

-

*

P

-

 

Parks and open space (excluding lighted play fields)

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Parks and open space (including lighted play fields)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Parks, playgrounds and playfields, lighted

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

CUP

 

Parks, playgrounds and playfields, unlighted

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

SPR

SPR

 

Race tracks

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

*

-

-

 

Recreation and community centers, including senior centers

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

SPR

 

Riding, hiking and bicycle trails and appurtenant facilities

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

*

P

-

 

Rodeos, but not including horse racing

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

 

Shooting ranges, indoor

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

 

Shooting ranges, outdoor

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

-

 

Swimming pools, public

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Skating rinks, indoor or outdoor, ice or roller

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Skating rinks, public (outdoor)

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

CUP

 

Sports arena, stadium or complex

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

CUP

-

*

CUP

CUP

 

Theaters, live performance

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

CUP

 

Theaters, live performance, outdoor

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Theaters, motion picture

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Theaters, motion picture drive-in

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Theaters, outdoor but not including motion picture drive-in theaters

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

CUP

-

 

Trail heads

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

SPR

-

 

Vista points

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

SPR

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FACILITIES AND SERVICES RELATED TO AIRCRAFT PRODUCTION AND REPAIR

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Aircraft and component parts; manufacture, testing, modification, repair, overhaul and storage of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Aircraft and missile power plants; manufacture, operating and testing, including reciprocating and jet engines

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Communication equipment, manufacture and testing of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Computers and electronic components, manufacture and testing of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Instruments and equipment, scientific, manufacture and testing of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Laboratories, research and testing

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Machinery storage, indoor or outdoor

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Metal products, fabrication of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Missile tracking stations

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Missiles; manufacture, testing, modification, repair, overhaul and storage

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Offices and administrative functions relating to aircraft manufacture or related industries

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Research and development (aircraft-related)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Space vehicle propulsion units; manufacture, testing, modifications, repair, overhaul and storage of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Space vehicles and component parts, except propulsion units; manufacture, testing, modifications, repair, overhaul and storage of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Welding, electric or gas

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FACILITIES AND SERVICES RELATED TO AIRPORT OPERATIONS, TRANSPORTATION, FREIGHT AND STORAGE SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Airports, public or private

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Air cargo carriers

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Air courier and delivery services

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Air passenger carriers

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Air taxi services

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Air traffic control

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Aircraft cleaning, servicing and repairing, and storage

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Aircraft fuel, propellants and lubricants; storage and sale

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Airfreight handling

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Airport hangar rental

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Airport limousine service

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Airport terminal services

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Airport transportation and shuttle services

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Ambulance services, air

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Boarding areas for public transportation (not including permanent stations)

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bus terminals

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Cold storage plants

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Docking facilities

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Flying charter services

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Freight terminals

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Furniture moving and storage

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Hangar operations

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Heliports

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Helistops

-

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Parcel delivery terminals

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Park-and-ride facilities

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Personal storage facilities (mini warehouses)

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

CUP

-

-

*

-

-

17.93.030

Railroad spur lines

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Stations for boarding and unboarding of passengers from public transportation modes, including bus and rail; not including stops having no permanent buildings, such as for Metrolink

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Taxi terminal

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Truck stops, including eating and sleeping facilities

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Truck storage

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Truck terminals

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Truss yards

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Warehousing of materials or products for which a conditional use permit is not required for the manufacture, storage, distribution or wholesale of that product in either C-5, M-1, M-2, M-3 or M-4 zones

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Weighing, public scales

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Weight scales

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Wrecking or salvage yards

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FINANCIAL AND REAL ESTATE SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Banks, savings and loan institutions, and credit unions offering a full range of financial services and accredited by applicable agencies

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

17.92.010

Check cashing, money orders and similar services

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Commodity services

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Escrow companies

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Holding and investment services

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Insurance carriers, agents and brokers

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Investment services

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Notary public

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Mortgage services

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Real estate offices, agents and brokers

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Real estate developers and builders (office only)

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Title abstracting

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

FOOD SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Bakeries, including baking only when incidental to retail sales from the premises

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Bars, nightclubs, cocktail lounges

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

17.92.070

Catering services

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Coffee shops

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Commissaries

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Delicatessens and sandwich shops

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Doughnut shops

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Fast food restaurants, excluding drive-through windows

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Fast food restaurants, including drive-through windows

CUP

CUP

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

17.92.010

Ice cream and yogurt shops

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Microbrewery or brewpub

-

-

CUP

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.92.070

Restaurants

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Restaurants, bona fide

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

*

-

CUP

17.92.070

Walk-up food services

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Water softener and bottled water supplies and service

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MANUFACTURING

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adhesives and sealants

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Agricultural chemicals (fertilizers and pesticides)

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Alcoholic beverages, distilling, bottling, wholesale and distribution of

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Ammunition

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Antifreeze

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Apparel and other textile products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Apparel (finishing work)

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Artificial flowers, foliage and fruit

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Asphalt coatings

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Asphalt paving mixtures and batch plants

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Asphalt sheathing, shingles and siding

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Chemicals and related products

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Coatings and engraving

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Computer and office equipment

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Drugs and pharmaceuticals

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Dyes

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Electronic and electrical equipment

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Electroplating

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Explosives

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Fabricated metal products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Fire extinguishers

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Fireworks, flares and pyrotechnics

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Food products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Furniture and fixtures

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Furniture refinishing and upholstery

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Industrial chemicals

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Instruments for measuring, analyzing and controlling

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Leather products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Machine shops

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Machinery, machine tools and equipment

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Manmade fibers

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Miscellaneous manufacturing and industries

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Monuments and markers, stone

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Ordnance and accessories

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Paints, varnishes and lacquers

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Paper and allied products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Perfumes, cosmetics, and other toilet preparations

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Petroleum products

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Plastics and synthetic resins

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Pottery and glass products

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Prerecorded tapes and discs

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Printed and published products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Printing ink

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Railroad equipment

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Rubber and plastic products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Sheet metal shops

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Silkscreening or embroidery of finished textiles

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Soaps and detergents and other cleaning preparations

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Solvents

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Stone, clay, glass and concrete products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Synthetic rubber

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Tar paper

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Transportation equipment

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Weapons and/or ammunition; storage and warehousing

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Wood products

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MEDICAL AND PROFESSIONAL SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Accounting, auditing, bookkeeping and tax preparation

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Ambulance service

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Assaying

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Attorneys and legal services

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Computer facilities management

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Convalescent care facilities

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

SPR

 

Counseling

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Engineering, architectural, urban planning and survey services

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Health services, industrial

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Hospitals

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

CUP

 

Interior decorating

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Laboratories, medical and dental

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Laboratories, research and testing

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Large residential care facilities also known as assisted living facilities

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.91.110

Medical facilities, industrial

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Medical services, outpatient, including urgent care centers

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopathic physicians, dentists, oral surgeons, orthodontists, and other medical specialists

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Prescription pharmacy and optical services

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Veterinarians (small animals)

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.92.040

X-ray laboratories

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MINING OPERATIONS

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Batching and mixing plants for cement and concrete

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Batching and mixing plants for asphaltic concrete, asphalt or other petroleum-based materials when it can be clearly demonstrated that such use will not have a significant impact on groundwater or other resources

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Clay, cement and concrete products, manufacture of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, removing and stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, decomposed granite, clay, cinders, diatomaceous earth, shale, limestone, flagstone, decorative stone, and rip-rap and similar materials

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Recycled paving materials; stockpiling, crushing, and sale of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Rock crushing plants and aggregate dryers

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of the same)

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Soil remediation units, mobile or stationary, operation of

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Solid fill projects

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

Specialty plants using or processing rocks, sand, gravel, decomposed granite or clay

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

*

-

-

17.102

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

MISCELLANEOUS SERVICES AND OTHER

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Adoption agencies

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Auction sales, not to include animals, conducted within an enclosed building

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bail bond sales

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Cemeteries

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Crematoriums

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Diaper services and similar large-scale laundry or dry cleaning facilities which serve other businesses

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Disinfecting, exterminating and pest control services

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Dry cleaning plants

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Equipment rental

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Equipment rental (excluding construction equipment and conducted indoors)

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Facilities support

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Field, tree, bush, berry and row crops, including nursery stock, as an interim use; provided, that no permanent structures are constructed; and provided, that no sludge and/or biosolid material shall be applied to any land as a soil amendment

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

*

P

-

 

Funeral parlors and mortuaries, including crematoriums

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Hazardous materials facility

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.96

Hotels and motels

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Mortuaries (excluding crematorium facilities)

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Outdoor off-site advertising

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.88.160

Paint booths

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Pet boarding and daycare

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

*

-

-

 

Radio and television broadcasting studios

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

CUP

17.95.040

Recording studios

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Recycling centers; heavy processing facilities, large collection facilities and light processing facilities

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.97.060, 17.97.070 and 17.97.080

Security systems

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Small-scale solar energy systems as an accessory use on a lot containing a permitted principal use

P

P

P

-

-

P

P

P

P

P

P

*

-

P

 

Special events

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

-

-

AA

AA

AA

-

*

AA

AA

17.27.030(A)

Stockpiling

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

*

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(6)

Taxidermy

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Telecommuting, teleconference and video-conference facilities

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Temporary and permanent facilities for detention, retention and conveyance of stormwater runoff

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

P

*

P

P

 

Temporary living quarters

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

*

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(3)

Temporary office modules

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

*

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(4)

Temporary uses

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

*

AA

AA

17.27.030(B)(1) through (4)

Transit stops

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Water injection wells, water percolation ponds

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PERSONAL SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Barber and beauty shops

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Diaper service

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Dry cleaners and launderers

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Dry cleaners and launderers serving the general public (not businesses)

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Introductory services

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Laundries, self-service

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Locksmith

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Massage services and massage establishments

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

5.04.560

Microblading, permanent makeup and ear piercing

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Pet grooming

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Photographic studios and processors (still photography only)

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Suntan parlors

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Travel agencies

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Wedding chapels

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

PUBLIC, QUASI-PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Air pollution sampling stations

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Alcohol and drug treatment facilities

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.91.140

Animal shelters

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bus barns

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Conference and convention centers

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Conference and meeting facilities

-

SPR

SPR

CUP

-

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Congregate meal facilities

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

17.94.030

Correctional facilities

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Court facilities

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

SPR

 

Disaster and emergency management offices

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Emergency operations centers

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Fire stations

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

*

-

SPR

 

Government administrative facilities requiring outdoor storage and/or operations such as fleet maintenance, helipads, materials or equipment storage and maintenance

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

 

Government administrative offices (office use only)

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

*

-

SPR

 

Homeless shelters

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.94.040

Libraries

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

CUP

SPR

 

Major communication facility

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

*

CUP

CUP

17.95.040

Maintenance and storage yards

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Minor communication facility

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

AA

*

AA

AA

17.95.040

Parking lots

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Parking structures

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Parking lots and structures, commercial off-site

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

17.87.050

Parking lots and structures, municipal/public

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

SPR

 

Post office

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

SPR

 

Post office and distribution center

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Post office; branch or main distribution center

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Public utilities, including administrative offices and facilities, excluding major communication facility

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Public utilities storage and maintenance yards

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Public works storage and maintenance yards

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Radio and television broadcast studios

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

17.95.040

Radio and television towers

-

-

 

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

CUP

-

-

*

-

-

17.95.040

Religious assembly (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-004, adopted by City Council August 6, 2019.)

CUP

SPR

SPR

CUP

SPR

CUP

-

-

CUP

-

-

*

-

SPR

17.94.010

Sanitary landfills

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Sewage pumping stations and force mains

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Sheriff's station

-

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

CUP

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Tourist information centers

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

SPR

 

Transit-related facilities such as boarding areas and park-and-ride lots

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

*

-

SPR

 

Treatment plants, sewer and water

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

-

*

-

-

 

Utility corridors

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

-

 

Utility facilities, buildings and equipment, excluding sewage pumping stations and treatment plants, and major communication facilities

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Utility facilities, excluding major communication facilities

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Utility facilities, including substations, excluding major communication facilities

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Utility-scale power generating facilities

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

-

 

17.99.020

Utility-scale solar power generating facilities, as an interim use on a parcel that has not previously been mined or as a permanent use on a parcel that has been fully mined and reclaimed in accordance with the approved Reclamation Plan or contains gravel resources unsuitable for mining purposes

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

*

-

-

17.99.020 

Utility-scale solar power generating facilities

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

17.99.020

Water impoundment and groundwater recharge

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

SPR

-

 

Water reservoirs or tanks

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

*

SPR

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agricultural equipment repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Antiques, restoration of

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Apparel repair, alterations and tailoring

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Bicycle repair

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Business equipment repair and servicing

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Carpet and upholstery cleaning (in-plant or on customer’s premises)

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Computer and electronics repair

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Furnace cleaning and repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Furniture refinishing, repair and upholstery

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Furniture repair and upholstery

SPR

-

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Heavy construction equipment repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Janitorial and cleaning services

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Janitorial, cleaning and maintenance services

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Large equipment repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Large equipment repair, mobile

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Machinery service and repair

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Mechanical equipment repair

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Motor rebuilding

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Photographic equipment repair

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Radio, television and stereo repair

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Refrigerator, repair and service

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Repair and servicing of any article which is permitted to be sold in the underlying zone

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR/CUP

 

Rug cleaning plants

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Shoe repair and shoe shine

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Small appliance repair

SPR

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Swimming pool cleaning and maintenance

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Tank truck cleaning

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Television, radio, stereo and video component repair

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Watch, clock and jewelry repair

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Welding services and shops

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT AND TESTING SERVICES

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agricultural and biological research; provided, that all research involving the use of sludge and/or biosolid material be conducted within an enclosed building

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Chemical research laboratories

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Engineering research laboratories

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Food research

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Industrial laboratories

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Testing laboratories; metallurgical, product, pollution, etc.

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

RETAIL

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Agricultural supplies and equipment

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Antique stores

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Apparel and clothing accessories

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Appliances, household

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Art, drafting and graphics supplies

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Automotive parts (new retail only)

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Automotive parts and supplies, new or used (wholesale or retail)

-

-

-

-

SPR

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bicycles, parts and accessories

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Boats and other marine products and accessories

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Book stores

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Building materials and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Carpeting, tile and floor coverings

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Caskets and other funeral supplies

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Coffee and tea, specialty stores

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Computers and accessories, sales and service

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Confectionery and candy stores

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

 

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Contractor’s equipment and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Convenience stores

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

*

-

CUP

17.92.090

Cosmetics and accessories

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Decorators showrooms and supplies, including sale of paint and varnish, wallcoverings, floor coverings, window coverings, and tile

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Department stores and general merchandise stores

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Dishes, china, glassware, and metalware

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Draperies, blinds, shades and other window coverings

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Drug stores and pharmacies

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Dry goods and notions

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Farmer’s markets

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

17.16.060

Feed, grain and hay

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Firearms and related accessories, sales and service

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Florist shops

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Fur and leather goods

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Furniture

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Furniture, Small-scale (less than six thousand (6,000) square feet)

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Galleries for display and sale of paintings, sculpture, pottery and other works of art

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Gift shops

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Grocery stores, food, meat and produce markets, excluding convenience stores

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Hardware stores

SPR

-

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Hobby, yarn and craft shops

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Home improvement centers

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Ice

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Jewelry, precious metals, coins, stamps and other collectibles

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Jewelry stores

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Lawn and garden equipment and supplies

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) dealers

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Liquor stores

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.92.070

Lumber yards

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Lumber yards, including cutting lumber to size but excluding any other milling operation

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Machinery, equipment and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Mail order businesses (excluding warehousing)

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Mail order businesses (including warehousing)

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Mobile home sales

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Motorcycles and off-road recreational vehicles, new

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Musical instruments and supplies

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Newsstands, newspaper and magazine sales

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Nurseries, including the growing of nursery stock

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Office furniture and equipment

-

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Paint, varnish and lacquer

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Pawn shops

-

-

CUP

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Pet shops and supplies

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Pharmacies

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Phonograph records, cassette tapes, compact disks and videotapes

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Photographic equipment, processing and supply stores

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Plumbing and heating equipment and supplies

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Portable storage sheds (including assembly and display)

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Prints and frames

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Purchase and sale of secondhand tangible personal property, incidental to a primary permitted use

CUP

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

CUP

17.92.160

Radio, television, stereo and other audiovisual equipment

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Recreational vehicle sales

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Recreational vehicle sales, new

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Specialty clothing shops

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Stationery stores

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Surveying equipment and supplies

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Swap meet, flea market or similar use, indoor or outdoor

-

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.92.080

Swimming pools and spas

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

 

 

 

 

-

-

*

-

-

 

Technical publications and supplies

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Thrift shops

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Tobacco/smoking products retailer

-

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

17.92.150

Tools

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Toys, sport and athletic equipment

-

-

SPR

-

-

 

 

 

 

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Variety stores

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Video rental and sales

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

Wallpaper, interior decorating supplies and upholstery

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

SPR

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

WHOLESALE TRADE

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Apparel, clothing, footwear and accessories

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Appliances; electrical and household

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Art goods and artist supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Audio and visual tapes and disks

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Bicycles and parts

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Books, newspapers and periodicals

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Building materials, equipment and supplies, including lumber, wiring, plumbing, insulation, masonry block, heating and air conditioning, electrical, glazing, roofing and other similar products

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Computers and accessories

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Confectionery

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Construction machinery and equipment

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Cordwood and firewood

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Decorating materials and supplies, including drapery, wall coverings, ceramic tile, fixtures, mirrors, lighting and similar items

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Dishes, cookware and kitchen articles

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Drugs and pharmaceuticals

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Dry goods, general merchandise and notions

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Electrical and electronic components and accessories

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Equipment and supplies for service establishments, including restaurants and health and beauty salons

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Flowers and floricultural specialties

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Fruits, vegetables and produce

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Furniture and home furnishings

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Gifts, novelties, baskets and curios

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Glassware and containers

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Groceries and related products, including produce, frozen foods, dairy and meat products

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Hardware

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Hosiery and lingerie

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Ice

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Industrial machinery and equipment

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Industrial supplies

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Jewelry, precious stones and metals and related materials

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Medical, dental, ophthalmic and hospital supplies and equipment

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Monuments and grave markers

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Motor vehicle supplies and parts, new

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Motor vehicle supplies and parts, used

-

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Musical instruments, parts and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Nonalcoholic beverages

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Office supplies, furniture and fixtures

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Optical goods and lenses

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Paints, varnishes and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Paper, paper products, paperboard containers and stationery

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Petroleum and petroleum products, wholesale and distribution

-

-

-

-

-

CUP

CUP

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Photographic equipment and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Radio, television and stereophonic equipment

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Scientific, engineering and drafting equipment and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Service establishment equipment and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Sporting, athletic and recreational equipment

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Steel and other semi-finished metal products

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Thrift stores

-

-

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Toys and hobby goods and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

Transportation equipment and supplies

-

-

-

-

-

-

SPR

-

-

-

-

*

-

-

 

Watches, clocks and supplies

-

-

-

-

SPR

SPR

SPR

-

SPR

-

-

*

-

-

 

(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Chapter 17.80
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17.80.010 Intent and Purpose
The development standards included in this Division are intended to clarify and complement the provisions and standards governing development in each zone.

17.80.020 Applicability
The development standards contained in this Division shall apply to all uses, buildings and structures in every zone, and shall be in addition to the property development standards specific to each zone. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Division and other provisions of this Ordinance, the more restrictive of the provisions shall apply.

17.80.030 Nuisances
Neither the provisions of this Ordinance nor the granting of any permit provided for in this Ordinance authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of any public or private nuisance.

Chapter 17.81
PARCEL REQUIREMENTS
17.81.010 Lot Area
A.    Easements on required area

A street or highway easement may be included in the net area calculation for the purpose of determining the minimum required lot area only in the following circumstances:

1.    Said lot or parcel of land is a legal lot of record; and the total area subject to all such easements includes not more than ten (10) percent of the required lot area; or

2.    The required area for said lot or parcel of land is one (1) acre or more; the total area subject to all such easements includes not more than ten (10) percent of the required lot area; and the net area of the lot not subject to such easement(s) is minimum forty thousand (40,000) square feet.

B.    Required area reduced by public use

If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required area, and after the creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for public use exclusively, in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, and if the remainder of such lot or parcel of land has not less than ninety (90) percent of the required area, but in no event less than forty-five hundred (4,500) square feet, then such remainder shall be considered as having the required area.

C.    Use of a lot or parcel having less than required area

Where a portion of a lot or parcel of land is sold or transferred and as a result of such sale or transfer one (1) or more parcels are created of such an area as to no longer conform to the requirements of this Chapter, then in the determination of the permissible number and location of any buildings on any lot or parcel of land so created by such sale or transfer, the portion sold or transferred and the remainder shall be considered as one (1) parcel.

17.81.020 Lot Width
A.    Width reduced by public use

If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required width and after creation of such lot or parcel of land a portion of its width is acquired for public use exclusively, in any manner including, but not limited to dedication, condemnation or purchase, and if the remainder of such lot or parcel of land has not less than seventy (70) percent of the required width, but in no event less than fifty (50) feet, such remainder shall be considered as having the required width.

17.81.030 Lot Frontage and Access
A.    Required frontage

Each lot or parcel of land shall have a street or highway frontage of not less than forty-five (45) feet, except as provided in subsection B of this Section.

B.    Flag lots

Flag lots may be permitted by the reviewing authority if the following criteria are met in the project:

1.    The flag lot is necessary to preserve slopes, ridgelines, significant habitat areas, and other significant resources;

2.    The body of the lot meets the lot area, width and depth requirements of the zone;

3.    The handle portion of the lot is at least twenty (20) feet in width and not more than one hundred and twenty (120) feet in length;

4.    The lot has at least twenty (20) feet of frontage on a public or private street which frontage serves as access to the subject lot only;

5.    The portion of driveway providing access from the street should be only ten feet wide to minimize paved surface and maximize landscaping potential;

6.    The address is clearly visible from the street for emergency vehicles.

C.    Access onto regional, major, or secondary arterials and highways

No new direct driveway access from a single family residential lot onto regional, major, or secondary arterials and highways designated on the Palmdale General Plan shall be permitted after the effective date of this Ordinance, except when specifically permitted by the City Engineer for an existing legal lot of record when no alternative access is available.

17.81.040 Identification or Designation of Lot Lines in Doubt
The Planning Director shall identify or designate the front, side, or rear lot lines in cases where the identification or designation of such lot lines is unclear, including but not limited to the following situations:

A.    Corner lots or parcels of land with two (2) street and/or highway frontages approximately equal in length;

B.    Through lots or parcels of land fronting on two (2) or more streets and/or highways;

C.    Flag lots or parcels where the only contiguous boundary to a public street or highway is provided by a driveway or other private access.

Chapter 17.82
YARDS AND LOCATION OF BUILDINGS
17.82.010 Required Yards
Each lot or parcel of land shall have minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks as required for the zone in which the property is located (Divisions 4, 5, 6, and 7), for the specific use when applicable (Division 9), or by this Chapter, whichever requirement is the greatest, except as modified by an adopted Specific Plan, Planned Development or the R-4 zone. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

A.    Setbacks along public and private streets for commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential buildings

All commercial, public/institutional, office, and multi-family residential buildings (except Medium-High Density Residential and High Density Residential development) shall maintain a minimum building setback measured from the public right-of-way (or the edge of the curb for private streets) to the nearest edge of the building as follows except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or in an adopted comprehensive development plan: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

1.    Arterials: A minimum building setback of thirty (30) feet, including a minimum of twenty feet (20') of landscaping along all designated arterials. Arterials are defined by the General Plan Circulation Element and indicated on the City’s Circulation Plan Map. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

2.    Local and collector streets: Except as otherwise required in PMC 17.83.030(A)(1), a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, including a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping shall be provided along local and collector streets, both public and private. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

3.    Freeway: Within commercial or industrial zones, a minimum building setback of twenty (20) feet, which shall be landscaped, shall be provided along freeway frontage. Within residential zones, a building setback of fifty (50) feet shall be provided for principal residential buildings, including a minimum of twenty (20) feet of landscaping, along freeway frontage. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

B.    Commercial and industrial buildings contiguous to residential use or designation, and multi-family residential buildings (except Medium-High Density Residential and High Density Residential buildings) contiguous to single-family residential use or designation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

C.    Setbacks for commercial buildings contiguous to a residential use or designation, and setbacks for multi-family residential buildings (except Medium-High Density Residential and High Density Residential buildings) contiguous to property designated or used for single-family residential use shall be provided according to Chapter 17.83 PMC. Setbacks for industrial buildings contiguous to property zoned or used for residential, commercial, office, or public/institutional uses shall be as established by the applicable zone district. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

17.82.020 Location of Accessory Buildings and Structures in Yards
No accessory building or structure shall be located within a required front or side yard or front or side building setback except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.

A.    Garages and carports

Single story detached and attached garages and carports shall be located as follows:

1.    Front yard setback: A garage or carport shall be set back from the public right-of-way a minimum of twenty (20) feet, in order to permit parking of a full car length without overhang onto the sidewalk. Except side-on garages may be located a minimum of fifteen (15) feet from the public right-of-way provided that driveway parking shall accommodate a full car length of twenty (20) feet measured from the edge of the public right-of-way. In hillside areas, the maximum driveway slope shall be fifteen (15) percent, with at least eighteen (18) feet in front of the garage at a slope not exceeding five (5) percent. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    Side yard setback: A garage or carport shall not encroach upon any required side yards; where access is provided to the garage from a side street, the provisions of subsection (A)(1) of this Section shall apply.

3.    Rear yard setback: An attached garage or carport shall not encroach upon any required rear yard. Detached garages and carports may be located within the rear yard, provided that no portion of the structure (including eaves) is located within ten (10) feet of the rear property line, and the useable rear yard area is not less than five hundred (500) square feet pursuant to PMC 17.41.090(D)(3). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

4.    Setback from the alley: Notwithstanding the provisions of this subsection, no detached garage or carport facing an existing or proposed alley shall be located less than fifteen (15) feet from the center line of said alley.

B.    Accessory dwelling units

A guest house or a second dwelling unit shall not be located closer (including eaves) than ten (10) feet from the rear property line and the usable rear yard shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet pursuant to PMC 17.41.090(D)(3). The front and side yard shall be the same as required for the main structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Other accessory buildings and structures

Accessory buildings or structures, other than garages or carports shall be located as follows:

1.    Storage sheds, children’s playhouses, and other similar non-habitable accessory structures as defined in PMC 17.16.190 that are ten (10) feet in height or under shall not be located closer (including eaves) than five (5) feet to the side or rear property line, and the useable rear yard shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet pursuant to PMC 17.41.090(D)(3). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    Storage sheds, children’s playhouses, and other similar nonhabitable structures that are over ten (10) feet in height, attached patio covers, gazebos, and other similar structures shall not be located closer than ten (10) feet from the rear property line. The front and the side yard shall be the same as required for the main structure.

3.    Fences and walls may be located as provided in PMC 17.86.040. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

4.    Signs may be located as provided in Chapter 17.88 PMC, Signs.

5.    In-ground swimming pools or spas shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from the side or rear property line. Pool equipment shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from a side or rear property line. Above-ground pools and spas shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from any side or rear property line. All Municipal Code and Building & Safety Department requirements for fencing, and self-closing gates shall be provided. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

6.    Landscape elements including trees, shrubs and other plants may be located as provided in Chapter 17.86 PMC, Landscaping.

7.    Satellite dishes and vertical antennae may be located as provided in PMC 17.95.020 and 17.95.030, Special Regulations.

8.    Decks or bermed areas twelve (12) inches or less from grade shall not be located closer than five (5) feet from any side or rear property line. No decks or bermed areas higher than twelve (12) inches from grade are permitted within any required side or rear setback area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

9.    Detached patio covers may encroach into the required rear yard setback, provided that a setback of ten (10) feet from the rear property line is maintained. The side yard setback shall be the same as required for the main structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

D.    Projections into the Yards

Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the following projections may extend into required yards as follows:

1.    Architectural features including cornices, eaves, sills, buttresses, awnings, and other similar architectural features may extend into a required side yard or space between structures not more than thirty (30) inches and may extend into a required front or rear yard not more than thirty-six (36) inches.

2.    Fireplace structures and bays, not wider than eight (8) feet measured in the general direction of the wall of which it is a part, provided said fireplace or bay does not project more than three (3) feet into any required yard.

3.    Porches, pergolas, decorative trellises, or similar shade structures located within the front yard may encroach into the required front yard setback no more than six (6) feet, provided that a twenty (20) foot driveway is maintained. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

4.    Open and unenclosed fire escapes, stairways and door stoops provided that said structures are not located in a front or side yard and do not extend more than thirty-six (36) inches into a required rear yard.

5.    Balconies provided that they do not project more than six (6) feet into any required front yard or ten (10) feet into any required rear yard. Balconies shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any side yard property line. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

6.    Attached patio covers may encroach into the required rear yard setback, provided that said structures do not project more than ten (10) feet into any required rear yard. No portion of the patio cover shall encroach into the required side yard setback area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

7.    Planting boxes or masonry planters, not to exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches provided that said structures are not located within any required side yard or project more than six (6) feet into any required front yard.

17.82.030 Reserved
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

17.82.040 Distance Between Buildings in Residential Zones
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

A.    Distance between multi-family residential buildings and structures

1.    A minimum distance of fifteen (15) feet is required between all principal residential buildings established on the same lot or parcel of land. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

2.    A minimum distance of ten (10) feet is required between all principal residential building and any accessory building established on the same lot or parcel of land. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

3.    A minimum distance of six (6) feet is required between all principal residential buildings and any other detached accessory structure established on the same lot or parcel of land, excluding in-ground pools and spas. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

B.    Distance between single family residential buildings and structures (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

1.    A minimum distance of ten (10) feet is required between a primary residential unit and a detached accessory dwelling unit established on the same lot or parcel of land. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

2.    A minimum distance of six (6) feet is required between any other detached accessory structure and a primary residential structure established on the same lot or parcel of land, excluding in-ground pools, provided building code setbacks are met. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.82.050 Use of Yards
Every front, side, or rear yard required by this Zoning Ordinance shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky, except as otherwise provided by this Zoning Ordinance.

A.    Vehicle parking and storage within yards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

These provisions shall apply to motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trailers, travel trailers, or any vehicle licensed by the State Department of Motor Vehicles.

1.    In residential districts the required front yard and/or street side yard shall not be used for vehicle parking except such portion as is devoted to the driveway use or as stated in PMC 8.36.060(A)(10)(c). The driveway width shall be limited to the width of the garage fronting onto the street and/or to the width of a single lane driveway leading to the rear portion of the lot, but shall in no event exceed thirty (30) feet total. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

2.    Recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trailers or travel trailers shall not be stored or parked in any required front or street side yard in residential or agricultural zones except on the driveway, or as required by PMC 8.36.060(A)(10)(d). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

3.    Motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, campers, trailers, travel trailers or any vehicle licensed by the State Department of Motor Vehicles may be stored or parked in any interior side or rear yard provided that: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

 

a.    No more than 5% of the total lot area or 1,000 square feet, whichever is less, shall be used to park or store vehicles in areas that are not enclosed.

b.    Such vehicles must be parked or stored on a rock or paved surface as required by PMC 8.36.060(A)(10)(d).

c.    No inoperative, wrecked or dismantled motor vehicle, recreational vehicle, boat, camper, trailer, travel trailer or any vehicle licensed by the State Department of Motor Vehicles shall be stored in such a way as to be visible at ground level from a public street or from an adjoining property as required by PMC 8.36.060(A)(4)(b).

B.    Other storage in yards

1.    No open storage shall be permitted in any required front or side yards adjacent to a street or highway except where otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

2.    Animal enclosures, cargo and shipping containers, trailers, mobile homes, motor homes, and other similar structures shall not be used for storage purposes. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

17.82.060 Line of Sight Restrictions
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

A.    A substantially clear line of sight shall be maintained between the driver of a vehicle waiting or yielding at an intersection or driveway and the driver of an approaching vehicle on the other approaches to the intersection or the street being entered from the driveway.

B.    Standards for determination or identification of substantially clear line of sight areas may be developed by the City Traffic/Transportation Engineer.

C.    It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the real property to remove from such property or any adjacent right-of-way any such obstruction.

17.82.070 Modification of Yard Requirements
A.    Reduced requirements

A minor exception or variance to the yard requirements may be permitted according to Chapter 17.23 PMC.

B.    Increased requirements

Setback requirements, landscaping and other measures in excess of the minimum standards contained in this Chapter may be required by the reviewing authority if deemed necessary to make proposed developments compatible with existing or prospective land uses in the vicinity.

Chapter 17.83
TRANSITION BETWEEN LAND USES AND ZONES
17.83.010 Purpose
The following standards are intended to ensure compatibility between adjacent uses of different type and intensity.

17.83.020 Applicability
The standards contained in this Section shall apply when a multiple family, commercial, industrial, or public/institutional zone is located adjacent to property that is zoned or used for a less intensive use, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

17.83.030 Development Standards
A.    Minimum setbacks

Front yard and street side yard setbacks (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    Where a commercial or institutional use is separated from a residential use or district by a local or collector street, the minimum building setback from such street shall be twenty (20') feet and shall include a minimum landscape setback of fifteen (15') feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

b.    Where an industrial use is separated from a residential or institutional use or district by a local or collector street, the setback provisions of the applicable zone district shall apply. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

2.    Interior side and rear yard setbacks (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    A minimum twenty (20) foot wide building setback shall be provided for all commercial developments or institutional uses along side and rear property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for single-family or multi-family residential uses, and for all multi-family residential developments (except Medium-High Density Residential and High Density Residential development) along side and rear property lines which are contiguous to property designated or used for single-family residential use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003; and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

b.    Where an industrial use abuts a residential or institutional use or zone, the setback provisions of the applicable zone district shall apply. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

B.    Building heights

1.    The maximum height (measured in accordance with PMC 17.16.020) for any commercial, institutional or multi-family residential buildings (except Medium-High Density Residential and High Density Residential buildings), located adjacent to property designated for single family residential use shall be as follows: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 199 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

 

Building Setback From Single-Family Residential Boundary

Permitted Building Height

Less than 50 feet

35 feet, except with CUP; No windows, balconies, stairways or other areas where people could look out onto adjacent residential properties shall be permitted above the first floor on the side of the building which faces the property designated for single-family residential use

Up to 150 feet

35 feet, except with CUP

Over 150 feet

As permitted by the zone

(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

2.    In the event a Conditional Use Permit is requested under this Section, additional buffers between the proposed structure and adjacent properties, including but not limited to additional building setbacks and landscaping, may be required by the Planning Commission.

3.    Height limits for industrial buildings shall be those established in the zone district. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

C.    Landscaping (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

All commercial, institutional and industrial developments which are contiguous to property designated or used for residential use shall provide a minimum ten (10) foot wide landscape strip adjacent to the residentially zoned property. At least one mature tree shall be provided for each two hundred square feet of required landscape area and shall be planted a maximum of twenty feet on center. A mature tree shall be defined as a forty-eight (48") inch box tree with a tree trunk diameter of three (3") inches as measured four and one-half (4.5') feet above the root crown, or as otherwise approved by the City Landscape Architect. A minimum of 50 percent of the required trees shall be of a fast-growing evergreen variety as approved by the City Landscape Architect. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

D.    Separation walls (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

Separation walls or fences shall be required as follows, except for commercial uses that are designed to integrate with residential uses or as otherwise approved by the reviewing authority.

1.    All commercial, institutional and industrial uses that are adjacent to property designated or used for residential use shall provide a minimum six (6) foot high decorative masonry wall on the side of the property adjacent to said residential use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

2.    All multifamily residential uses that are adjacent to property designated or used for single family residential use shall provide a minimum six (6) foot high decorative masonry wall on the side of the property adjacent to said single family residential use.

3.    The reviewing authority may approve use of a view fence combined with landscaping sufficient to screen the more intense uses, when such fence is necessary to preserve views, discourage graffiti, or for other reasons specific to the use and/or the site.

E.    Location of service areas

All loading areas and trash enclosures shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any residential use, out of which a minimum ten (10) feet shall be landscaped, and shall be screened from adjacent residential uses by walls, fences, or dense landscaping to the satisfaction of the reviewing authority.

Chapter 17.84
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
17.84.010 Applicability
Performance standards contained in this Chapter shall apply to any existing or proposed use, or portion thereof, permitted in any zone. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

17.84.020 Smoke or Other Particulate Matter
All proposed uses shall comply with the applicable requirements of the South Coast Air Quality Management District.

17.84.030 Heat, Light, and Glare
Any existing or proposed use or portion thereof that creates heat, light, or glare that constitutes or may be considered a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property, such as use of arc welders or furnaces, security lighting or spot lights, or reflecting building materials or water features, or similar equipment, shall shield or control all sources of heat, light, or glare in such manner as will prevent the issuance, continuance or recurrence of the disturbing emissions.

17.84.040 Electromagnetic Disturbances and Radiation
Any existing or proposed use or portion thereof that can or may generate any electrical disturbances or produce any electromagnetic or radioactive emanations that can or may be considered a nuisance or hazard shall shield or control the source of the electrical or radioactive emanations in such manner as will prevent the issuance, continuance, or recurrence of any hazardous or disturbing emanations.

17.84.050 Noise Standards
Any existing or proposed use or portion thereof that can or may generate noise that constitutes or may be considered a nuisance or hazard on any adjacent property, shall control the source of the noise in such manner as will prevent the issuance, continuance, or recurrence of any hazardous or disturbing emanations. All existing or proposed uses shall conform to the Noise Element of the General Plan. All construction activity shall conform to Chapter 8.28 PMC, Building Construction Hours of Operation and Noise Control.

17.84.060 Outdoor Storage
A.    There shall be no uses or storage of materials not permitted by the type of structure or classification of occupancy as specified in the Building Code and Fire Code.

B.    There shall be no outdoor storage unless specifically approved by the City. Any storage area which is visible from the public right-of-way shall be screened from view by a solid masonry block wall not less than 5' nor more than 6' in height.

C.    The required access aisles shall not be used for storage purposes.

D.    No areas designated for off-street parking shall be used for storage of vehicles or other material except as otherwise provided by this Ordinance.

17.84.070 Maintenance of Required Facilities
All physical facilities required in this Ordinance, such as buildings and structures, paving, fences, walls and landscaping, shall be kept and maintained in a neat, clean, orderly, operable and usable condition.

17.84.080 Fire Department Requirements
All plans shall meet the requirements of the Fire Department as to adequate fire protection.

17.84.090 Public Nuisance
Any existing or proposed use or portion thereof which produces any condition, substance or element including wastepaper, trash, or other debris, that constitutes or may be considered a nuisance or hazard due to its operation or maintenance, but is not subject to the standards contained in this Section, shall be eliminated or controlled as will prevent the issuance, continuance or recurrence of said nuisance or hazard.

Chapter 17.85
TRASH AND RECYCLING STORAGE
17.85.010 Trash Storage
A.    Requirement

Containers for trash storage of a size, type, and quantity approved by the City, shall be provided for all commercial, industrial, and multiple residential development, and for institutional or other uses as deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority.

B.    Development standards

1.    Containers for trash storage shall be placed so as to not be readily visible from public rights of way, to the extent feasible. It is preferable to have trash enclosures hidden from public streets by building placement, although landscaping may be provided for screening where appropriate. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

2.    Any outdoor area used for the storage of trash, refuse, or similar materials shall be completely enclosed by a six (6) foot decorative masonry block wall. Trash enclosures shall be designed to integrate with the site design, using the same materials and architectural details as the primary structures. Self-closing gates constructed of solid metal and attached to metal posts embedded in concrete shall be provided. In multiple residential projects and where otherwise deemed appropriate, the reviewing authority may require pedestrian access to the enclosure, in addition to the gated opening. Roof or lattice treatment shall be provided to prevent wind-blown trash from leaving the enclosure. Alternatively, enclosures may be located within a building’s facade provided that the area is architecturally integrated with the building design. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

3.    Trash enclosures shall be screened with appropriate plant material, wherever they are in view of the general public from the street, access drives, or less intensive zone districts. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

4.    Trash enclosures shall be designed to meet or exceed the minimum capacity requirements of the development as determined by Building and Safety Department. Enclosure size and configuration may be determined during development review for users with specialized requirements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

5.    All trash shall be stored in metal containers to prevent it from being blown outside its walled enclosure by the wind.

6.    Gates shall be maintained in working order and shall remain closed except when in use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

7.    Trash enclosures shall be located so as to be easily accessible to refuse collection trucks, and to site users. In general, distance from a building entry to the trash enclosure should not exceed 150 feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

8.    Where practical, enclosures should be sized to contain transformer boxes or other utility equipment which also requires screening. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

17.85.020 Trash Compactors
A.    Any area used for the compaction of trash or refuse generated from the primary use shall be located away from view from the public right-of-way and screened by walls or projections which are designed to be architecturally compatible with the main building.

B.    Vehicle access to the trash compactor area and the trash compactor pad shall be paved with concrete rather than asphalt.

C.    Trash compactor areas shall be provided with a floor drain and hose bibb to facilitate washing of non-hazardous waste fluids from the area.

D.    Design of trash compactor area shall prevent runoff of waste fluids into adjacent structures or onto adjacent properties.

17.85.030 Recycling Containers
A.    Purpose

The purpose of this Section is to ensure provision of adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials in order to encourage diversion of solid waste by facilitating source reduction, recycling, and composting activities.

B.    Definitions

1.    Development Project shall mean any commercial, industrial, multiple family or institutional project which proposes to implement an on-site waste separation program for recyclable materials, for which such a program has been required.

2.    Recycling Area (Areas for Recycling) shall mean space allocated for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. Such areas shall have the ability to accommodate receptacles for recyclable materials.

C.    Development standards

All recycling areas, if required by reviewing authority or otherwise included within a project, shall be subject to the following development standards:

1.    Recycling area shall be located to be at least as convenient for those persons who deposit, collect, and load the recyclable materials placed therein as the location(s) where solid waste is collected and loaded. Whenever feasible, areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials shall be adjacent to the solid waste collection areas.

2.    The recycling facility shall be located away from view from the public right-of-way and screened by walls or projections which are designed to be architecturally compatible with the main building.

3.    Recycling areas shall be accessible and convenient for those who deposit as well as for those who collect and load any recyclable materials placed therein.

4.    The facility shall contain on-site refuse containers for disposal of non-hazardous waste which are adequate in capacity, number, and distribution to serve the development project.

5.    The City may specify what types of materials may be stored or processed and in what quantities.

6.    All trash shall be stored in metal containers or inside mobile vehicles to prevent it from being blown away by the wind.

7.    Any outdoor area used for the storage of trash, refuse, or similar materials, including metal containers but not including mobile vehicles, shall be completely enclosed as specified in PMC 17.85.010(B)(2).

8.    The recycling facility shall be constructed and maintained of durable waterproof and rustproof material.

9.    Driveways or aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel in conformance with building code requirements for garbage collection access and clearance.

10.    A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of direct access to the recycling areas.

11.    The facility and/or containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions and hours, and the identity and phone number of the facility operator to call if the machine is inoperative, and shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure of containers.

12.    Facilities shall meet the sign requirements of the zone designation as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, unless otherwise specified; directional signs may be installed with the approval of the Director of Planning.

13.    The facility, including mobile facilities, shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner free of litter and any other undesirable materials.

14.    Developments and transportation corridors adjacent to recycling areas shall be adequately protected from any adverse impacts such as noise, odor, vectors, or glare, through measures including, but not limited to maintaining adequate separation, fencing, and landscaping.

15.    If the facility is located in or near an area designated, or planned for residential use, special conditions for hours of operation, type of machinery used, lighting, and truck routes may be required.

16.    Noise generated by the facilities shall not exceed maximum limits established by the General Plan.

17.    The facility must meet all applicable requirements of the Fire, Health, and Building and Safety Departments.

Chapter 17.86
LANDSCAPING, LIGHTING, SCREENING AND WALLS
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

17.86.010 Landscaping Requirements
In all projects proposed or required to provide landscaping as part of the development plan, the landscaping shall be provided in accordance with the provisions in this Chapter.

A.    All landscaping shall conform to provisions of Chapter 14.04 PMC, Joshua Tree and Native Desert Vegetation Preservation.

B.    All landscaping shall conform at all times to provisions of Chapter 14.05 PMC, Water Efficient Landscape. In addition, landscape area design shall be based upon the principles of water conservation; grouping of plant materials based upon similar water requirements, ecological requirements, climatic conditions, and selection of drought tolerant plant materials. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-003; adopted by City Council October 2, 2013.)

C.    Landscape areas shall be provided with a permanent, fixed automatic irrigation system including an automatic irrigation controller adequate to meet the water needs of all landscape material. Irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize maintenance and water consumption, and the irrigation systems shall be properly designed and installed to ensure that overspray onto adjacent properties, fences, walls and structures is eliminated to the maximum extent feasible. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-003; adopted by City Council October 2, 2013.)

D.    Landscape areas and landscape materials shall be maintained in a neat, clean and healthful condition. This shall include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, and the regular watering of all plants. Any damaged, dead, diseased or decaying plant material shall be replaced in an expeditious manner. Plants shall be maintained free of disease and free of infestations of insects, animals or other pests. Bare spots in lawns or planters shall be promptly revegetated. Customary maintenance shall include provision of adequate irrigation, based on the microclimate, and regular application of fertilizer, based on the needs of the plant. Pruning and mowing will conform to the commonly used standards for each species; however in no case will the landscape areas allow to become overgrown. Examples of overgrown landscape materials include: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

1.    Lawn grass species: plants which have established seed heads, lawns that have become thatched and matted, have become infested with herbaceous weeds, or exceed eight (8) inches in height.

2.    Shrubs and decorative grasses: Plants that have grown so large as to block natural light from entering windows, extend over property lines, extend over roof peaks or eaves, or are causing the strangulation of other plants.

3.    Trees: Plants which display sucker growth, have grown to a height or canopy width which impairs the normal illumination of street lights, extend over property lines, interfere with overhead lines or impact public property.

E.    All plant materials, their location and spacing, and irrigation systems shall be installed and maintained pursuant to the City’s Engineering Design Standards or as otherwise approved by the City Landscape Architect.

F.    Landscaping design shall consider solar heating and cooling techniques. Deciduous trees should be planted to the south and west of buildings, to provide summer shade and winter sunlight.

G.    Landscape design shall conform to the applicable provisions of the General Plan.

H.    Graded, undeveloped portions of project sites proposed for future expansion shall be kept in a weed free condition and appropriate ground cover may be required for erosion control. Graded pad sites may require temporary seeding and irrigation for erosion control and to mitigate visual impacts. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

I.    Except in the A-1 and R-1 zones, all plants utilized in required landscape areas shall be from the City of Palmdale Approved Plant and Tree List. In the A-1 and R-1 zones it is recommended, but is not required, that required landscaping utilize the above mentioned plant lists. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-003; adopted by City Council October 2, 2013.)

J.    Except in Zones A-1 and R-1, the following species are not permitted in required landscape areas. In Zones A-1 and R-1, on properties developed after June 7, 2001 the following species are not permitted on lots less than one acre. In Zones A-1 and R-1 on properties developed before June 7, 2001 the following species are not recommended: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

1.    Trees: Cottonwood (including Populus fremontii, P. trichocarpa, and P. tremuloides), eucalyptus, willows (Salix), Siberian elms (Ulmus pumila), tamarack (Larix occidentalis), and Arizona (Cupressus glabra) or Leyland cypress (Cupressocyparis leylandii).

2.    Shrubs and grasses: pampas grass (Cortadera selloana), and common Bermuda (Cynodon dactylon).

K.    Gravel, stones, decomposed granite, mulch or other hardscape materials used in a parkway or along a pedestrian access shall be compacted or secured in such a way as to avoid spreading over any portion of a pedestrian path. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

L.    Decorative water features such as pools, ponds and waterfalls used in landscaped areas shall recirculate water, shall use reclaimed water where available, and shall be designed and operated to minimize water loss. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 00-05, adopted by City Council May 9, 2001.)

17.86.020 Screening Requirements
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

A.    Screening of loading areas and facilities shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.87.200.

B.    Screening of rooftop equipment shall be provided as follows:

1.    In residential, commercial, and public/institutional development consistent with residential and commercial zones, roof-mounted equipment shall be fully screened from view from the public right-of-way and properties in the vicinity. Screening for roof-mounted equipment shall be integrated into the building design, such as with parapet walls or roof line treatment, rather than added as a separate device which is not part of the structure and appears to be an afterthought. The need to screen rooftop equipment should be taken into consideration during the initial design phase for the structure. If equipment will be visible from adjacent taller buildings or from higher grades, it shall be painted to match the rooftop in color and should be grouped together where practical.

2.    In industrial zones, and for public/institutional development consistent with industrial zones, rooftop equipment shall be screened from arterial streets, freeways, and less-intensive land use districts as described in subsection (B)(1) of this Section. For portions of buildings not visible from arterials, freeways and less-intensive districts, the reviewing authority may reduce or waive the requirement for rooftop equipment screening provided that such action is determined to cause no adverse effects. Requests to allow visibility for roof-mounted equipment from arterials, freeways, and less-intensive districts will require approval of a variance or minor exception, pursuant to Chapter 17.23 PMC.

3.    Where rooftop equipment screening is required by this Section but, through approval of a variance, minor exception, or alteration to a non-conforming structure, mechanical equipment and/or ductwork projects vertically more than one and one-half (1½) feet above the roof line or parapet, the reviewing authority may require that such projecting equipment be screened by an architecturally designed enclosure which is compatible with the building design and appears permanent through use of high quality materials. Where equipment and/or ductwork projects one and one-half feet or less above the roof line or parapet, the reviewing authority may require that it be painted consistent with the color scheme of the building, or require other treatment as deemed appropriate.

C.    Screening of utility lines and equipment

1.    In residential, commercial, and public/institutional development consistent with residential and commercial zones, all existing and new utility lines 50kv and less within the project and along adjacent major arterials shall be placed underground, pursuant to Ordinance 724. Utility meters on or adjacent to buildings shall be screened by the building’s architectural features, a screen wall, landscaping, or a combination thereof. Utility boxes, backflow devices, and irrigation equipment shall be screened by use of screen walls, landscaping, or other approved means. All screen walls and landscaping should be shown on the landscape or site plans submitted for the project. No mechanical equipment, drainage spouts, or other similar devices should be visible on exterior building walls. Except as otherwise required for fire life safety as determined by the Planning Director, roof ladders shall not be placed on the outside of a building but may be placed inside, for security purposes. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-002, adopted by City Council May 7, 2019.)

2.    In industrial zones, and for public/institutional development consistent with industrial zones, utility lines and equipment shall be screened when visible from arterial streets, freeways, and less-intensive land use districts. Such screening shall meet the requirements of subsection (C)(1) of this Section. For portions of buildings not visible from arterials, freeways, and less intensive use districts, the reviewing authority may reduce, waive, or defer requirements for utility line undergrounding and utility equipment screening, pursuant to Ordinance 724 and provided that such action is determined to have no adverse effects. Additionally, for infill industrial projects in substantially developed industrial areas where utility lines have not been placed underground within the vicinity of the site, the City Engineer may defer utility line undergrounding requirements until such time as lines in the general area are undergrounded. Any request to deviate further from utility screening requirements in industrial zones will require approval of a variance or minor exception, pursuant to Chapter 17.23 PMC.

3.    In industrial zones and public uses consistent with industrial zones, the requirement for undergrounding of utility lines may be waived for remodeling of existing structures where the cost of remodeling is less than fifty (50) percent of the replacement cost of the existing structure as determined for building permits.

D.    Outdoor storage

    Screening of outdoor storage areas shall be provided as follows:

1.    In residential, commercial, and public/institutional development consistent with residential and commercial zones, outdoor storage areas shall be completely screened from public view, public rights-of-way, or less intensive land use districts. Where possible, these areas shall be placed behind the buildings to screen them from public rights-of-way. Landscaping, screen walls, berming, or other approved means of screening may be used. Screen walls shall be of solid masonry construction and shall be high enough to hide the materials being stored, provided that wall height may not exceed six (6) feet in these zones except for the C-5 (Service Commercial) zone, where wall height may not exceed eight (8) feet.

2.    In industrial zones, and for public/institutional development consistent with industrial zones, outdoor storage shall be screened from arterial streets, freeways, and less-intensive land use districts. Landscaping, screen walls, berming, or other approved means of screening may be used. Fences or walls used for screening should be high enough to screen the material being stored, but in no case should the height exceed twelve (12) feet. For portions of a site less visible to the general public but visible to local and collector streets or other industrial users, chain link fencing with slats may be allowed as a screening method. For areas not visible to other properties or the general public, the requirement for screening of outdoor storage areas may be reduced or waived by the reviewing authority, provided that such action is determined to cause no adverse effects. Any request to deviate further from outdoor storage screening requirements will require approval of a variance or minor exception, pursuant to Chapter 17.23 PMC.

E.    Service bays and areas

1.    Service areas shall be integrated into the site and building design, through means including but not limited to the following:

a.    Roll-up and service doors should be painted to blend in with the main building colors, and should not face arterial streets. Where site constraints make the placement of these doors away from arterial streets infeasible, then doors shall be designed with glass or other architectural features to minimize visual impacts from the street, subject to approval by the reviewing authority.

b.    Long-term shopping cart storage areas shall be completely screened; if screen walls are used, they shall be of sufficient height and length to screen all carts, and shall be architecturally integrated with the main building.

F.    Screening of parking lots

1.    Screening of parking lots from adjacent streets and less intensive uses shall be provided pursuant to PMC 17.87.050(L).

17.86.030 Lighting Requirements
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

A.    Lighting fixtures within or abutting residential zones within a distance of 150 feet from the zone boundary shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. Particular care must be given in these areas to avoid glare and light spread. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

B.    Except as provided in subsection A of this Section, lighting fixtures within commercial zones and public uses consistent with commercial zones shall be as follows: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

1.    On sites that are less than twenty (20) acres shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet in height

2.    On sites with a developed area of 20 acres or larger light fixtures shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height.

3.    Heights in excess of 35 feet may be approved through approval of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).

C.    Except as provided in subsection A of this Section, lighting fixtures within industrial zones and public uses consistent with industrial zones shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, when they are visible from public rights-of-way and less intensive, non-industrial use districts. Within portions of these developments not visible to the general public, taller standards may be approved if there is no glare or light spillage into areas visible to the general public through approval of a Conditional Use Permit (CUP). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

D.    Lighting for Outdoor Recreation Facility (An area designed for active recreation, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to, baseball diamonds, soccer and football fields, golf driving range, tennis courts, and swimming pools): light fixtures within a PF (Public Facility) zone shall not exceed seventy (70) feet in height. The lighting intensity shall not exceed 50 horizontal foot candles measured from the infield. The installation shall limit off-site spill (off the parcel containing the sports facility) to the maximum extent possible consistent with the illumination constraints of the design. The luminary shall be fully shielded. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

E.    Exterior lighting standards and fixtures should be located and designed to minimize direct glare beyond the site boundaries. Lighting fixtures shall be cut-off fixtures as defined by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North American (IESNA) to confine light spread within the site boundaries. There shall be no illumination or glare from the exterior lighting system onto adjacent properties or streets. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

F.    Illumination levels should be compatible with the character and use of surrounding development. Excessive illumination will not be allowed.

G.    All light standards visible to the general public should be consistent with the overall architectural style of the project with respect to design, materials, color, and color of light. At a minimum, all standards in these locations shall have an attractive top and base; cobra-head standards shall not be allowed. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

H.    Security lighting fixtures and wall packs shall not project above the fascia or roof line of the building on which they are mounted. All security lighting fixtures and wall packs shall be shielded and aimed so that the illumination is directed only to the designated area and shall not cast direct light on other areas. The use of flood-lighting fixtures is not allowed. Security lighting fixtures and wall packs are to be included in the photometric lighting plan (specifications below). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

I.    Lighting intensity shall be a minimum of 0.5-foot candle (at the darkest spot on the parking area), maintained. There shall be no more than a four to one (4:1) average illumination ratio (average to minimum) level of illumination shown between lighting standards. The maximum average illumination across the parking lot shall be no more than 2.4 foot candles. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

J.    No low-pressure sodium lighting fixtures are allowed. Flashing lights are strictly prohibited. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

K.    An exterior lighting (photometric) plan consisting of a point-by-point foot candle layout (based on a ten foot grid center) extending a minimum of twenty (20) feet outside the property lines, prepared by an electrical engineer registered in the State of California, shall be prepared for new development as required by the reviewing authority, in conformance with this Section and any applicable conditions of approval.

L.    Exposed neon strips, chip strips, and LED lighting, are allowed in the C-2, C-3, and C-4 zones to enhance the architectural features of the building. Continuous light strips (banding) are not allowed. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

M.    Low-voltage string ornamental lighting may be used in Commercial and PF (Public Facilities) zones to accentuate landscaping or decorative architectural features, provided the fixtures are property maintained, securely attached to the structure and provide architectural lighting to the building façade. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 01-01, adopted by City Council February 14, 2002.)

17.86.040 Walls And Fences
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

A.    Applicability

The provisions of this Section shall apply to fences, walls and hedges within all zones. The provisions of this Chapter may not apply to a fence or wall required as an environmental mitigation measure or required by any law or regulation of the State or federal government or agency thereof.

B.    Height measurement (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

When there is a difference in the ground level between two adjoining lots, the height of any wall or fence constructed along any property line shall be determined by using the level lot line of the highest contiguous lot.

C.    Height requirements (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

Except as provided in PMC 17.82.060 relating to line of sight restrictions, fence and wall height shall not exceed the following provisions: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

1.    Residential Zones (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

a.    A minimum 5'-6", not to exceed 6'-6" feet high wall, fence, or hedge may be located anywhere except within the required front yard setback. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

b.    Within the front yard setback, the maximum height of a sight obscuring wall, fence, hedge or earth berm shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches high and shall be located within the property line of the subject parcel. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

c.    Within the front yard setback, open view fencing may be permitted up to five (5) feet high. If fencing is located across the driveway, it shall operate using an automated rolling gate, or open inward, away from the public right-of-way. Any man gate shall open away from the public right-of-way. Fencing shall be located within the property line of the subject parcel. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

d.    On residential lots of 20,000 square feet or more and in multiple family residential zones, a six (6) foot high open view fence may be located within the required front yard setback. The wall or fence shall be located within the property line of the subject parcel. Any gates for vehicles must be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from the property line to allow for vehicle parking when the gate is closed. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

e.    On lots which front onto a private street or drive, a minimum 5'-6", not to exceed 6'-6" feet high wall, fence, or hedge may be located a minimum of thirty-two (32) feet from the face of curb or edge of easement. A wall, fence, or hedge a maximum of thirty-six (36) inches high may be located a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the face of curb or edge of easement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

f.    On lots which side onto a private street or drive, a minimum 5'-6", not to exceed 6'-6" feet high wall, fence, or hedge may be located a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet from the face of curb or edge of easement. A wall, fence, or hedge a maximum of thirty-six (36) inches high may be located a minimum of twelve (12) feet from the face of curb or edge of easement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    Residential Sports Courts (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012.)

Residential sports court fencing in the A-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 zones shall comply with the standards set forth in PMC 17.91.080. Tennis court fencing in all other zones shall not exceed the height of fifteen (15) feet and shall observe the setback of accessory structures within the zone. However, not less than a five (5) foot setback shall be provided to any property line. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012.)

3.    Commercial zones (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

Within the required landscape setback along public and private streets, the maximum height of a solid wall, fence, or hedge shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches high. Within the required building setback, excluding the required landscape setback, the maximum height of a solid wall, fence or hedge shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches high, except as otherwise required for safety as determined by the Planning Director. The maximum fence height shall not exceed six (6) feet, open view (sight-obscuring wall not permitted), and consist of tubular steel or other material, as determined by the Planning Director. A maximum six (6) foot high solid wall, fence, or hedge may be located anywhere except within the required landscape or building setback along a public or private street. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-005, adopted by City Council August 6, 2019.)

4.    Industrial zones

Within the required landscape setback along public and private streets, the maximum height of a solid wall, fence, or hedge shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches high. Within the required building setback, excluding the required landscape setback, the maximum height of a solid wall, fence or hedge shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches high, except as otherwise required for safety as determined by the Planning Director. A maximum six (6) foot high solid wall, fence, or hedge may be located anywhere except within the required landscape or building setback along a public or private street. Walls and fences used for screening and/or security purposes in industrial zones may be approved for over six (6) feet in height based on the following criteria, provided they are not within the required landscape or building setback along a public or private street: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-005, adopted by City Council August 6, 2019.)

a.    Walls adjacent to or extending from the building which have been architecturally designed to integrate with the structure design may be of a height determined by the reviewing authority.

b.    Wall height should be the minimum needed to accomplish the screening or buffering purpose for which it is constructed.

c.    Walls or fences meeting the criteria of this Section may be approved up to eight (8) feet with a plot plan approval or zoning clearance. Over eight (8) feet, the reviewing authority may approve additional wall or fence height based upon a finding that no adverse visual or aesthetic impacts will occur on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way; this determination may be made as part of the development review process for a new project or as a minor modification for an existing development, pursuant to PMC 17.26.040. No wall or fence may exceed twelve (12) feet in height, except as approved with a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).

5.    Public Facilities and Open Space and Recreation zones (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Within the required landscape setback along public and private streets, the maximum height of a solid wall, fence, or hedge shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches high. Within the required building setback, excluding the required landscape setback, the maximum height of a solid wall, fence or hedge shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches high, except as otherwise required for safety as determined by the Planning Director. A maximum six (6) foot high solid wall, fence, or hedge may be located anywhere except within the required landscape or building setback along a public or private street. Walls and fences used for screening and/or security purposes in Public Facilities or Open Space and Recreation zones may be approved for over six (6) feet in height based on the following criteria, provided they are not within the required landscape or building setback along a public or private street: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-005, adopted by City Council August 6, 2019.)

a.    Wall height should be the minimum needed to accomplish the screening or buffering purpose for which it is constructed.

b.    Walls or fences meeting the criteria of this Section may be approved up to eight (8) feet with a plot plan approval or zoning clearance. Over eight (8) feet, the reviewing authority may approve additional wall or fence height based upon a finding that no adverse visual or aesthetic impacts will occur on adjacent properties and public rights-of-way; this determination may be made as part of the development review process for a new project or as a minor modification for an existing development, pursuant to PMC 17.26.040. No wall or fence may exceed twelve (12) feet in height, except as approved with a Conditional Use Permit (CUP).

6.    Vacant or abandoned lots (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

On any vacant or abandoned lot, a maximum six (6) foot high solid wall, fence or hedge may be located within the property lines of the subject parcel, except within the required front yard building setbacks. Within such required front yard setbacks a maximum six (6) foot high open-view fence shall be permitted, except on residential lots under 20,000 square feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

D.    Material and Design (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

1.    Residential zones

a.    Acceptable fencing materials may consist of masonry, wrought iron, durable vinyl, or other similar durable materials, as approved by the Director of Planning. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

b.    Fencing composed of wood, plywood, solid metal, tires, garage doors, and other salvageable materials are not permitted. Painted solid metal and treated wood may be permitted only as gates. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

c.    Chain link fencing is not permitted within the front and street side yard setback area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

d.    The use of barbed wire, electrified fence or razor wire in conjunction with any fence, wall, or hedge, or by itself within any residential zone, is prohibited unless required by any law or regulation of the state or federal government or agency thereof.

2.    A-1 Zone

a.    The use of barbed wire or electrified fence in conjunction with any fence, wall, or hedge, or by itself within Zone A-1 is permitted provided that the barbed wire or electrified fence is used in conjunction with animal keeping or other agricultural activities, and that it is separated from any public access (i.e., road, trail, etc.) by a regular fence or wall that is a minimum of six (6) feet in height.

b.    Acceptable fencing materials may consist of masonry, wrought iron, durable vinyl, chain link or other similar durable materials, as approved by the Director of Planning. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

c.    Fencing composed of wood, plywood, solid metal, tires, garage doors, and other salvageable materials are not permitted. Painted solid metal and treated wood may be permitted only as gates. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

3.    Commercial zones

a.    No chain link fencing is allowed adjacent to or visible from the public right-of-way.

b.    No roof-mounted fencing, including wrought iron, barbed wire or razor wire, is allowed.

c.    The use of barbed wire, electrified fence or razor wire is prohibited unless required by any law or regulation of the state or federal government or agency thereof.

d.    Use of solid block walls is discouraged, except where required for buffering, screening, and/or security. Where used, walls should be of decorative construction and should integrate with the overall site design in use of colors, materials, and architectural features. Long walls should incorporate offsets, pilasters, planter walls, or other similar approved design features to provide visual interest.

e.    Where open-view fencing is required for security purposes and is visible from public rights-of-way, decorative construction such as tubular steel or wrought iron should be used. Masonry pilasters and/or landscaping may be required to provide visual interest.

f.    Acceptable fencing materials may consist of masonry, wrought iron, durable vinyl, or other similar durable materials, as approved by the Director of Planning. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

g.    Fencing composed of wood, plywood, solid metal, tires, garage doors, and other salvageable materials are not permitted. Painted solid metal and treated wood may be permitted only as gates. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

4.    Industrial zones

a.    Any walls or fences in industrial zones which are visible to the general public from arterial streets, freeways, or less intensive, non-industrial uses or zones shall meet the criteria for commercial zones as specified in subsection (D)(3) of this Section.

b.    Walls or fences in industrial zones which are not visible to the general public from arterial streets, freeways, or less intensive zones may be of other materials and design as approved by the reviewing authority. Barbed wire may be permitted atop fencing in these locations, as approved by the reviewing authority.

c.    Acceptable fencing materials may consist of masonry, wrought iron, durable vinyl, or other similar durable materials, as approved by the Director of Planning. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

d.    Fencing composed of wood, plywood, solid metal, tires, garage doors, and other salvageable materials are not permitted. Painted solid metal and treated wood may be permitted only as gates. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

5.    Public Facilities and Open Space and Recreation Zones (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

a.    The use of barbed wire, electrified fence or razor wire is prohibited unless required by any law or regulation of the state or federal government or agency thereof.

b.    No roof-mounted fencing, including wrought iron, barbed wire or razor wire, is allowed.

c.    Acceptable fencing materials may consist of masonry, wrought iron, durable vinyl, or other similar durable materials, as approved by the Director of Planning. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

d.    Fencing composed of wood, plywood, solid metal, tires, garage doors, and other salvageable materials are not permitted. Painted solid metal and treated wood may be permitted only as gates. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

E.    Minor exceptions or variances to the fence, wall, and hedge requirements may be permitted according to Chapter 17.23 PMC.

F.    Perimeter wall setbacks (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

1.    The perimeter subdivision setback area on a regional or major arterial street shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet, and on a secondary arterial or local collector street a minimum of seven (7) feet, or as otherwise specified by the City Engineer. The setback area shall be measured to the back of the sidewalk or to the public right-of-way when no sidewalk exists, and the entire setback area shall be landscaped. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

2.    RV and vehicle access through a perimeter wall shall be prohibited. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-03, adopted by City Council July 9, 2003.)

Chapter 17.87
OFF-STREET PARKING
17.87.010 Intent and Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to ensure provision of adequate, accessible, secure, properly lighted, and well maintained and screened off-street parking facilities. Properly provided and designed parking will facilitate the intended use of the property; reduce traffic congestion and safety concerns; protect the neighborhoods from the effects of vehicular noise and traffic generated by adjacent nonresidential land use district; assure maneuverability of emergency vehicles; and provide a positive visual experience.

17.87.020 General Provisions
A.    Applicability. Every use of land or property shall provide adequate parking facilities in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter and other provisions of this Zoning Ordinance, except as allowed under subsection D of this Section.

B.    Continuing obligation. The provision for off-street parking facilities shall be a continuing obligation of the property owner so long as any use requiring vehicle parking continues.

C.    Reduction in number of spaces. No required off-street parking facility shall be reduced in capacity or in area without sufficient additional parking capacity or additional parking spaces being provided to comply with this Chapter, unless otherwise permitted by this Chapter.

D.    Existing nonconforming parking facilities. Any use of property which, on the effective date of this Chapter or of any subsequent amendment thereto, is nonconforming, only as to the regulations relating to off-street parking, may continue in the same manner as if the parking facilities were conforming.

E.    Use of required parking as commercial or public lot. No area designated as a required parking area in connection with any designated building or use shall be operated as a commercial or public lot providing parking spaces for the general public or the occupants, tenants, customers, clients, or residents of any use or activity for a fee or other compensation, unless approved by the reviewing authority.

17.87.030 Number of Parking Spaces Required
A.    Parking Schedule. Off-street parking shall be provided for the following uses in the quantities specified below, except as otherwise provided in this Chapter: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

 

Assisted living facilities

One space for every three (3) beds, plus one space for each employee scheduled to work on the largest shift. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Auditoriums, theaters, sports events, rodeos, and other similar spectator uses

One space per four (4) fixed seats or one space per thirty-five (35) square feet of spectator area where seats are not fixed. Eighteen (18) lineal inches of bench seating shall equal one seat. Additional parking for non-related uses are calculated according to use.

Auto Display

One space per four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area for show room; plus one space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor areas for offices; plus one space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area for shops.

Auto dismantling/salvage yards/recycling centers

One space for each three hundred (300) square feet of gross building area plus one space for every 10,000 square feet of gross yard area.

Auto Repair

One space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. No inoperable vehicle may be parked within a required parking space.

Automobile Service Stations

Two (2) parking spaces for employee parking. Additional parking for non-fuel sale uses shall be calculated according to use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

Billiards

Three spaces per table.

Boarding houses,

dormitories

Three spaces, plus one per sleeping room.

Bowling alleys

Three spaces per lane.

Caretaker’s residence

One covered space, except as required by PMC 17.93.030(B). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Carnivals

One space per five hundred (500) square feet of site area.

Check cashing facilities and similar uses

One space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Churches, chapels,

mortuaries

One parking space for every four (4) fixed seats or one space per thirty-five (35) square feet of assembly area where seats are not fixed in the principal assembly area; plus one space for each classroom and secondary assembly area. Eighteen (18) lineal inches of bench seating shall equal one seat.

Commercial uses,

unspecified

One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.

Condominiums, community

apartments, stock

cooperatives and other

limited equity cooperatives

Studio: One and one-quarter (1.25) spaces per unit, one (1) of which must be located within an enclosed garage.

One (1) Bedroom: One and one-half (1.5) spaces per unit, one (1) of which must be located within an enclosed garage.

Two (2) or More Bedrooms: Two and one-quarter (2.25) spaces per unit, two (2) of which must be designated for a specific dwelling unit. Of the two (2) designated spaces, a minimum of one (1) space shall be located within an enclosed garage. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

Congregate Meal Facilities

One space per employee based on the largest number of employees scheduled to work in a 24-hour period, with a minimum of ten (10) spaces. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Convalescent homes,

group care

One space per three (3) beds.

Day care centers

One space for each classroom; plus one for every twenty (20) students.

Financial institutions,

banks, savings and loans

One space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area.

Furniture sales, major

appliance sales,

warehouse commercial

One space per five hundred (500) square feet of gross floor area.

Golf courses, miniature golf

courses, golf driving ranges

Six (6) spaces per golf course hole; three (3) spaces per miniature golf course hole or driving tee on a golf range; plus one space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area used for other commercial uses. Additional parking for non-related uses are calculated according to use.

Health clubs, gymnasiums,

dance studios and other

similar participatory

facilities

One space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross area, excluding court facilities; plus three spaces per court facility.

Homeless Shelter

One space per employee plus one space per five temporary residents. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

Hospitals

One space per bed.

Hotels, motels

One space per guest room; plus one space per one hundred (100) square feet of eating area in a restaurant/coffee shop; plus one space per 70 square feet of seating area in a meeting or banquet room; plus one space per three employees on the largest shift.

Industrial/manufacturing uses, unspecified

For each structure:

1 – 5,000 square feet – One space for each 500 square feet of gross floor area (gfa)

5,001 – 10,000 square feet – One space for each 750 square feet of gfa

10,001 – 50,000 square feet – One space for each 1,000 square feet of gfa

50,001 + square feet. – One space for each 1,250 square feet of gfa

(Includes up to 25 percent of gfa used for office space; over 25 percent of gfa, office space requires one space per 250 square feet)

Libraries, museums,

galleries

One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.

Mini-warehouse, self-

storage facilities

One space per twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area; plus one space per fifty (50) vehicle or boat storage spaces; with a minimum of three (3) spaces.

Mobile home parks

Two spaces per unit, which may be in tandem, one of which must be covered; plus one space per five mobile homes as a guest space; plus one space per five mobile homes as a recreational vehicle storage space. The recreational vehicle spaces shall be clustered in a separate area and shall be screened from view from public streets.

Multiple-family residential

apartments

Studio: One and one-quarter (1.25) spaces per unit, one (1) of which must be covered and designated for a specific dwelling unit.

One (1) Bedroom: One and one-half (1.5) spaces per unit, one (1) of which must be covered and designated for a specific dwelling unit.

Two (2) or More Bedrooms: Two and one-quarter (2.25) spaces per unit, one (1) of which must be covered and designated for a specific dwelling unit. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-003, adopted by City Council June 4, 2019.)

Office, medical

One space per two hundred (200) square feet of net leasable floor area.

Office, professional

One space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of net leasable floor area.

Open air commercial uses,

nurseries, equipment rental, swap meets, farmer’s markets, and similar outdoor uses (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

One space per one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot area devoted to sales and display.

Open air industrial uses

One space per twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet of outside storage area.

Parks

Ten (10) spaces per net acre of active recreational area within a park or playground; plus five (5) spaces per net acre of passive recreational area within a park or playground.

Public buildings

and facilities

One space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area for public buildings or facilities frequently visited by the public. One space per four hundred (400) square feet of floor area for public facilities not frequently visited by the public.

Research and

development, light

industrial

Three (3) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area. For developments where office space exceeds 25% of the gross floor area, parking for that portion of office space shall be required at one space for each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of floor area.

Restaurants, bars and

other eating or drinking

places

One space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, with a minimum of ten (10) spaces. Where there is no on-site consumption of food or beverages, one space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.

Retail uses

One space per each two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.

Schools, grades K-9

Two (2) spaces per classroom

Schools, grades 10

and above

Six (6) spaces per classroom.

Senior citizen housing

One and one-half (1.5) spaces per unit, one of which must be covered and designated for a specific dwelling unit.

Service-oriented

commercial, plumbing

repair and service shops

One space per each four hundred (400) square feet of gross floor area; plus one space for each vehicle used in conjunction with the use.

Service stations

Two (2) spaces per service bay; plus two (2) parking spaces for employee parking. Additional parking for non-related uses calculated according to use.

Shopping centers

(regional)

Regional shopping centers are centers having more than fifty (50) gross acres and 600,000 square feet of floor area. Five (5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area shall be provided for the first one million (1,000,000) square feet of floor area and four (4) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area shall be provided for any floor area exceeding one million (1,000,000) square feet. Floor area for an enclosed mall shall be calculated exclusive of mall concourse, restrooms, emergency exit areas, service areas, rear corridor areas, electrical and utility rooms. Floor area for attached anchor stores shall be calculated as gross building area less four (4%) percent, or the actual calculation of above exclusions, whichever is less. Subsection (B)(3) of this Section shall not apply to this use.

Single-family residential

Fully enclosed two car garage with a free and clear interior dimension of 20 feet wide by 20 feet long. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

Temporary uses

A sufficient number of spaces to accommodate parking for the proposed use, in accordance with that specified for the most comparable use in this Section.

Townhouses

Two and one-half (2.5) spaces per unit, two of which must be covered and designated for a specific dwelling unit. Of the two covered spaces, a minimum of one space shall be located within an enclosed garage.

Transitional Housing Facilities

One space per employee and one space for every seven (7) beds. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

Warehouse

One space per 1,000 square foot for the first 20,000 square feet; one space per 2,000 square feet for the second 20,000 square feet; one space per 4,000 square feet for all space in excess of the first 40,000 square feet. (Includes up to 25 percent of gfa for office space; over 25 percent of gfa, office space requires one space per 250 square feet.)

Uses not specified

Where parking requirements for any use are not specified, parking shall be provided in an amount which the Director finds adequate to prevent traffic congestion and excessive on-street parking. Whenever practical, such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified in this Section.

B.    Computation

1.    Calculation of spaces. Any calculation of parking space requirements which results in a fraction of a parking space shall be counted as requiring a whole space.

2.    Increase or change in use. Any existing building or use that is enlarged, structurally altered, modified or remodeled to the extent of increasing or changing the use by more than twenty-five (25) percent, as it existed on the effective date of this ordinance, shall be accompanied by off-street parking for the entire building or use in accordance with the parking regulations set forth in this Chapter. When the enlargement, structural alteration, modification or remodeling is to the extent that the use is not increased or changed by more than twenty-five (25) percent, additional parking shall only be required for the increased or changed floor area or use.

Existing parking spaces may not be used to satisfy additional parking requirements of this Chapter unless the existing spaces proposed for use in meeting the requirements exceed the number required for the building or use with which the existing spaces are associated. All parking associated with a building or use from which the spaces are drawn must meet all requirements of this Chapter.

3.    Combined uses. When two (2) or more uses are located in the same building or structure, or are within the same common developments, the parking requirements shall be the sum of the separate requirements for each use, except as specifically provided in this Chapter.

4.    Additional parking required. Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to limit the power of the reviewing authority to require adequate provision of parking spaces as a condition of approval of a conditional use permit, a site plan review, or as a development standard when under the circumstances of a particular case, a greater number than specified in this Chapter is found to be necessary.

5.    Transportation demand management programs. Reductions in the number of parking spaces provided may be approved by the reviewing authority pursuant to PMC 17.23.030(B)(5) when the applicant has provided substantial evidence that Transportation Demand Management (TDM) efforts may be effective in reducing vehicle demand. Such a program may require such provisions as: (a) land set aside for additional parking if determined necessary; (b) in-lieu payments for transportation demand related services and programs; periodic monitoring and certification that the TDM effort is being maintained; and/or penalties for non-compliance (including suspension or revocation of occupancy permit).

6.    Bus turnout credit. Where required or agreed to by the City, provisions for a bus turnout shall be provided. When such a turnout is provided, the number of on-site parking spaces may be reduced by a maximum of either five (5) spaces or two and one half (2 1/2) percent of the required number of spaces, if approved by the reviewing authority pursuant to PMC 17.23.050(B)(5).

C.    Modification of parking standards. The reviewing authority may allow a reduction of the required on-site parking spaces, provided that the City determines that a suitable area exists on the site on which to provide the additional required spaces if needed; that the area which would have been used for parking will instead be used for landscaping until such time as it is converted to parking; and that the number of parking spaces provided is adequate and such reduction will not create a traffic safety hazard. In the event the City’s Traffic/Transportation Engineer determines the additional spaces are needed for traffic safety, or an intensification of use is proposed on the site, the City may require provision of the additional spaces. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

17.87.040 Use of Parking Spaces
A.    General. Required parking spaces shall be used only for parking of vehicles for property owners, guests, renters, patrons or employees. Required parking spaces shall not be used for sale, display, rental, storage or repair of motor vehicles.

B.    Residential zones. No vehicle which is registered for commercial purposes pursuant to applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code of the State of California or other jurisdiction and which has a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more shall be parked or left standing on any residentially zoned property, in excess of thirty consecutive minutes unless it falls within the exceptions given in Chapter 15.101 PMC.

C.    Commercial and industrial zones. Required parking spaces shall not be used or permitted to be used for the repair, servicing or storage of vehicles, or for the storage of recycling bins, property or materials, nor shall the racks and pump blocks used in auto repair shops or other similar uses be considered in calculating required parking spaces.

17.87.050 Design Standards
The following design standards shall apply to all off-street parking areas:

A.    Location

1.    Single family residential uses. Off-street parking spaces for single-family detached dwellings shall be located on the same lot or parcel on which the dwelling is located. No parking space required by this Chapter shall be located in the required front, side or rear setback area except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance.

2.    Multi-family residential uses. Off-street parking spaces for all other dwelling types shall be located on the same development site and on the same lot or parcel, but in no event more than one hundred fifty (150) feet from the dwelling unit for which the parking space is provided. No parking space required by this Chapter shall be located in the required front, side or rear setback area.

3.    Commercial and industrial zones. Required off-street parking in commercial and industrial zones shall be located as follows: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

a.    Parking shall be located on the same lot, or, with a reciprocal parking and access agreement approved by the City, on a lot contiguous to the building, structure or use to be served. Where parking is proposed to be located off-site, the location of such parking and where applicable, the lot itself, shall approved by the reviewing authority. Any term agreements between private property owners shall be recorded and shall require City approval prior to termination. Pedestrian access shall be available within a distance of not more than two hundred (200) feet measured from the nearest point of public access to the building, to the nearest part of the off-site parking area, unless otherwise approved by the reviewing authority. Such separated parking area shall be useable without causing unreasonable traffic congestion, detriment to any residential neighborhood, or safety concern to pedestrian or vehicular traffic in the vicinity.

b.    Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, the required parking spaces shall not be located in the rear of commercial buildings unless direct access for the customers to the facility is provided.

c.    Subject to the approval of the reviewing authority, up to ten (10) percent of the required parking spaces may be located in the rear lot area of a commercial use, provided that the spaces are designated for employee parking only.

d.    All accessory parking facilities, whether provided in fulfillment of or in excess of the requirements of this Ordinance, and whether located on the same or on a different lot from the principal use, shall be located on property zoned the same or at a less restrictive designation as the principal use served by the parking.

e.    In industrial zones, employee parking may be differentiated from customer parking, and placed to the side and rear of the buildings. Customer parking shall be located near the main building entrance. Employee parking may be fenced and/or gated, and should have safe, well-lighted pedestrian access routes to employee entrances. Parking areas restricted to employee parking may use up to fifty (50) percent compact spaces.

B.    Size

1.    Standard spaces. A standard parking space shall have minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in depth.

2.    Compact spaces. A compact parking space shall have minimum dimensions of eight (8) feet in width and fifteen (15) feet in depth. In commercial and industrial projects with twenty or more required parking spaces, up to twenty-five (25%) percent of the required spaces provided may be compact size as defined herein.

3.    Parallel parking. A parallel parking space shall have minimum dimensions of nine (9) feet in width and twenty-two (22) feet in depth, as indicated in the table below. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

4.    Aisles. Except as specified elsewhere in this Chapter, the minimum dimensions of aisles for off-street parking spaces shall be as indicated in the table below:

 

Parking Angle:

Parallel

30°

45°

60°

90°

One-way aisle (D)

12'

16'

18'

20'

26'

Two-way aisle (D)

26'

26'

26'

26'

26'

5.    Handicapped spaces. Whenever any off-street parking is required, spaces shall be provided in accordance with the latest version of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

6.    Spaces next to walls. Any uncovered parking space located next to a wall or other solid barrier shall be widened by an additional two (2) feet.

7.    Parking structures. In multiple bay parking structures, where covered parking occurs that provides pillars and posts for roof supports, parking stall design shall provide for a clear parking stall dimension with no encroachment of structural supports.

8.    Garages and carports. The minimum interior dimension for a single car garage or carport shall be ten (10) feet wide by twenty (20) feet deep. The minimum interior dimension for a two (2) car garage or carport shall be twenty (20) feet wide by twenty (20) feet deep. Additional spaces in garages having more than two parking spaces shall have minimum dimensions of nine (9) by eighteen (18) feet.

9.    Reduced parking space length and width prohibited. No reduction of parking space length or width will be allowed.

C.    Access and design

1.    Access points. Entrances from and exits to streets and alleys shall be provided at locations approved by the City. Except for single-family detached dwellings, and unless expressly recommended otherwise by the Traffic Engineer, access drives onto public streets shall be more than one hundred fifty (150) feet apart, measured centerline to centerline.

2.    Width of access drives

a.    Single Family Residences and Duplexes. The minimum width of access driveways for detached single-family residences and duplex residences on a single lot shall be ten (10) feet. For single-family detached residences, an unobstructed paved driveway a minimum twenty (20) feet in length shall be provided within the required front setback. No portion of the public sidewalk shall be counted towards meeting this requirement. Driveways for three- or four-car garages should be tapered down to a standard two-car width at the street.

b.    Multi-family residential developments. Access drives which are not located next to parking spaces shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for a one-way drive aisle and a minimum width of twenty-six (26) feet for a two-way drive aisle. This requirement shall apply to any residential use where more than 2 dwelling units are located on a parcel, including condominium-type arrangements. A minimum five (5) foot driveway apron shall be provided between the garage and any private street or drive aisle.

c.    Commercial and industrial uses. Access drives shall have a minimum width of twelve (12) feet for a one-way drive aisle and a minimum width of twenty-six (26) feet for a two-way drive aisle.

d.    Private industrial and commercial streets. Private streets serving industrial and commercial developments shall have a minimum vehicle access width of forty (40) feet.

3.    Circulation design

a.    Except for single-family detached dwellings, groups of four or more parking spaces shall be located and served by an access drive in such a way that the use of the spaces and access drive will require no backing movement or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way, excluding alleys.

b.    On-site circulation shall be designed in such a manner that all parking spaces are useful for the intended purposes and the internal circulation pattern is safe and efficient for motorists and pedestrians.

c.    Parking aisle length shall not exceed 350 feet without a cross aisle for vehicle circulation.

d.    Adequate clear throat distance shall be provided at all parking entrance and/or exit driveways.

e.    The arrangement of parking spaces should avoid backing of vehicles onto ring roads, perimeter roads, or major aisles.

f.    Tangent or long radius sections of aisles along the perimeter of buildings should be less than four hundred (400) feet.

g.    Adequate driver sight distance shall be provided throughout all parking areas.

h.    Four-way aisle intersections should be avoided.

i.    Access should provide for adequate turning radii for all movements, especially for truck access.

j.    Circulation within the parking area should be provided to avoid use of streets as a substitute for on-site circulation.

k.    Dead end aisles should be avoided.

l.    Buildings, vehicular circulation, and landscaping shall be arranged so that pedestrians moving between buildings, and between building and parking areas, are not unnecessarily exposed to vehicular traffic.

m.    Approved compact parking spaces should be grouped and clearly marked for compact car use, rather than being scattered throughout the lot in a manner which makes their location unclear to users.

n.    Each development shall contain at least one clearly designated route for pedestrians connecting the street, the parking area, and the main building entrance(s). Access for people with disabilities shall be provided in accordance with state and federal statutes, and shall provide a convenient and efficient circulation system for these individuals.

o.    For retail and office uses, parking spaces should be located within 150 feet of a building entrance, or a sidewalk leading to a building entrance.

p.    Parking lot layout should minimize the need for pedestrians to cross parking aisles and landscape areas to reach destination points.

q.    Where adjacent parking areas are connected, design should provide for coordinated circulation and aisle alignments to reduce vehicular conflicts at points of connection.

r.    Use of individual wheel blocks should be avoided.

s.    Except in parking structures, a minimum vertical clearance of fifteen (15) feet shall be provided for all parking spaces.

t.    All sidewalks located perpendicular to parking stalls shall be a minimum of seven (7) feet in width to accommodate vehicle overhang and to meet handicap accessibility requirements. Two and one-half (2 ½) feet of the sidewalk width may be counted as part of the overall parking space length. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

D.    Slopes

1.    Parking spaces and turnarounds. All parking lot areas used exclusively for parking and turnarounds shall be designed and improved with a grade not exceeding five (5%) slope. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall conform to the slope requirements of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations and the Americans with Disabilities Act.

2.    Driveways. All driveways within a parking lot used exclusively for ingress and egress or interior parking lot circulation shall be designed and improved with grades not to exceed a ten (10%) percent slope. Driveways providing a means of ingress and egress to a lot upon which is proposed to be located a single family detached dwelling shall not be subject to this requirement.

E.    Drainage. Parking areas, aisles and access drives shall be graded and drained to dispose of surface water without damage to private or public properties, streets or alleys. All parking and circulation areas shall be designed with an adequate drainage system and improvements shall consists of appropriate devices as specified by the City Engineer.

F.    Surface. All parking areas, aisles, and access drives shall be paved as follows, unless alternate materials are approved by the City Engineer:

1.    Residential areas. A minimum of two inches (2") of asphalt on four inches (4") of compacted base, or four inches (4") of concrete;

2.    Commercial and Industrial Areas. A minimum of three (3") inches asphalt on four (4) inches of compacted base unless otherwise required by City Engineer based on soil studies.

G.    Striping. Parking lots shall be completely striped, indicating individual parking spaces and traffic lanes as provided in a striping/parking plan submitted to and approved by the City. Except for parallel parking, the striping of all other parking spaces shall be either single line or double line. All parallel parking spaces shall be striped with single lines. Handicapped spaces shall be striped, marked and signed in accordance with Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.

H.    Landscaping (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    The following landscaping requirements shall apply to all off-street parking areas for residential and commercial zones and uses, and for public/institutional uses consistent with these zones. For industrial zones and for public/institutional uses consistent with these zones, the following landscaping requirements shall apply to off-street parking areas which are visible from arterial streets, freeways, and less-intensive land use districts. For parking lots in industrial areas which are not visible to the general public from arterial streets, freeways, or less-intensive land use districts, the requirement for parking lot landscaping may be reduced or waived by the reviewing authority.

2.    Interior.

a.    Landscaping shall be provided within parking areas so that at least five (5) percent of the surface area of the parking lot is landscaped (excluding perimeter and front setback landscaping). Landscaping should be dispersed throughout the parking lot in order to provide shade throughout the lot.

b.    Required interior landscaping may be provided as approved by the reviewing authority, but must include the following measures:

(i)    One (1) canopy tree per four (4) parking stalls (or eight parking stalls when two rows of four share a common frontage);

(ii)    A minimum fifty (50) percent of the parking lot trees shall be a minimum two (2) inch caliper in a 24-inch box size or larger container. A minimum twenty (20) percent of the parking lot trees shall be a minimum two and one half (2½) inch caliper in a 36-inch box size or larger container. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

(iii)    Landscape planters shall be a minimum of six (6) feet in width (inside dimension), except that tree wells located between parking rows and spaces may be a minimum of four feet in width (inside dimension). All landscaping and planting within paved areas shall be contained within raised planters surrounded by six (6) inch concrete curbs. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

(iv)    Bumper blocks or curbs shall be placed a minimum of thirty (30) inches away from the trunk of any tree.

(v)    Landscape islands a minimum ten (10) feet in width with minimum aisle turning radii of ten (10) feet shall be provided at the end of all parking rows, except where parking rows directly abut buildings, sidewalks, walls or similar features.

(vi)    For parking rows containing fifteen (15) or more spaces, one (1) landscape island within the interior of the parking row shall be provided per fifteen (15) parking spaces in addition to the required row end landscape islands.

(vii)    Landscape islands shall not extend closer than three (3) feet from the aisle end of the adjacent parking space(s).

(viii)    All landscape islands shall be designed with a six (6) inch curb and an additional paved strip to provide a minimum one (1) foot wide paved landing area where abutting the side of parking stalls. Paved areas shall not be counted toward fulfilling landscape requirements or meeting minimum width requirements specified in subsection (H)(3) of this Section. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

(ix)    All landscape islands shall be designed with a minimum two and a half (2 1/2) foot area free from vegetation where the front of a vehicle may overhang the island. Overhang area should be surfaced with non-living landscape material such as bark, gravel or rock. Two and a half (2 1/2) feet of the overhang area may be counted as part of the overall parking space length.

c.    For projects requiring twenty (20) or fewer parking spaces on site, the required width of required landscape islands may be reduced to four (4) feet, and the requirement for landscape islands within the interior of the parking row may be waived, subject to a determination by the reviewing authority that an equivalent amount of overall site and parking lot landscaping is provided and that the parking lot is provided with a reasonable amount of shade.

3.    Adjacent to vacant property. Landscaping along a property line adjacent to an abutting property that has no entitlement application on file for development is required to be defined by use of a six inch concrete curb or a block wall or six inch concrete mowing strip or a combination thereof.

4.    Adjacent to streets. Where parking areas are located adjacent to a street, vehicles shall be screened to a height of at least three (3) feet by means of landscaping, low-profile walls, berms, lowering of the grade of the parking area relative to the street, or a combination thereof.

5.    Irrigation. All portions of a parking lot devoted to landscaping shall be provided with a permanent automatic irrigation system designed for water conservation.

I.    Fire Lanes. All Fire Lanes shall be identified through signs or pavement markings for “NO PARKING” in accordance with Fire Department Specifications.

J.    Maintenance. All parking facilities shall be maintained in good condition in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.87 PMC. The maintenance thereof may include, but shall not be limited to the repaving, oiling and striping of a parking area and the repair, restoration and/or replacement of any parking area design features when deemed necessary by the Director of Planning to insure the health, safety and welfare of the general public.

K.    Tandem parking. Except where specifically allowed herein, required parking spaces shall not be in tandem. All parking spaces shall be free of obstructions and parking shall be accomplished in a continuous forward movement.

L.    Screening of parking lots (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    In residential and commercial zones and for public/institutional uses consistent with these zones, parking lots abutting a street or a less intensive land use district shall be designed to avoid headlight glare and to minimize the visual effect of large paved areas. Screening requirements may be established by the reviewing authority and may include but are not limited to use of landscaped berms, changes in grade, a decorative wall not to exceed three (3) feet in height, or a combination thereof.

2.    In industrial zones and for public/institutional uses consistent with these zones, parking lots adjacent to arterial streets, freeways, or less-intensive land use districts shall be designed to provide adequate screening, as set forth in subsection (L)(1) of this Section. For parking lots which are not visible to the general public from arterial streets, freeways, or less intensive land use districts, the requirement for parking lot screening may be reduced or waived by the reviewing authority.

17.87.060 Shared Parking
A.    Requirements. Shared parking facilities may be considered only if the following requirements are met:

1.    The uses that propose to share parking generate their parking needs primarily at different times and will cooperatively establish and operate shared parking facilities.

2.    The applicant has provided substantial evidence and documentation (including a description of all uses and operating characteristics) that a sufficient number of spaces are being provided to meet the parking demand of all participating uses at any given time of the day, week, or year.

3.    All shared parking spaces shall be located so as to be reasonably accessible to the uses they serve, and shall not be separated from such uses by any street, unless otherwise approved by the reviewing authority.

4.    Reasonable pedestrian connection shall be provided from any shared parking spaces to all the uses that they are proposed to serve.

5.    Covenants, conditions and restrictions (CC&R’s), deed restrictions, or other agreements as may be required by the reviewing authority are executed and recorded ensuring that required parking is provided and that the uses and operating characteristics of all participating uses are maintained.

B.    Review process. Requests for shared parking shall be considered as follows:

1.    Existing development. Where the request involves an existing development, an application shall be filed pursuant to PMC 17.23.040, Minor Modification to Approved Plans.

2.    New development. Where the shared parking is being proposed as part of a Site Plan Review or Conditional Use Permit application, the request shall be processed concurrently with said applications.

C.    Additional requirements. Nothing in this Section shall preclude the reviewing authority from placing additional conditions to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City or to establish the number or percentage of off-street parking to be shared.

D.    Any entertainment use which utilizes parking lot locations, such as street hockey or remote control vehicle racing, may be considered only if the following requirements are met:

1.    The use is permitted in the zone in which the parking lot is located.

2.    The requirements set forth in PMC 17.87.060(A) through (C) are met, and necessary parking is not diminished.

3.    Sanitary facilities are provided or are available for the use.

4.    The use is located so as not to impact adjacent uses by virtue of noise, dust or litter.

5.    No special lighting is erected for the use.

6.    No amplified sound systems are utilized.

17.87.070 through 17.87.190 Reserved
17.87.200 Loading Zone Standards
Every use, building or structure shall have permanently maintained off-street loading and unloading spaces as follows:

A.    Number of loading spaces required

All off-street loading facilities shall have the number of spaces required per building based on proposed or projected use or uses as specified in the following standards, except as they may be modified by the reviewing authority pursuant to Division 23, Variances and Minor Exceptions.

 

USE

FLOOR ARE

(SQ. FT.)

BERTHS

REQUIRED

Restaurants and other eating and drinking places

 

less than 4,000

4,000 to 20,000

20,001 to 50,000

(each additional 50,000)

0

1

2

1

 

 

 

Administrative office, medical, professional office, personal and financial services
Hotels, motels, Hospital and sanitariums, Commercial, Recreational

less than 10,000

10,000 to 100,000

100,001 to 200,000

(each additional 100,000)

0

1

2

1

 

 

 

Warehouses, storage facilities, Manufacturing other industrial uses and retail

less than 5,000

5,000 to 30,000

30,001 to 80,000

80,001 to 150,000

(each additional 100,000)

0

1

2

3

1

The number of loading spaces shall be computed as follows:

1.    A fraction of a space greater than one-half (1/2) shall be counted as a whole space.

2.    In the case of mixed uses, the total number of required loading spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses proposed for each building.

3.    Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be based upon the requirements for comparable uses listed and upon the particular characteristics of the use as determined by the Director of Planning.

4.    No area may be utilized and counted both as a required parking space and a required loading berth space.

5.    No part of an alley or street shall be used for loading except areas designated by the City for loading.

B.    Location (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    Required loading facilities shall be located on the same site as the use requiring such facilities.

2.    No required loading facilities shall be located in any required setback areas.

3.    Loading areas and docks shall be permitted only in rear and side lot areas, and shall be located behind the main structure where feasible so as to be screened from public rights-of-way by the building placement.

4.    For buildings abutting the freeway, loading areas should be located on the side of the building away from on-coming travel lanes.

5.    Passenger loading spaces shall be located so that passengers need not cross drive aisles to walk from the loading space to the building entryway.

C.    Size.

1.    All off-street loading facilities shall comply with the following minimum dimensions, except that passenger loading spaces shall be at least ten (10) feet by twenty (20) feet: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

 

USE

BERTH

WIDTH

BERTH

LENGTH

CLEARANCE

TURNING

RADIUS*

Industrial uses
Warehouses

12'

50'

15'

45'

 

 

 

 

 

Office commercial

Retail commercial

Restaurants

11'

30'

15'

32'

* Outside turning radius of the vehicles. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

D.    Design standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

1.    Loading spaces shall be located and designed so that trucks shall not back into a public street or alley nor shall a loading area be designed to require the use of a public right-of-way for access to a loading dock.

2.    Sufficient space for turning and maneuvering loading vehicles shall be provided on the site.

3.    Loading doors should not open toward public streets; when these features must face a street due to prevailing winds or site constraints, they must be screened.

4.    Vertical clearance of all access aisles or drives to loading areas shall not be less than fourteen (14) feet above finished surface.

5.    Loading areas in commercial, office, and public/institutional uses compatible with residential or commercial zones shall be screened from view by architectural means, which may include a screen wall architecturally consistent with the building design. Screen walls may be required to be softened with landscaping, where appropriate. A lowered grade for loading docks, where practical, can minimize views while avoiding tall walls.

6.    Loading areas in industrial zones and public/institutional zones compatible with industrial zones should be screened from arterial streets, freeways, and less-intensive use districts, as set forth in subsection (D)(5) of this Section. Loading should be located at the rear of the site, and should be offset from driveway openings where feasible.

7.    Loading areas should be paved with a minimum of four (4) inches of asphalt over six (6) inches of base material, or as otherwise approved by the City Engineer.

8.    Hardware for rolling doors should be placed on the inside of the building.

17.87.210 Bicycle Parking Facilities
All non-residential developments containing twenty or more automobile parking spaces shall be required to provide bicycle parking facilities in conformance to this Section:

A.    Number of spaces. Every non-residential development containing over twenty parking spaces shall provide a minimum of two bicycle rack spaces for the first fifty parking spaces, and one additional bicycle rack space for each additional fifty parking spaces. Fractional requirements of .5 or greater shall be considered as a full bicycle rack space.

In no case shall the number of bicycle racks accommodate less than 4 bicycles for the first 50,000 square feet of non-residential development, and 1 bicycle per each additional 50,000 square feet of non-residential development.

B.    Location. Bicycle racks shall be located in such a manner as not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic and shall be conveniently placed near front and employee entrances. Location of bicycle racks should provide for surveillance of the area from the primary building parking and pedestrian access areas, to provide for security of the bicycle parking area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-5, adopted by City Council July 9, 1997.)

C.    Access. Safe and convenient access shall be provided from the external circulation system to the bicycle parking facilities on-site.

D.    Bicycle racks. The required bicycle rack spaces shall consist of a rack or other secure device for storing and protecting bicycles from theft.

17.87.220 Modification to Parking and Loading Requirements
A.    Minor reductions in the number of required parking spaces or reconfigurations of parking lots to meet requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act may be granted through approval of a Minor Exception, pursuant to PMC 17.23.030(B).

B.    Any deviation from the requirements of this Chapter not specifically authorized as a Minor Exception shall be deemed a Variance and may be approved pursuant to PMC 17.23.030(D).

Chapter 17.88
SIGNS
17.88.010 Applicability
This Chapter shall apply to all signs and/or sign structures that are visible from public rights-of-way and private streets, within parking lots and loading areas and from adjacent properties, unless such signs are regulated under the provisions of an adopted specific plan.

17.88.020 Intent and Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to implement the Palmdale General Plan by promoting the growth of the city in an orderly and attractive manner and to provide standards to safeguard life, health, property and public welfare by regulating and controlling the type, number, area, height, quality of materials, construction, illumination, location and maintenance of all signs and sign structures. The sign regulations of this Chapter are intended to accomplish the following results:

A.    Make the city attractive to residents, visitors and commercial, industrial and professional businesses while maintaining economic stability through an effective and high-quality signing program.

B.    Protect and enhance the character of residential neighborhoods and property values by preventing visual clutter caused by excessive and obtrusive signage.

C.    Promote and maintain healthy commercial and industrial areas and property values for effective identification and communication of the nature of goods and services and avoidance of wasteful and unsightly signs.

D.    Establish an attractive uniform citywide sign beautification program that creates a sense of place upon arrival to the city and provides a public convenience by directing persons to various activities and uses.

E.    Provide a reasonable system of sign control throughout the city consisting of sign type, size, location, and illumination and spacing to contribute toward development of a high-quality visual environment.

F.    Encourage signs that are well designed and pleasing in appearance and to provide incentive and latitude for variety, good design, relationship and spacing.

G.    Encourage a desirable community character, which has a minimum of visual clutter.

H.    Enhance the economic value of the community and each area thereof through the reasonable regulation of such things as type, number, area, height, location and illumination of signs.

I.    Encourage signs that are well located and harmonious with adjacent land uses and contribute to architectural compatibility.

J.    Reduce and, to the extent permissible and practicable, eliminate traffic and safety hazards posed to motorists and pedestrians by outdoor advertising structures and other signs that may distract motorists and pedestrians.

K.    Implement the goals, policies and objectives of the general plan.

L.    Encourage pedestrian-oriented commerce within the downtown district by promoting pedestrian-scale signs.

M.    Direct persons at entrances of multi-tenant buildings through placement of directory signs or information kiosks.

N.    Enhance the community environment by limiting the visual influence of wall signs on buildings containing three stories or more.

O.    Ensure and protect the constitutional right of free speech by not imposing greater restrictions on noncommercial speech than on commercial speech or advertising.

P.    Provide sign criteria that is objective, does not vest City officials with unfettered discretion, and that is aimed at regulating the time, place and manner of signs as distinguished from the content of the sign. Where content is regulated, the City intends its regulations to be narrowly tailored to serve the City’s compelling interest in preserving and enhancing its appearance and in protecting motorists and pedestrians from traffic and safety hazards.

Q.    Bring existing approved sign programs into conformance with current development standards while maintaining the unique characteristics intended for such programs.

R.    Provide a reasonable amortization period for the removal of nonconforming signs.

S.    Inventory, identify and abate all illegal, abandoned and improperly maintained signs.

T.    Identify precisely those areas and/or zones where the installation of additional outdoor advertising structures should be prohibited due to the importance of such areas to the environmental, economic or other development goals and objectives of the City.

U.    Provide for the relocation of existing legal outdoor advertising structures so as to minimize the adverse effects of such signs on the City’s goals and objectives, in accordance with Business and Professions Code section 5412.

V.    Remove all outdoor advertising sign structures from the residential areas of the City, in accordance with Business and Professions Code section 5412.

17.88.030 Definitions
Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-01, adopted by City Council March 5, 2014. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.88.040 Sign Permit Requirements and Procedures
Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, no person shall cause or permit the construction, enlargement, remodeling or upgrade of any sign without first obtaining a sign permit in accordance with the provisions of this Section, and any other permits required by law. Legally established signs becoming nonconforming as a result of this ordinance shall be subject to amortization in accordance with PMC 17.88.160. Any person or entity engaged in the business of constructing signs in the City shall have a valid state contractor’s license and a City business license.

In each instance, and under the same conditions to which this Chapter permits any sign, a sign containing an ideological, political, religious or other non-commercial message and constructed to the same physical dimensions, character and standards shall be permitted.

A.    Application Requirements. An application for a sign permit shall be made on the appropriate form(s) provided by the Director of Planning. A processing fee established by resolution of the City Council for new sign permits shall accompany applications. Applications for new sign permits shall contain all of the following information and materials:

1.    Project location:

a)    Address or nearest cross streets

b)    Assessor’s parcel number (for vacant land)

2.    Name of business (if applicable)

3.    Name, address, and phone number of person and firm preparing application.

4.    Property owner or owner’s authorized leasing agent name, signature and telephone number.

5.    Description and number of signs requested, including all accessory signs.

6.    Drawing depicting dimensions, design, colors and materials of the sign or sign structure(s).

7.    Construction specifications for method of attachment of the sign to the ground or structure and illumination.

8.    Building elevation (for wall signs) depicting the dimensions, color and materials of the building or leaseholder unit where sign is to be attached. A photograph may be used to show the color and material of the building.

9.    Site plan (for freestanding signs). Showing the intended location and position of the proposed sign; distance to existing or future buildings, parking facilities, any outdoor seating areas, other freestanding signs, property lines, roadways, and driveways on or adjacent to the parcel where the sign is to be located.

 

10.    Grading Plans (for freestanding signs), demonstrating grade elevation within landscaped areas in relationship to the public right-of-way in immediate proximity of proposed sign structure(s).

B.    Review process

An application for a sign permit to construct a new sign or to enlarge or upgrade an existing sign for an existing building shall be submitted on the appropriate form(s) provided by the Director of Planning and accompanied by a processing fee established by resolution of the City Council. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of an application for a sign permit, the Director shall approve the sign permit if the Director finds that such application satisfies the standards set forth in subsection C of this Section and the provisions of this Chapter. Otherwise, the Planning Director shall deny the sign permit, in which case the applicant shall be notified in writing the reason(s) why the application was denied. All decisions of the Director of Planning may be appealed in accordance with PMC 17.20.110.

C.    Criteria for approval. The following findings shall be made for approval of any sign permit for a sign or sign structure regulated by this Chapter:

1.    The sign complies with the applicable provisions of PMC 17.88.090, General Development Standards, for permanent sign structures regulating the allowable sign area, location, setbacks, orientation, design, construction, materials, colors, and illumination; and

2.    The sign complies with the adopted sign program for the site, which regulates the size, color, lettering, location and other design elements specified in the sign program (if applicable).

17.88.050 Change of Copy Requirements and Procedures
Application Requirements. The application for a change of copy on an existing legally established and legally existing sign shall be made on the appropriate form(s) provided by the Director of Planning. Any person or entity engaged in the business of constructing signs in the City shall have a valid state contractor’s license and a City business license. In each instance, and under the same conditions to which this Chapter permits any change of copy, a sign containing an ideological, political, religious or other non-commercial message and constructed to the same physical dimensions, character and standards shall be permitted.

A.    Applications for a change of copy shall contain all of the following information and materials:

1.    Project location including address or nearest cross streets, assessor’s parcel number (for vacant land) and name of business (if applicable).

2.    Name, address, and phone number of person and firm preparing the application.

3.    Property owner or owner’s authorized leasing agent name, signature and telephone number.

4.    Description and number of signs for which change of copy is requested.

5.    Previously approved sign plans depicting sign area, dimensions, colors, design and materials and method of illumination of the original sign or sign structure.

B.    Review process

An application for a change of copy to upgrade an existing sign shall be reviewed by the Director of Planning or his or her designee within ten (10) business days following submittal of a complete change of copy application. The Director shall either approve the requested change of copy if the Director finds that such application satisfies the standards set forth in subsection C of this Section and the provisions of this Chapter or the Planning Director shall deny the sign permit, in which case the applicant shall be notified in writing the reason(s) why the application was denied. All decisions of the Director of Planning may be appealed in accordance with PMC 17.20.110.

C.    Criteria for approval. The following findings shall be made for approval of any change of copy regulated by this Chapter:

1.    The requested change of copy is to change the face of a legally-established sign structure that was issued all required permits at the time the sign was originally constructed;

2.    The sign structure to which the change of copy is requested is of sufficient integrity and strength to adequately support the sign copy; and

3.    The requested change of copy does not alter or reconfigure the outside dimensions of the sign, structurally modify the sign or relocate the sign from its original construction.

17.88.060 Sign Program Requirements and Procedures
Anyone wishing to establish a new sign program for an approved commercial shopping center, Business Park or industrial center for the purpose of establishing a coordinated project theme consisting of uniform design elements for multiple tenants and/or for modifying the spacing or location requirements for signs established under this Chapter may apply for a sign program in accordance with this Section. Elements not specified, as a component of the sign program shall comply with all applicable City sign regulations as required under this Chapter. In no case will a sign program be allowed to exceed the maximum sign area or height for the various types of signs permitted under this Chapter. A processing fee established by resolution of the City Council shall accompany applications for new sign programs along with the following:

A.    Application Requirements. New applications for sign programs shall be submitted in an 8 ½" X 11" format containing the following information and materials.

1.    Name, address and location of the center.

2.    City of Palmdale project case number for the center.

3.    Name, address, and phone number of person and firm preparing program.

4.    Property owner or leasing agent name, signature and phone number.

B.    Optional Sign Program Specifications. The following may be submitted in support of an application for a sign program. Where appropriate, illustrations shall be included.

1.    Size and material specifications;

2.    Method of attachment;

3.    Method of illumination;

4.    Architectural design enhancements;

5.    Location(s) of signs;

6.    Major or other tenant sign specifications, provided total center sign area is not exceeded;

7.    Letter style, font, color, and/or height specifications;

8.    Spacing requirements for signs; and

9.    Prohibited signs, beyond those identified under PMC 17.88.080.

C.    Review process. Applications for new sign programs shall be submitted on the appropriate form(s) provided by the Director of Planning and accompanied by a processing fee established by resolution of the City Council. Within 30 days of the receipt of an application for a sign program, the Director shall approve the application if the Director finds that such application satisfies the standards set forth in subsection D of this Section and conforms to the provisions of this Chapter. Otherwise, the sign program shall be denied and the applicant shall be provided with the reason(s) for the denial in writing from the Director of Planning. All decisions of the Director of Planning may be appealed in accordance with PMC 17.20.110.

D.    Criteria for approval. The following findings shall be made in order to approve any sign program regulated by this Chapter:

1.    The sign program establishes a coordinated project signage theme or modifies the spacing or location requirements within an approved commercial, business or industrial center of three or more tenants;

2.    The sign program does not exceed the maximum sign area for the various types of signs permitted under this Chapter; and

3.    The sign program meets all of the provisions contained in PMC 17.88.090, General Development Standards, for permanent sign structures.

17.88.070 Exemptions to Sign Permit Requirements
The following signs shall be allowed without the requirement of a sign permit in all zones, except as specified herein in which case such signs shall comply with PMC 17.88.040, Sign Permit Requirements and Procedures. All exempt signs shall be subject to PMC 17.88.090, General Development Standards, and PMC 17.88.190, Administration:

A.    Bus shelter signs. Signs located on bus shelters as specifically allowed by Resolution of the City Council.

B.    Flags. One (1) flagpole per developed parcel with a maximum of two (2) flags, not to exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height and twenty-five (25) square feet in area. One additional flagpole with up to two additional flags may be permitted subject to approval of a sign permit.

C.    Holiday displays. Holiday decorations displayed for an aggregate period not exceeding sixty-days (60) in any 365-day period.

D.    Information kiosks and directory signs. Information kiosks and directory signs that are permitted by the zone district as an accessory use and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height or sixteen (16) square feet in area per face (maximum thirty-two (32) square feet for a multi-sided kiosk). Information kiosks may be located within public property or right-of-way, subject to approval by the Director of Public Works or his/her designee. Wall-mounted signs are not exempt and are subject to the sign regulations for the zone.

E.    Interior signs. Signs located inside a building, structure or mall provided the sign copy is not visible to the public right-of-way or a parking lot or is not located so as to be conspicuously visible and readable without intentional and deliberate effort from outside the building, structure or mall.

F.    Light pole banners. Light pole banners as specifically allowed under PMC 17.88.140, Citywide Sign Beautification Program.

G.    Off-site directional sign structures. Off-site directional sign structures as specifically allowed under PMC 17.88.140, Citywide Sign Beautification Program.

H.    On-site directional signs. The City has a compelling interest in ensuring traffic safety, and to directly advance that interest, the City will allow on-site directional signage in accordance with the following standards so as to assist and direct traffic circulation into, out of, and through, parking lots on private property. On-site directional signs shall be limited in number to five (5) signs. Developed sites that have more than one frontage shall be allowed four (4) signs per frontage up to eight (8) total signs. The maximum area for such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet in area per sign and three (3) feet in height. Up to two (2) times the allowable sign area may be permitted with approval of a sign permit, provided no more than one-half (½) the allowable number of on-site directional signs is proposed for the site.

I.    Official signs. The City has a compelling interest in facilitating traffic safety for pedestrians and motorists. This interest is directly advanced by having official signs that help direct pedestrians and motorists away from roadway hazards, toward public services, and informs those persons of the applicability of certain traffic regulations. To accomplish this compelling purpose, the City finds that it must allow for such signs to be erected, moved and changed by governmental officials with minimal regulation from the Planning Department of the City. For these reasons, the City hereby exempts the following signs from its sign permit requirements and development standards. Official traffic, fire and police related signs, temporary traffic-control signs used during construction, utility facilities and substructure location and identification signs and markers required to protect said facilities, and other signs and markers required by the City of Palmdale, the State Department of Transportation, or any other public agency.

J.    Personal property for sale signs. One sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area may be placed on residential property where personal property is displayed for sale in accordance with Municipal Code provisions.

K.    Signs on vehicles. Vehicle signs, as defined in PMC 17.88.030, provided that the vehicle is not parked in a required parking space adjacent to a public right-of-way for the primary purpose of advertising. Any signage required by state law or local ordinance to be affixed to a vehicle, or vehicle signage required to protect public health, safety and welfare is also exempt. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

L.    Temporary signs. The City has a compelling interest in making the City attractive to residents, visitors and business owners. To accomplish this interest, the City finds it necessary to establish standards for temporary signs and to regulate their duration. All temporary signs in the City shall be subject to the following: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

1.    No more than one temporary sign shall be allowed per authorized use as specified under this Section.

2.    Temporary signs may be placed on private property with the owner’s permission. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit the owner of a piece of property, or his or her authorized representative, from removing a temporary sign from his or her property when the sign has been erected without his or her consent; and provided, further, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the Director, Code Enforcement staff or other authorized representative of the City from taking action to abate sign violations.

3.    Size.

(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

a)    Maximum area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet per side for signs on all non-residentially-designated property and on residential property over one acre in size. Freestanding signs shall be limited to eight (8) feet in height. Projects or parcels exceeding twenty (20) acres in size shall be permitted a twenty-five percent (25%) increase in allowable sign area.

b)    Residential property consisting of less than one acre in size shall be permitted one temporary sign up to nine (9) square feet in area per side. Freestanding signs shall be limited to six (6) feet in height.

4.    Temporary signs shall be non-illuminated.

5.    Removal. When displayed for a specific event or activity, temporary signs shall be removed within ten (10) calendar days of the advertised event or activity.

6.    Temporary non-commercial signs. No person shall remove, destroy, relocate, or otherwise disturb any temporary non-commercial sign, or direct, permit or allow such removal, destruction, relocation or disturbance, without the permission of the party who erected the sign. It shall be presumed, as to signs for political candidates, that the political candidate or his or her representative is the party who erected the sign. It shall further be presumed that the committee who has registered with the Secretary of State to support a position on a ballot proposition is the party who erected the sign taking the position on the ballot measure.

7.    Temporary on-site commercial signs. Temporary on-site commercial signs may be displayed as follows:

a)    During the period that a valid grading or building permit exists.

b)    For a maximum of 60 calendar days after the issuance of a business license for a new business. A new business may include an existing business under new ownership but does not include an existing business under new management. The size of a new business banner utilized pursuant to this Section shall be as permitted under PMC 17.88.100(E)(1)(a). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

c)    During the seasonal sale of agricultural products lawfully produced on the property.

d)    During the period when property is for sale, lease or rent.

e)    As a part of an approved Temporary Use Permit or Special Event Permit as specified in Chapter 17.27 PMC, Temporary Uses:

(i)    Parking lot and sidewalk sales;

(ii)    Grand openings and anniversary events;

(iii)    Outdoor art and craft shows and exhibits;

(iv)    Bazaars, pony rides and festivals;

(v)    Mobile health services;

(vi)    Christmas tree lots, pumpkin lots, haunted houses and firework stands; and

(vii)    Circuses, carnivals, rodeos concerts, shows or similar enterprises

f)    Inflatable displays. Inflatable displays may be approved by the Director of Planning for a period of time not to exceed an aggregate total of forty-five (45) days per calendar year and fourteen (14) consecutive days, and shall only be approved as part of a Special Event or Temporary Use Permit, as provided for in PMC 17.27.030. Inflatable displays must be securely fastened, ground-mounted and maintained in a good condition. Inflatable displays do not include balloons typically found in retail stores. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

g)    Temporary commercial signs may also display non-commercial messages.

8.    A-frame signs. One (1) temporary A-frame or similar impermanent freestanding sign is permitted for any use located within the C-D (Downtown Commercial) zone and civic center where pedestrian-oriented use is encouraged, as described in the adopted Palmdale Downtown Revitalization Plan. Such signs shall be non-illuminated and not exceed five (5) square feet per side (maximum two sides) and a height of five (5) feet. Signs shall be constructed using a minimum of industrial grade particleboard (or equivalent) and designed with radius edges, unexposed hinges and feet. Only oil-based paints shall be used for painted signs, which shall be professionally painted. Placement of A-frame signs shall not impede pedestrian or handicap access.

9.    Temporary off-site commercial signs. Temporary off-site commercial signs are permitted in the A-1, R-1, R-2 and R-3 zones as follows:

a)    Temporary off-site commercial signs shall be freestanding only and shall not be affixed to posts or utility poles or pushed or hammered into the ground. Such signs shall be formed from aluminum or a hard plastic material (or equivalent) in accordance with current industry standards. Cardboard or paper signs are not allowed. Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area and three (3) feet in height. Signs shall be of sufficient weight in order to keep upright and in place. No reflective paint or day-glo colors are permitted. Signs shall not include balloons, ribbons, pennants, streamers, or other attachments.

b)    Signs shall not be placed within subdivision landscape easements.

c)    Up to one such sign may be located at any one corner of an intersection provided handicap access is maintained.

d)    No sign shall be placed upon any private property without first obtaining permission from the owner of such property.

e)    No sign shall be placed within the public right-of-way without approval of an encroachment permit issued by the City Engineer. A minimum clearance of four (4) feet shall be maintained at all times for safe pedestrian access on public sidewalks. Signs may not be located on center medians or within the public street where vehicles travel. Where the public right-of-way extends into a parkway strip, signs shall be placed so as not to cause damage to landscaping and/or irrigation systems. One or more sign may be approved under an encroachment permit; however, each sign shall be inspected for consistency with the original approved sign in terms of its style, size, material and color. City decals issued under an encroachment permit shall be displayed on all signs placed within the public right-of-way and shall be oriented toward the street.

f)    Signs may be displayed only during daylight hours on weekends, holidays and one day during the week.

M.    Window sign, permanent. One (1) permanent non-illuminated window sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area.

N.    Window signs, temporary. Temporary window signs not exceeding 25% of the window area provided visibility into the building is maintained.

O.    Strand lights or similar outdoor lighting within areas where people dine or otherwise publicly congregate that is intended as festive ornamentation to be used on a year round basis. Holiday decorations are not included.

17.88.080 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited, except as otherwise expressly allowed under this Chapter:

A.    Animated signs.

B.    Balloons or other inflatable, wind activated or spinning devices that are typically available in retail stores, except as exempted under PMC 17.88.070. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

C.    Banner signs as permanent signage; however, temporary banners may be exempt as specified under PMC 17.88.070(L)(7) or permitted as specified in PMC 17.88.100. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

D.    Cabinet signs with little or no decorative elements.

E.    Cardboard signs exposed to the outdoor elements.

F.    Electronic reader board signs.

G.    Flags, except as expressly permitted under this Chapter.

H.    Flashing signs.

I.    Freestanding on-premise pole signs.

J.    Human signs.

K.    Off-site signs, except as exempted under PMC 17.88.070 and 17.88.130.

L.    Paper signs exposed to the outdoor elements.

M.    Pennants, strings of pennants or streamers.

N.    Portable or A-frame signs, except as permitted under PMC 17.88.070.

O.    Revolving signs, excluding barber shop poles.

P.    Roof signs.

Q.    Signs that create a safety hazard by obstructing the clear view of pedestrian and vehicular traffic.

R.    Signs that display a message, graphic representation, or other image that is obscene as that term is defined in Section 311 of the Penal Code.

S.    Signs, which by their color, design, location, or illustration resemble, distract attention from, or conflict with any traffic control device.

T.    Signs within the public right-of-way or upon public property (except where approved or required by a government agency and exempted under PMC 17.88.070), including, but not limited to, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, sticker, banner, sign, advertising or other device affixed or attached to or upon any public street, walkway, crosswalk, or other right-of-way, curb, lamp post, hydrant, tree, telephone booth or pole, lighting system or any fixture of the police or fire alarm system.

U.    Signs mounted on vehicles. No person shall park any vehicle on a public right-of-way or in a location on a private property that is visible from a public right-of-way, which has attached thereto or suspended there from any sign, except as exempted under PMC 17.88.070. This Section shall not preclude the display of bumper stickers.

17.88.090 General Development Standards
The following general provisions are applicable to all signs and sign structures regulated by this Chapter. These general provisions apply in addition to any specific regulations in this Chapter.

A.    Sign Area. Unless otherwise specified in this Chapter, the maximum permitted sign area for signs shall be calculated based on the acreage and frontage of a property and/or the length of the building elevation upon which the sign is to be attached. Wall signs for multiple tenant buildings shall be based upon the lineal building frontage occupied by each tenant as specified by the zone unless otherwise approved through a sign program. The size and number of freestanding signs may be modified under a sign program provided the maximum sign area is not exceeded.

B.    Locational Criteria. All signs shall be subject to all applicable regulations for the zone in which the proposed sign is to be located, as specified under PMC 17.88.100 through 17.88.120 under this Chapter or any applicable specific plan sign regulations. Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Chapter, no sign shall be erected or used for business purposes of any kind, except such sign(s) as shall be located on the site of the place of business, enterprise or calling which is reasonably related to the products or services available on or within those premises. Sign location shall not obstruct motorists’ visibility by considering driveway placement, long-term growth of landscaping, and adjacent and/or future development. No signs may be located in or adjacent to the public right of way, or private drive aisle or driveway in such a manner that it obstructs the clear view of pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic or constructed so as to obstruct any window, door, fire escape or other emergency exit of any building. In addition, the following additional location criteria shall be maintained:

1.    Wall-mounted signs shall not project above the parapet, canopy, fascia, or wall to which it is attached nor above the roofline.

2.    Freestanding signs shall not block visibility of motorists in order to maintain traffic safety, or from outdoor seating areas to preserve views. All such signs shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any property line and shall be placed at least 100 feet or one-half (1/2) of the lot width, whichever is less, from residentially designated or zoned properties. Freestanding signs shall be spaced along street frontages as specified in this Chapter, unless otherwise approved through a sign program.

3.    Except where approved or required by a government agency or as otherwise expressly permitted under this Chapter, no sign may be stuck, glued, painted, pasted, posted, nailed, stapled or otherwise affixed or attached to or upon any public street, walkway, cross walk or other right of way, curb, lamp post, transit bench or shelter, trash receptacle, fire hydrant, tree, telephone booth or pole, lighting system or any fixture of the police or fire alarm system, any existing sign, or upon any other public property.

C.    Setbacks. All freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum of ten feet from the public right-of-way unless expressly permitted by the zone in which the proposed sign is to be located or this Chapter.

D.    Orientation. On-site signs shall be oriented so as not to create confusion and shall be visible to pedestrians, motorists and/or other passersby from the front, side or rear of the building to which it is intended; however, wall signs located within commercial or industrial zones shall not face directly onto residentially designated property.

E.    Methods of Attachment. Wall signs shall be attached to the sides of buildings with fasteners that are either concealed from clear view or treated to match the building. Projecting signs shall utilize decorative methods of attachment in instances where their visibility cannot reasonably be concealed. Freestanding signs shall be secured to the ground utilizing a solid support base consisting of solid materials such as concrete, block, stone or brick rather than poles with veneer covers.

F.    Design. Signs and sign structures shall be professionally designed, in accordance with industry standards, and clearly understood for its intended purpose. Signs shall incorporate a classic style that will not quickly become out-dated. In addition, the following additional elements of design shall be incorporated into new signs:

1.    Wall signs.

a)    Wall signs shall consist of one of the following types of signs:   

(i)    Individual raised letters or symbols (channel letter);

(ii)    Custom contour enclosure;

(iii)    Decorative cabinet (not plain); or

(iv)    Professionally custom painted; and

b)    Signs attached to buildings shall project no less than one (1) inch and no more than eighteen (18) inches from the structure.

2.    On-site freestanding sign structures.

a)    Colors and materials of freestanding sign structures shall be similar or complimentary to the building’s exterior construction materials to which it represents, such as concrete, stucco, masonry, stone or tile;

b)    Minor architectural features such as cornices, roof pitches and archways, which are similar to those of the building(s) shall be incorporated into the design of the sign structure. Such features may increase the allowable size of structures by 25%, exclusive of sign face and base. Freestanding can signs with no architectural features are not permitted;

c)    The shape or appearance of freestanding signs shall not depict inanimate objects, animals or human beings;

d)    The depth of sign structures shall be a minimum of six (6) inches and a maximum of 24 inches, exclusive of the base. Sign structures exceeding 24 inches in depth may be considered provided the total sign area allowed for a double-faced sign is not exceeded and the sign structure meets all other criteria for approval; and

e)    Panel inserts for multi-tenant freestanding sign structures shall be uniform in color and typeface.

G.    Substitutions.

1.    Marquee signs may be substituted for wall or freestanding sign structures pursuant to the definition of a marquee sign under PMC 17.88.030.

2.    Projecting signs may be used in place of wall signs provided they do not exceed one-half (1/2) of the allowable wall sign area and the sign meets all other provisions in PMC 17.88.090, General Development Standards.

3.    Canopy signs may be allowed in place of or in addition to wall signs as specified in subsection O of this Section.

H.    Construction. All signs and sign structures shall be professionally constructed in accordance with industry standards. All parts, portions, units, and materials, comprising all signs, together with the frame, background, supports, or anchorage for all sign structures, shall be manufactured, fabricated, assembled, constructed, and erected in compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and City laws and regulations.

I.    Materials. Construction materials for all components of signs shall consist of durable, long-lasting materials that hold up to the extremes inherent in Palmdale’s desert environment, including heat, cold and wind for long-term durability, as well as damage caused by nesting birds and other environmental constraints of the region. Individual foam letters shall be covered with a solid material to prevent damage by birds, sun and harsh weather.

J.    Colors. Earth tones and subdued colors such as maroon, brown, tan, gray, peach, cream, or white shall be used for the sign face or sign structure. Primary colors such as red, green, blue, yellow, orange, purple, pink and black may be used for letters, symbols, graphics or minor accents; however, except in the case of temporary signs, such colors shall not be used for the sign face or sign structure. Day-glo colors may only be used as minor accents to the overall sign. Reflective paint is not allowed.

K.    Illumination. The City has a compelling interest in promoting traffic safety for pedestrians and motorists. To achieve this interest, it is necessary to minimize excessive lighting of signs that may distract pedestrians and motorists or produce hazardous light and glare into the eyes of motorists, and to do so by conditioning the type and intensity of the lighting and its appropriateness for the planned location and orientation of the sign.

The method of illumination for all types of signs is an important design element. However, the intensity or glare of the illumination may cause a visual distraction, safety hazard or public nuisance. The Director of Planning or his/her designee shall determine any required measures necessary to reduce possible negative impacts on adjacent buildings, roadways or surrounding land uses. New light fixtures added to the exterior of an existing building for the purpose of sign illumination shall be subject to review and approval of a Minor Modification by the Director of Planning. Any sign that requires approval of an electrical building permit shall utilize only approved electrical components that are properly listed and tested by an acceptable testing agency and approved by the City’s Building Official. The approval of any illuminated sign shall not be final until thirty days (30) after receipt by the Director of Planning of written notice that installation is complete. During the thirty day (30) period the Director may order the dimming or removal of any illumination found to be excessive pursuant to this Section. No illuminated sign or lighting device shall be placed or directed so as to permit or cause glare or reflection which may constitute a traffic or safety hazard or interfere with the use and enjoyment of a public street, walkway, or adjacent properties by having a blinding affect on residents, motorists or pedestrians, preventing safe illumination of sidewalks, streets or drive aisles, or by negatively impacting illumination levels on adjacent properties.

L.    Flags. Flags shall consist of fabric or similar flexible material that is designed to hang from a pole and blow in the wind. Plastic or other materials that produce more noise than fabric are prohibited for use as flags. Such flags shall be replaced when ripped, tattered, and/or faded or other wear is evident as determined by the Director of Planning or his/her designee.

M.    Neon signs. Neon signs as defined by this Chapter are permitted only in Zones C-3, C-4 or C-5, or in those portions of approved Specific Plans with commercial land use designations equivalent to Zones C-3, C-4 or C-5, subject to PMC 17.88.040(C) (Criteria for Approval of a sign permit) and subsection K of this Section, Illumination. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

N.    Painted signs. Painted signs may be permitted as permanent wall signs and shall be professionally painted only. Such signs may be externally illuminated with decorative light fixtures within commercial zones subject to subsection K of this Section. As permitted by the zone, signs may be painted directly on buildings or on industrial grade particleboard (minimum, or equivalent) with radius edges. Only oil-based paints (or equivalent) shall be utilized for painted signs.

O.    Canopy/awning signs. Canopy and awning signs are intended to be visible to pedestrians and/or from nearby parking areas and on-site circulation drives. Canopy signs are permitted within a shopping center where canopies are uniformly used within the shopping center or for a single tenant if the tenant is occupying an entire parcel and does not share space in a shopping center, as follows:

1.    The total combined area for wall and awning signs shall not exceed the allowable wall sign area permitted for the face of the building;

2.    Awning signs may be located on the front or side panels of angled, curved or box awnings or on the bottom flap (valance) of the awning;

3.    Awning signs shall not consist of more than a single line of copy or symbols; and

4.    The size of the sign shall not exceed seventy-five (75) percent of any one dimension of the canopy or awning.

P.    Maintenance. The following maintenance standards shall apply to all signs:

1.    Every sign and all parts, portions, units and materials comprising the same, together with the frame, background, supports, or anchorage thereof, shall be continuously maintained in a safe, structurally sound, neatly painted, and well-repaired condition; and

2.    Signs illuminated either internally or externally must be capable of being fully illuminated and legible and the face(s) must be intact without holes or other exterior facial damage. Illuminated signs that are damaged or have defective lighting elements shall remain unlighted until repaired.

17.88.100 Temporary Commercial Banner Permit
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

The following provisions are applicable to all banners regulated under this Section. The provisions are intended to permit the greatest flexibility possible in terms of business signage, while maintaining as orderly and attractive business environment within the City’s commercial and industrial areas.

A.    Permit Process and Fees for Temporary Commercial Banners

1.    The applicant/business owner shall be responsible for obtaining all required building permits from the Building and Safety Division associated with the installation of the banner.

2.    A Temporary Commercial Banner permit shall be obtained for the use of banners at a business location. In evaluating permit applications, staff will review zoning, location, size, method of attachment and conformance with this Section and any other applicable requirements.

3.    The Temporary Commercial Banner permit application shall include the property owner or owner’s authorized leasing agent name, signature and telephone number.

4.    Applicants shall pay an annual Temporary Commercial Banner permit fee consisting of the fee for a sign, as established by resolution of the City Council plus the cost of two (2) inspections annually by the Code Enforcement Division.

B.    Zones. Banners will be permitted in all commercial and industrial zones and commercially and industrially designated properties within Specific Plan areas.

C.    Use. Banners may be used for all general business purposes, provided that banners may not be utilized as the sole source of business identification. In order to ensure that banners are not used for primary business identification, any business applying for a banner permit must have permanent signage on the building that has been legally established.

D.    Design Standards. The banner shall be constructed of high quality, durable material capable of withstanding the severe local weather conditions. The banner shall be professionally designed and manufactured. No hand writing on blank banners or erasable banner material and design shall be allowed.

E.    Types of Banners.

1.    Wall Mounted

a.    The maximum size of a wall mounted banner shall be 32 square feet or one square foot of banner area per lineal foot of building frontage, whichever is larger. There shall be no minimum height or width dimensions required, provided the banner does not encroach onto the frontage of any adjacent business.

b.    No more than one banner per frontage shall be displayed at any time by any business. Banners may not be located on any frontage that faces a residential use.

c.    Banners shall be mounted flat against a wall and be secured to the wall using permanent anchors or other similar methods. Under no circumstances shall banners be mounted using wire, rope cables, bungee cords or similar devices.

d.    The location of banners shall not be changed without prior approval of the Planning Department. Modification requests shall be submitted to the Planning Department for review and approval along with those plans as deemed necessary and a review fee for Zone Clearance as established by resolution of the City Council.

2.    Ground Mounted Banners

a.    Ground mounted banners shall include freestanding banners, feather, teardrop, swooper, and bowhead banners.

b.    No more than one (1) ground mounted banner may be permitted per business in addition to any permitted wall mounted banner(s).

c.    The maximum height of a ground mounted banner shall be twelve (12) feet and the maximum area shall be 42 square feet.

d.    No ground mounted banner shall be located within the public right-of-way, except within the CD (Downtown Commercial) zone where ground mounted banners may be located in a manner consistent with A-frame signs as stated within PMC 17.88.070(L)(8).

e.    A minimum clearance of five (5) feet from the edge of the public right-of-way shall be maintained at all times for safe pedestrian access on public sidewalks.

f.    Banners shall not be located in or adjacent to the public right of way, or private drive aisles or driveway in such a manner that it obstructs the clear view of pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic or placed in such a way as to obstruct any window, door, fire escape or other emergency exit of any building.

g.    Ground mounted banners shall not impede pedestrian or handicap access.

h.    Ground stakes shall be placed so as not to cause damage to landscaping and/or irrigation systems.

i.    Ground mounted banners may only be located on the parcel or within the larger commercial/industrial center in which the business is located; no off-site banners are permitted. Banners within the CD zone must be located within the immediate vicinity of the business.

Any banner legally established under this Section shall be maintained by the applicant/business owner. When wear and tear is observed by any employee of the City and upon notification to the property owner/business owner, required work to restore or replace the worn banner shall be performed to the satisfaction of the Planning Manager within 14 days. Failure to comply with this provision may result in revocation of the permit for the Temporary Commercial Banner.

The Planning Manager shall give written notice to the applicant/business owner regarding any violations of the provisions of this Section. Within 14 days of receipt of the notice, the violation shall be corrected or remedied to the satisfaction of the Planning Manager. Failure to pay fees, or non-compliance with the regulations, procedures and conditions set forth in this Section shall be cause for revocation of the Temporary Commercial Banner permit and removal of the banner. Materially inaccurate or erroneous information submitted as a part of a Temporary Commercial Banner permit application may be cause for revocation of the permit.

17.88.110 Signs in Residential Zones.
In addition to temporary signs identified in PMC 17.88.070, the following signs are permitted in the R-1, R-2, R-3 and A-1 zones and for any residential use in the MX overlay zone subject to approval of a sign permit:

Use

Sign Type

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Height Including Base

Remarks

Manufactured Home Subdivisions and Parks

Wall or Monument and Directory

One each per public street entrance, up to 4 signs total

30 sq.ft.

5 feet when setback 10 feet from public right-of-way, or 3-1/2 feet when setback 5-10 feet from right-of-way

Signs may be externally illuminated only, subject to PMC 17.88.090(I). No more than 10 feet permitted for any one dimension.

Single-Family Residential Subdivisions

Wall or Monument

One per public street entrance, up to 2 signs total

30 sq.ft.

5 feet when setback 10 feet from public right-of-way, or 3-1/2 feet when setback 5-10 feet from public right-of-way

Signs may not be illuminated.

No more than 10 feet permitted for any one dimension.

Multiple-Family Residential

Monument and Directory

One each per public street entrance, up to 4 signs total

30 sq.ft.

5 feet when setback 10 feet from public right-of-way, or 3-1/2 feet when setback 5-10 feet from public right-of-way

Signs may be externally illuminated only. No more than 10 feet for any one dimension.

Model Home Sales Complex1

Temporary Freestanding Sign

One double-face or two single-face signs

60 sq.ft. per single face

10 feet

Signs shall be set back ten feet from the edge of the public right-of-way; signs may not be illuminated.

 

On-site directional or identification

Two per model home

6 sq.ft.

3 feet

Signs within the public right-of-way shall obtain an encroachment permit.

 

Flags

Two per model home up to 6 flags total

Up to 15 sq.ft. each

15 feet

Flags may be displayed on two sides of models on corner lots, otherwise only on one side. Flags may not be located within 50 feet of an occupied unit.

Institutional Uses2

Wall or Monument

One per public street entrance up to 2 signs

30 sq.ft.

Monument signs: 5 feet when setback 10 feet from public right-of-way, or 3-1/2 feet when setback 5-10 feet from public right-of-way.

Signs may be externally illuminated. No more than 10 feet permitted for any one dimension.

1    Subject to approval of a Temporary Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 17.27 PMC.

2    Within structures not classified as R-1, R-2.1, R-2.2, R-2.1.1, R-2.2.1 or R-3 under the State Building Code.

17.88.120 Signs in Commercial or Public Facility Zones.
In addition to temporary signs identified in PMC 17.88.070, the following signs may be permitted in the C-1, C-2, C-3, C-43, C-5, C-D, OR and PF zones and for any residential use in the MX overlay zone, subject to approval of a sign permit:

 

Use

Sign Type

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area

Max. Height4

Remarks

Commercial, Office, Professional, Institutional, Public Facilities

Wall signs, secondary skyline signs or canopy signs

No limit; combined area of signs shall not exceed the maximum permitted sign area

1-1/2 square feet of sign area per lineal foot of building frontage

(1-1/2:1)

N/A

Secondary skyline signs are subject to PMC 17.88.150(B); Externally lighted signs are subject to PMC 17.88.090(K); Canopy signs are subject to PMC 17.88.090(O).

Same

Skyline signs5

One per allowable elevation; 2 max.

1:1 sign area per lineal foot of bldg. frontage

 

Signs are in addition to secondary skyline signs.

Same

Monument signs

One sign per 250 feet of street frontage

Improved property6:

< 10 acres: 50 sq.ft.;

> 10 acres: 100 sq.ft.;

Unimproved property:

 

5'

10'

 

No more than two signs over 50 sq.ft. per development consisting of 10+ acres in size. Signs for unimproved property may not be lighted and/or may not serve as off-site commercial signs.

 

 

 

= 35 acres 100 sq.ft.

10'

 

Same

Drive-thru or walk-up svcs.

Two signs

45 sq.ft

7'

Accessory signs may be internally lighted only.

Same

Under-canopy signs

One per tenant

5 sq.ft.

1-1/2 ft.

8' clearance above walkways.

Same (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

Wall mounted banner

One per frontage except facing residential uses

32 sq.ft. or 1 sq.ft. of area per lineal foot of frontage

N/A

Mounted flat against the wall using permanent anchors.

Same (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

Free standing banner

One per business

42 sq.ft.

12 foot

Min. clearance of 5 ft. from edge of ROW, shall not impede pedestrian or handicap access.

Gasoline Stations

Fuel price

One per street frontage

15 sq.ft.; or 30 sq.ft. if placed on corner

5'

 

Same

Pump island canopy

One per side visible to the public right-of-way

20 sq.ft.

N/A

Signs may not extend above the canopy roofline.

Same

Pump island

One per gas pump

4 sq.ft.

N/A

 

3    Signs within the C-4 zone for regional shopping centers shall be subject to a sign program approved by the Planning Commission as part of a Conditional Use Permit.

4    Grade changes by mounding within landscape areas less than 3:1 slopes shall be counted in calculation of sign height; maximum height includes the base.

5    This applies to buildings with three or more stories, in accordance with Section 88.14.

6    Architectural features may increase overall sign area by 25% for monument signs on improved property.

17.88.130 Signs in Industrial Zones.
In addition to temporary signs identified in PMC 17.88.070, the following signs may be permitted in the M-1, M-2, M-3, M-4 and QR zones subject to approval of a sign permit:

 

Use

Sign Type

Max. Number

Maximum Sign Area7

Max. Height8

Remarks

Manufacturing, Wholesale and Retail Trade, Services, Commercial, Public or Institutional Uses and Mining Operations

Wall signs, secondary skyline signs or canopy signs

No limit; combined area of signs shall not exceed maximum area permitted

1-1/2 sq.ft. of sign area per lineal foot of building frontage

N/A

Painted wall signs shall be non-illuminated only. Signs on buildings of three stories or more shall be subject to PMC 17.88.150(B).Canopy signs shall be subject to PMC 17.88.090(O).

Same

Skyline signs9

1 per allowable elevation up to 2 signs maximum

1 sq.ft. of sign area per lineal ft. of building frontage

 

Signs are in addition to secondary skyline signs

Same

Monument signs

One sign per 250 feet of street frontage

Individual Tenants: 30 sq.ft.

5' < 30 sq.ft.

No more than one sign over 30 sq. ft. per street frontage. Signs on unimproved land may not be lighted and/or may not serve as off-site commercial signage.

Improved land:

 

<20 acres 50 sq.ft.

6' 50+ sq.ft.

20-80 acres 75 sq.ft.

7' 75 sq.ft.

>80 acres 120 sq.ft.

10' < 120 sf.

Unimproved land:

 

> 35 acres 100 sq. ft

10' < 100 sf.

Same

Drive-thru or walk-up services

Two signs

45 sq.ft.

7'

May only be internally lighted.

Same

Under-canopy signs

One per canopy

5 sq.ft.

 

8' clearance above walkways.

Same (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

Wall mounted banner

One per frontage except facing residential uses

32 sq.ft. or 1 sq.ft. of area per lineal foot of frontage

N/A

Mounted flat against the wall using permanent anchors.

Same (Zoning Ordinance 10-03, adopted by City Council March 2, 2011.)

Free standing banner

One per business

42 sq.ft.

12 foot

Min. clearance of 5 ft. from edge of ROW, shall not impede pedestrian or handicap access.

Gasoline Stations

Fuel price signs

One per street frontage

15 sq.ft. or 30 sq.ft. if located on corner

5'

The combined area of all freestanding signs shall not exceed the maximum allowed

Same

Pump island canopy

One per viewable side

20 sq.ft.

1-1/2 ft.

Signs may not extend above the canopy roofline.

Same

Pump islands

One per pump

4 sq.ft.

 

 

7    Architectural features may add 25% to overall sign area for monument signs.

8    Grade changes by mounding within landscape areas less than 3:1 slopes shall be counted in calculation of sign height; maximum height includes the base.

9    Applicable to buildings with three or more stories, in accordance with PMC 17.88.140.

17.88.140 Citywide Sign Beautification Program
The City has a compelling interest in making the City attractive to residents, visitors and business owners and in protecting and improving the economic vitality of its historic downtown area, in protecting and enhancing the aesthetic character of that area, and in promoting traffic safety in, through and around this area of the City that has a concentration of public facilities and buildings. To accomplish these interests, the City finds it necessary to establish certain classes of signs, to limit their content and to provide a public convenience by directing motorists and pedestrians to various locations throughout the City and by promoting the downtown area.

The Citywide Sign Beautification Program consists of signs that are uniform in design, which provide the community with a sense of place and a distinct identity. Signs constructed as a part of this Citywide Sign Beautification Program shall be allowed without the requirement of a sign permit in all zones; however, such signs shall be in substantial conformance with PMC 17.88.090, General Development Standards. This Section shall be applicable to the following types of signs:

A.    Civic Center Plaza. Roadway signs may be installed on streets leading to the Civic Center and surrounding public parking areas.

B.    City Entry Signs. Freeway and roadway monument signs may be installed on major thoroughfares near City limits in varying size. Such signs shall be constructed of integral concrete monolith and stone base with lettering to be cast into the concrete with color infill.

C.    City Roadway/Street Signage. Street name signs may be installed on streets throughout the City.

D.    Light Pole Banners. Banners may be placed on light poles along major thoroughfares and/or surrounding the Civic Center during various seasons of the year or for City-sponsored events.

E.    Off-Site Directional Signs. This Section rescinds the Freestanding Residential Subdivision Directional Sign Program established by Resolution No. 93-32 adopted by the City Council. Off-site directional signs shall be permitted in accordance with the following provisions:

1.    Design and Construction. The City Council may, by duly executed license agreement, grant to a qualified person or persons the exclusive right to design, erect and/or maintain the off-site direction sign component of its Citywide Sign Beautification Program. The design of such signs shall be subject to approval of the City. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person or entity erecting or placing such signs shall be required to maintain a City business license.

2.    Operation. The City Council may, by duly executed license agreement, grant to a qualified entity or organization the exclusive right to operate its Citywide Sign Beautification Program. Licensee(s) shall make directional sign panels available to all persons or entities on a first-come, first-service basis; however, public facility signs shall have priority for 1/3 of the sign panels for each sign structure. The City shall have the authority to review and approve the form of any agreement to be used between the licensee and persons/entities requesting space on the sign structures. Licensee(s) shall maintain a separate waiting list for each sign structure.

3.    General Requirements.

a)    For purposes of this Section, street intersection shall mean where two or more streets or roads cross at the same grade. This shall include all streets and roads with a right-of-way of one hundred (100') or larger.

b)    Signs may be constructed on improved or unimproved property along major arterial streets provided they are located on private property with the owner’s written permission or within the public right-of-way with approval of an encroachment permit. Major arterial streets shall consist of those designated on the General Plan Circulation Map.

c)    Signs shall not obstruct the use of sidewalks, walkways, bike and hiking trails and shall not obstruct the visibility of motorists, pedestrians of traffic control signs.

d)    Signs shall be limited to no more than three structures on the same side of the street between major arterial street intersections and shall not be located within 100 feet of another freestanding sign structure.

e)    Directional signs shall not be placed on local, collector or secondary arterial streets.

f)    Directional sign structures shall be ladder type with individual sign panels of uniform design and color throughout the city limits.

g)    Single-panel directional sign structures shall not exceed six feet (6') in width and twelve (12') feet in height. Double panel directional sign structures may be permitted when constructed in conjunction with a City Entry Sign as otherwise described in this Chapter.

h)    Directional sign panels shall not exceed five feet (5') in width or twelve inches (12") in height. A one-half inch clear space shall be provided between each sign panel.

i)    Sign panels shall not be internally illuminated.

j)    Sign structure installations shall include “break away” design features.

k)    No signs, pennants, flags or other devices for visual attention or other appurtenances shall be placed on the directional signs.

l)    The design of all off-site directional signs shall be consistent throughout the city, subject to City approval.

m)    Sign lettering used for identification panels shall be uniform in style and size, subject to City approval.

n)    All signs erected on private property must have written consent from the property owner with the City to have a right to enter property to remove any signs not in conformance.

o)    The licensee or holder of an encroachment permit shall hold the City, and its officers and employees, harmless of all costs, claims and damages levied against them.

17.88.150 Skyline Signs
Skyline signs shall consist of wall signs that are placed on buildings of three stories or more. Signs on tall buildings can have a significant visual influence upon the community’s environment; therefore, they should be consistent with the architectural style of the building. The approval of skyline signs shall be subject to PMC 17.88.040, Sign Permits, and to the following standards:

A.    Skyline Signs.

1.    Area. Signs shall be subject to the maximum sign area permitted for skyline signs within the zone as regulated under PMC 17.88.110 and 17.88.120.

2.    Placement. Skyline signs shall be placed above the vision glass windows of the highest floor of the building and below the eave line in accordance with the provisions for signs within the zone. In conventional high-rise design, a sizeable area is generally available for signs above the vision glass of the highest floor. Skyline signs shall not be located on any building elevation in vertical (stacked) alignment and shall be separated by a horizontal dimension of not less than forty (40) percent of the linear dimension of the subject elevation. For buildings with articulated roofs, a more flexible definition is appropriate. In such cases, signs are to be integrated visually with architectural features such as windows, projections and articulating elements.

3.    Proportion of sign area. To avoid the appearance of crowding a sign into a sign area, sign copy shall occupy no more than 80 percent of the horizontal skyline sign area as defined by this subsection. Additionally, no part of a sign can be located within the extreme left or right ten percent of the building elevation.

4.    Number of signs. Skyline signs shall be limited to one sign per allowable building elevation. Skyline signs shall only be placed on a maximum of two building elevations, which shall be opposite sides of the building.

5.    Skyline sign copy. Skyline signs shall consist of a single line of copy or symbols. However, subject to the review and approval of the Director of Planning, multiple lines of copy or symbols may be permitted where building architecture or the length of a sign prohibits a single line.

6.    Compatible materials. Skyline signs shall utilize material that is the same or appears to be the same or that is compatible with the building surfaces. Skyline signs on the top of buildings shall complement and add to the aesthetics of the architectural materials used.

7.    Sign illumination. Skyline signs may be illuminated. If illuminated, such shall be either internally illuminated or illuminated to create a silhouette effect.

B.    Secondary skyline signs.

1.    Sign Area. Secondary skyline signs shall be subject to the maximum sign area permitted for wall signs within the zone as regulated under PMC 17.88.110 and 17.88.120. Wall signs for multiple tenant buildings shall be based upon the lineal building frontage occupied by each tenant as specified by the zone unless otherwise approved through a sign program.

2.    Placement. Secondary skyline signs shall be permitted below the second floor, except that, if the building has a two-story lobby, secondary skyline tenant signs are permitted between the second and third floors above such lobby. An individual tenant may have no more than one sign per building elevation. Secondary skyline signs shall not be located on any building elevation in vertical (stacked) alignment and shall be separated by a horizontal dimension of not less than fifteen (15) percent of the linear dimension of the subject elevation.

3.    Locational Criteria. Secondary skyline signs are intended to be viewed from on-site walkways and parking areas adjacent to the building.

C.    Retail, service business and restaurant uses located within buildings of three or more. In addition to secondary skyline signs described in subsection B of this Section, retail uses, service business uses or restaurants located within an office building containing three or more stories may be permitted signs as specified in this Chapter and may appear on the same building elevation as and included in the same total sign area calculation and placement as secondary skyline signs. Such signs shall be located at or adjacent to the entrance of the building and individual tenants shall be permitted no more than one sign per elevation.

17.88.160 Outdoor Advertising Sign Structures (Billboards)
A.    Permits and review process.

1.    Permits required.

a)    No outdoor advertising sign structure shall be constructed, relocated or upgraded at any location in the City of Palmdale without obtaining a conditional use permit subject to the provisions of this Section, and any other permits required by law.

b)    Other permits. Nothing in this Chapter shall exempt the applicant from obtaining any other required approval including, but not limited to, any permits required by the State of California.

2.    Review process

Conditional Use Permit. A conditional use permit shall be required, pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter and Chapter 17.22 PMC for any construction, upgrade, or relocation of outdoor advertising sign structures. The Planning Commission shall approve the conditional use permit if the Commission finds that such application satisfies the requirements set forth in subsection (A)(3) of this Section, or the Planning Commission shall deny the application, in which case the applicant shall be notified in writing of the reason(s) why the application was denied. All decisions of the Planning Commission may be appealed in accordance with PMC 17.20.110.

3.    Findings for approval. No conditional use permit for an outdoor advertising sign structure shall be issued unless the Planning Commission finds that the application satisfies, or with conditions can satisfy, all of the following requirements:

a)    The proposed sign meets all of the findings for approval of a Conditional Use Permit as set forth in PMC 17.22.050;

b)    The proposed sign meets the locational criteria for outdoor advertising sign structures, pursuant to PMC 17.88.160(B);

c)    The proposed outdoor advertising sign structure meets all of the development standards as specified in subsection C of this Section or PMC 17.88.160(E), whichever is applicable of this Chapter, including permitted size, height and setbacks for such signs;

d)    The outdoor advertising sign structure is oriented to attract the attention/patronage of the general public, taking into consideration long-term growth of landscaping and future development;

e)    The outdoor advertising sign structure is in compliance with all applicable Federal, State, and City laws and regulations pertaining to the construction of outdoor advertising sign structures;

B.    Locational Criteria. Outdoor advertising sign structures shall be limited to placement on improved properties with habitable structures only, subject to the following restrictions:

1.    No outdoor advertising sign structure shall be located within the area bounded by 20th Street West to the west, Avenue N to the north, Sierra Highway to the east and Palmdale Boulevard to the south.

2.    There shall be no more than four outdoor advertising sign structures, including existing outdoor advertising sign structures, located within the area bounded by the extension of Avenue N-12 to the north, Rancho Vista Boulevard to the south, Sierra Highway to the west and an imaginary line 100’ of the easterly Southern Pacific property line to the east.

3.    No additional outdoor advertising sign structures shall be constructed, relocated or upgraded except when located in C-5, M-1, or M-2 zones.

4.    No additional outdoor advertising sign structures shall be constructed on properties within six hundred sixty (660) feet of Palmdale Boulevard.

5.    The outdoor advertising sign structure shall be no closer than a radius of five hundred feet (500') to any premises designated or zoned for residential purposes, or to any premises containing a school, church, or similar place of worship, historical site or building, cemetery or similar place of interment, public or private park or outdoor recreational facility.

6.    The outdoor advertising sign structure shall be no closer than a radius of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet to a previously constructed off-premise outdoor advertising sign structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-01, adopted by City Council March 5, 2014.)

7.    An outdoor advertising structure may be approved in a location other than specifically identified or excluded in subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this Section, including within an adopted Specific Plan area, when a Conditional Use Permit is approved in conjunction with a Billboard Relocation Agreement pursuant to PMC 17.88.160(D), but in no event shall be located within a residential zone. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-01, adopted by City Council on March 5, 2014.)

C.    Development standards. All outdoor advertising sign structures shall comply with the following requirements:

1.    Sign Area. The total area of a single sign face shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet. The total area of a double-faced sign shall not exceed six hundred (600) square feet. Not more than five percent (5%) of the area of a sign face shall be used for projections.

2.    Height. The outdoor advertising sign structure shall not exceed thirty-two (32) feet in height measured from the ground level.

3.    Setbacks. The sign shall comply with all setback requirements of the underlying zone. It shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any property line. No materials or structural feature, except poles or pilasters, shall extend into the cross-visibility area between ground level and seven (7) feet above the grade of the nearest street curb. No portion of the sign shall block the view of any on-site advertising sign on the same or adjoining parcels.

4.    Construction. The outdoor advertising sign structure shall be built to withstand a minimum wind pressure of twenty-one (21) pounds per square foot of exposed surface.

5.    Design. The outdoor advertising sign structure shall not be supported by more than one (1) supporting post. It shall be architecturally treated so as to screen the frame, support structures and lighting from public view. The outdoor advertising sign structure shall not contain any flashing or blinking material, or mechanically activated or animated devices. The color and materials shall be subject to the provisions of this Chapter.

6.    Sign copy area. The message or sign copy area of any relocated or upgraded outdoor advertising sign structure may be no larger than the message copy area of the original outdoor advertising sign structure.

7.    Utility lines. Utility lines providing electrical power to a new or relocated outdoor advertising sign structure shall be placed underground.

8.    Maintenance. The sign and structure shall be continuously maintained in an attractive, clean, and safe condition pursuant to PMC 17.88.090(O).

9.    Traffic safety. The sign shall not constitute a traffic hazard because of sign shape or its location in relationship to an official public traffic sign or signal.

D.    Billboard Relocation Agreement (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-01, adopted by City Council March 5, 2014.)

1.    Purpose. The purpose of the Billboard Relocation Agreement is to reduce the overall number of outdoor advertising sign structures within the City by allowing relocation of billboards in more suitable locations and provide more attractive, aesthetically-pleasing billboard designs and to improve the aesthetic appearance of the City.

2.    Authority. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, and consistent with the California Business and Professions Code Outdoor Advertising provisions, existing outdoor advertising sign structures may be relocated and/or upgraded as part of a Billboard Relocation Agreement entered into between the City Council and a billboard owner and the approval of a Conditional Use Permit for any relocated billboard.

3.    Content. Each Billboard Relocation Agreement shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

a.    Identification of the location of the billboards being permanently removed and the location of the relocated billboards.

b.    Conceptual design drawings for the relocated billboards.

4.    Review Process and Findings. All Billboard Relocation Agreements shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council. The following findings must be made by the City Council in order to approve a Billboard Reduction and Relocation Agreement:

a.    The proposed agreement is consistent with the goals, objectives, purposes and provisions of the Palmdale General Plan, the Palmdale Zoning Ordinance and any applicable specific plan;

b.    The proposed relocation site is compatible with the uses and structures on the site and in the surrounding area;

c.    The proposed Billboard Relocation Agreement provides for a net reduction in existing outdoor advertising sign structures within the City.

d.    The proposed Billboard Relocation Agreement contributes to the reduction of visual clutter in the City;

e.    The proposed billboard would not create a traffic or safety problem with regard to onsite access circulation or visibility;

f.    The proposed billboard would not interfere with onsite parking or landscaping required by City ordinance or permit;

g.    The proposed billboard would not otherwise result in a threat to the general health, safety and welfare of City residents.

5.    Conditional Use Permit. Subsequent to the approval of a Billboard Relocation Agreement by the City Council, the billboard owner shall file a Conditional Use Permit application to relocate or upgrade the outdoor advertising sign structure as authorized by the Billboard Relocation Agreement.

E.    Outdoor Advertising Sign Structures subject to a Billboard Relocation Agreement. An outdoor advertising sign structure may be upgraded or relocated through the approval of a Conditional Use Permit and a corresponding Relocation Agreement. A relocated or upgraded billboard shall meet the development standards contained within subsection C of this Section. A Digital Advertising Display (DAD) is permissible in conjunction with the relocation/upgrade of an outdoor advertising sign structure approved under a Billboard Relocation Agreement, subject to the following requirements: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-01, adopted by City Council March 5, 2014.)

1.    Sign Area. A DAD shall be subject to the sign area requirements specified in subsection (C)(1) of this Section; however, given the unique characteristics of DAD’s, an applicant may request a modification to the maximum sign area under the following conditions:

a.    The applicant demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission, that the larger size is necessary to provide a readable DAD in a cost-effective manner;

b.    The maximum sign area of a single-face DAD is 675 square feet and 1,350 square feet for a double-face DAD.

2.    Sign Height. A DAD shall be subject to the sign area requirements specified in subsection (C)(2) of this Section; however, a DAD relocated immediately adjacent to State Route 14 may be modified if the applicant can demonstrate that compliance with the 32-foot height limit would impair visibility for a portion of the sign face. Increased height shall only be permitted to the extent necessary to allow reasonable view of the sign face.

3.    A DAD may only display a series of still images, each of which is displayed for a minimum of six (6) seconds and transitions between images shall not exceed one second. No DAD shall depict or simulate any motion or video, have flashing, chasing, or twinkling lights.

4.    Each DAD shall include a photometric sensor that will adjust the intensity of the sign for daytime and nighttime viewing. The intensity from sunset to sunrise shall be limited to 150 nits. The City may modify or further restrict the intensity of any DAD should the lighting create a distraction to drivers or an adverse effect on nearby residential properties.

5.    In addition to complying with the other requirements set forth in this Section and any other applicable provisions of PMC 17.88.160, any relocated billboard within 660 feet of a state highway must also comply with the requirements of the California Outdoor Advertising Act (Chapter 2 of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code beginning at Section 5400), including, but not limited to, the restrictions on size, height, proximity to interstate and primary highways and landscaped freeways. To the extent any conflict arises between this Section and the Outdoor Advertising Act, the Outdoor Advertising Act will prevail.

17.88.170 Amortization and Abatement of On and Off-Premise Signs, Sign Programs and Outdoor Advertising Sign Structures
A.    On-premise signs

1.    Inventory of signs. Within 120 days of the date of adoption of this Ordinance the Director of Planning shall cause to be performed an inventory of all on-premise signs within the City to identify those that are illegal or abandoned. For the purposes of this subsection, the term “illegal” denotes a sign which was erected without compliance with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use, and the term “abandoned” denotes a sign which remains in place or is not maintained for a period of ninety (90) days which no longer advertises or identifies an ongoing business, product, or service available on the business premises where the sign is located.

2.    Upon completion of the required identification and inventory of signs described in subsection (A)(1) of this Section, the City Council shall consider at a public hearing, with opportunity for public comment, whether there is a continuing need for the provisions of the ordinance that caused the signs to become illegal or abandoned.

3.    Abatement. No later than sixty (60) days after the public hearing described in subsection (A)(2) of this Section, the City shall commence abatement as provided in this subsection of the illegal and abandoned on-premises signs identified by the inventory required by subsection (A)(1) of this Section.

4.    Nonconforming signs which may be abated without payment of compensation. Any sign which does not comply with the requirements of this Chapter and which may be abated without the payment of compensation pursuant to Section 5497 or Section 5498 of the Business and Professions Code shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter as soon as may reasonably be accomplished and in no event later than six (6) months after the date of adoption of this Ordinance, unless such period is extended by the Planning Commission for good cause shown. Any sign that is not brought into conformance with the requirements of this Chapter within that time shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance.

5.    Other nonconforming signs. Any sign which does not conform to the requirements of this Chapter and which may be abated after the expiration of fifteen (15) years pursuant to Section 5495 of the Business and Professions Code shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter within fifteen (15) years of the date of adoption of this Chapter. Any sign that is not brought into conformance with the requirements of this Chapter within that time shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance.

6.    Continuation of existing nonconforming signs. Pursuant to PMC 17.11.090, a sign that lawfully existed as a nonconforming sign prior to the effective date of this Chapter pursuant to Ordinance No. 684 and/or Ordinance No. U-1060 shall be deemed to be continued under this Ordinance, and in determination of the termination date established by this Ordinance, shall be computed from the original date it became nonconforming under said Ordinance No. 684 and/or Ordinance No. U-1060. Any sign that is not brought into conformance with the requirements of this Chapter within that time shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance.

7.    Signs with flashing and rotating features. Any sign which contains flashing or rotating features and which is not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be brought into compliance with the provisions of this Chapter as soon as may reasonably be accomplished and in no event later than six (6) months after the date of adoption of this Ordinance unless such period is extended by the Planning Commission for good cause shown. If such sign is not brought into conformance with the requirements of this Chapter within that time, the flashing or rotating features of the sign shall be deactivated immediately. However, the owner or operator of such sign may be authorized to continue its operation notwithstanding this subsection if the Planning Commission determines the sign to be of historical significance.

B.    Off-site commercial signs. All off-site commercial signs that do not comply with the requirements of this Chapter shall be brought into compliance with the requirements of this Chapter as soon as may reasonably be accomplished and in no event later than one (1) year after the date of adoption of this Ordinance, unless such period is extended by the Planning Commission for good cause shown. Any sign that is not brought into conformance with the requirements of this Chapter within that time shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance.

C.    Sign programs. Sign programs approved prior to the effective date of this Ordinance shall be automatically subject to the General Development Standards contained in PMC 17.88.090. New sign permits requested under these programs may not exceed the maximum sign area or maximum sign height specified under PMC 17.88.100 through 17.88.120.

D.    Outdoor advertising sign structures. Any outdoor advertising sign structure which lawfully existed in an agricultural or residential zone at the time of the adoption of this Chapter or was lawfully constructed pursuant to a permit issued by Los Angeles County and was later annexed to the City of Palmdale, but which is not in conformance with the requirements of this Chapter, and is located within residential or agriculturally zoned property, shall be deemed legal nonconforming use which must be maintained, and may be upgraded subject to the restrictions and limitations imposed on nonconforming signs by this Chapter. Such signs shall be removed in accordance with the following amortization schedule.

Fair Market Value of Off-Premise

Commercial Advertising Signs*

Years Allowed Before

Removal

Under $1,999

2

$2,000 to $3,999

3

$4,000 to $5,999

4

$6,000 to $7,999

5

$8,000 to $9,999

6

$10,000 and over

7

*    Fair Market Value of outdoor advertising sign structures on the date of removal requirement.

Continuation of existing nonconforming signs. Pursuant to PMC 17.11.090, nonconforming outdoor advertising sign structures that lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this Chapter pursuant to Ordinance No. 684 and/or Ordinance No. U-1060 shall be deemed to be continued under this Ordinance, and in determination of the termination date established by this Ordinance, shall be computed from the original date it became nonconforming under said Ordinance No. 684 and/or Ordinance No. U-1060. Any sign that is not brought into conformance with the requirements of this Chapter within that time shall be subject to abatement as a public nuisance.

17.88.180 Variance and Minor Exceptions
Applicants may apply for a variance or minor exception to the provisions of this Chapter in accordance with Chapter 17.23 PMC, Variances and Minor Exceptions, and shall have the burden of proving that the requested variance or minor exception is in conformance with the required findings.

17.88.190 Administration
A.    Duty to enforce: The Director of Planning shall have the duty to enforce the provisions of this Ordinance.

B.    Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this Chapter. It shall also be unlawful for a property owner, tenant, and a proprietor of a sign company to use, occupy, or maintain property in violation of this Chapter. Illegal signs and persons using, occupying or maintaining property with an illegal sign shall be subject to enforcement procedures as described in the City of Palmdale Municipal Code, including but not limited to issuance of a citation, imposition of a fine, and/or arrest. Signs in violation of this Chapter may be summarily removed by the Superintendent of Maintenance or his/her representative, or any Community Service or Code Enforcement Officer, or any other City employee authorized by the City Manager to remove such sign(s). The sign owner shall be responsible for payment of a fine in an amount specified in the City’s fee resolution for each sign so removed. In cases where a duly authorized representative of the City has direct contact with the violator of these provisions, this person shall be responsible for the payment of the aforementioned fines. A written notice of the removal shall be given to the sign owner stating that the sign may be reclaimed within ten (10) days and will be returned to the owner upon payment of the fine specified herein, except that no such notice shall be required if the owner is not identified on the sign. In the event the sign is not reclaimed within the time allowed to do so, the sign may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the Superintendent of Maintenance. Unclaimed signs may be sold at a price determined by the Superintendent of Maintenance.

C.    Ambiguity. Whenever ambiguity arises as to the interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance, the applicant for a sign permit may request that the Planning Commission make a determination as to the meaning and application of the ambiguous provisions.

D.    Discontinuance of a business. Within ninety-one (91) days of vacancy in the unit or building for which a commercial sign was placed or before a new business occupies the premises, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner or the property owner’s authorized leasing agent to remove the message or copy of an abandoned sign and to patch and conceal any and all damage to the structure resulting from removal of the sign in a neat and professional manner. Legally existing abandoned cabinet signs shall be replaced with a blank panel.

E.    Removal of illegal signs on public property. The Director of Planning shall remove or cause to be removed any sign unlawfully placed or located on public property. The Director shall send notification in writing to the owner of such sign, if such owner is known, stating the location where his or her sign is being held and that it will be destroyed if not claimed by the owner within ten (10) days after the date of such notice. In the event that the owner does not claim such sign within the ten (10) day period, the Director may destroy or otherwise dispose of such sign. The owner of the sign shall reimburse the City for the actual costs of removing, storing and destroying or otherwise disposing of the sign.

For purposes of this subsection, there shall be a presumption that: (i) the real estate agent, broker, brokerage firm or other person whose name or telephone number appears on the handbill or sign is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign advertising property for sale, lease or rent; (ii) the candidate seeking office is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign promoting the candidate for public office; (iii) the owner, or lessee if the property is leased, of property used for a yard or garage sale is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign advertising a yard or garage sale; (iv) the owner, or lessee if the property is leased, of property used for a commercial activity or event is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign advertising the subject commercial activity or event; (v) the person whose name, telephone number or address appears as the sponsor for a sporting event, concert, theatrical performance, or similar activity or event is the person responsible for posting a handbill or sign advertising the subject activity or event; and (vi) the person whose name, telephone number or address appears as the person to contact on any handbill or sign posted is the person responsible for posting the same. For purposes of this subsection, the person presumed to be responsible for posting a handbill or sign on public or utility property may rebut such presumption by declaring under penalty of perjury or swearing under oath that the person did not cause, authorize, allow or permit the posting of the handbill or sign on public or utility property.

F.    Abatement of danger. When the Director of Planning determines a sign constitutes an imminent danger to the public safety, the Director of Planning may take appropriate action to abate the danger. Any sign removed to abate such a threat to the public safety shall become the property of the City and may be disposed of in any appropriate manner. The cost of such emergency abatement shall be charged against the owner of the sign and may be recovered by the City by an appropriate legal action or by assessment against the property, provided that the person assessed shall be granted a hearing before the Planning Commission to contest the amount or propriety of the charge if such person requests a hearing within thirty (30) days of notice from the City. For the purposes of this subsection, a sign shall be refutably presumed to be the property of the same person as described in subsection E of this Section.

G.    Entitlements strictly construed. Because the regulations provided by this Chapter are established to protect and promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, any sign entitlement authorized hereunder shall be strictly construed to further the purposes of this Chapter.

Chapter 17.89
ANIMAL KEEPING
17.89.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish regulations governing the keeping of animals where accessory to the residential use of a property. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

17.89.020 Applicability
This Section shall apply to all agricultural and residentially designated properties. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

17.89.030 General Provisions
A.    Types of animals permitted:

1.    Dogs.

2.    Cats.

3.    Large animals, including horses, mules, donkeys, cattle, goats, hogs, sheep, llamas, alpacas, and other similar hooved animals, may be kept on a lot or parcel of land having an area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. Three (3) such animals may be kept for each twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of lot area; provided, that said animals are primarily raised and kept for the private use of members of the family residing on the premises. Up to twenty-five (25%) percent of the total permitted number of animals on a parcel may be boarded there for persons who do not reside on the property.

4.    Other domestic creatures which are neither farm animals, exotic, nor wild animals, such as canaries, parakeets, cockatiels, and other similar birds; tropical fish excluding caribe; turtles; white mice, white rats, hamsters, gerbils, guinea pigs, and similar small rodents; snakes and reptiles; and other similar animals commonly sold in pet stores and kept as household pets.

5.    Poultry and fowl, excluding roosters and peafowl, on a lot or parcel of land, not having less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, provided that said birds are kept or maintained for the private use of members of the family residing on the premises. Up to three (3) such birds in any combination may be kept for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of lot area.

6.    Vietnamese pot-bellied pigs maintained as a pet; provided, that not more than one (1) such animal may be kept for each dwelling unit.

B.    Limitations

1.    The allowable number of dogs and cats shall be limited by zone as outlined within the following table:

 

Allowable Number of Dogs

Allowable Number of Cats

Agricultural (A-1)

4

5

Single-Family Residential (R-1)

4

5

Medium Residential (R-2)**

2

2

Multiple Residential (R-3)

2

2

High Density Residential (R-4)

2

2

** Property designated medium residential (R-2) constructed to the single-family residential (R-1) standards (i.e., minimum lot size, lot coverage, setbacks, etc.), may have an allowable number of dogs and cats consistent with the single-family residential (R-1) standards.

2.    The keeping of additional animals shall be prohibited in all zones except for the agricultural zone. Any request for the keeping of additional animals shall be in compliance with PMC 17.26.080.

3.    The keeping of exotic animals, as defined in PMC 17.16.050, shall be prohibited, unless an exotic animals permit is obtained in accordance with PMC 17.26.070.

C.    Setbacks for animal-keeping structures

1.    Tackrooms and feed storage facilities shall not be located in a front yard, and shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet to any side or rear lot line.

2.    Animal enclosures shall not be located in a required front yard and shall not be located closer than fifty (50) feet from any residential structure. In addition, barns, doghouses, hutches, coops, aviaries and other similar buildings or structures shall not be located within twenty (20) feet of any side or rear lot line.

3.    Apiaries shall not be located in a required front yard and shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of any side or rear lot line. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-002, adopted by City Council February 6, 2018.)

Chapter 17.90
GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.90.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the community by establishing specific standards, design criteria, and review procedures for certain uses which have unique structural, development, and/or operational characteristics and have potential for adverse visual, health, safety, and other impacts on the surrounding properties and/or the community.

17.90.020 Applicability
All uses that are addressed by this Division and are permitted or conditionally permitted by the Zoning Ordinance shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this Division, in addition to any other applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

The requirements of this Division shall be in addition to any requirements which the reviewing authority may deem necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, and to meet the goals, objectives and policies contained in the General Plan.

Chapter 17.91
RESIDENTIAL USES
17.91.010 Guest House as an Accessory Use
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for guest houses. The intent is to preserve the integrity of the existing residential areas by preventing negative health, safety, aesthetic, and traffic impacts, while allowing residents the opportunity to establish guest homes on properties that can accommodate this use.

B.    Development standards

Where permitted by the zone, a guest house shall be permitted subject to the following standards:

1.    Limited use. A guest house shall be used only by the occupants of the principal dwelling, their nonpaying guests or domestic employees. The guest house shall not be rented and a deed restriction specifying this requirement shall be recorded by the property owner prior to occupancy of the structure.

2.    Property requirements. A guest house may be permitted only on properties in A-1 and R-1 zones which contain an existing owner-occupied single family detached dwelling unit. Only one guest house may be permitted per lot of record.

3.    Minimum lot size. Guest houses may only be constructed on legal parcels which are 20,000 square feet in size or larger.

4.    Location. Guest houses shall be located in the rear yard area and shall not extend into the required front or side yards.

5.    Yards. Guest houses shall conform to all setback standards of the Zoning Ordinance.

6.    Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage provisions of the zone shall apply.

7.    Floor area. The floor area of a guest house shall not exceed 500 square feet. The minimum permitted size of a guest house shall conform to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code and Uniform Housing Code. The minimum unit size for residential zones shall not apply to the guest house.

8.    Living facilities. There shall be no kitchen, cooking or wet bar facilities within a guest house.

9.    Construction standards. All construction shall meet the Minimum Construction Standards For Single Family Residences as contained in PMC 17.41.090(G).

10.    Design and materials. Guest house shall be designed and constructed with materials that are comparable to and compatible with the primary residence and other residences in the vicinity.

11.    Driveway access. The driveway serving the primary dwelling unit shall also serve the guest house.

12.    Pedestrian access. Each guest house shall be provided with a separate outside entrance, not visible from the street, with adequate pedestrian access from a public street to the entrance.

13.    Parking. A minimum of one (1) parking space, in a permitted location, shall be provided on the same lot as the guest house, in addition to the required parking spaces serving the primary unit.

14.    Non-conforming properties. Any conditions pertaining to parking, building code and property development standards of the zone that are non-conforming for the primary use shall be corrected, to the extent feasible, prior to the commencement of construction.

C.    Review process

Guest houses shall be subject to administrative approval by the Planning Director pursuant to PMC 17.26.030, Zoning Clearance Review.

17.91.020 Cottage Food Operation Permit
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-002, adopted by City Council May 1, 2013.)

A.    Purpose and Intent

The purpose of the Cottage Food Operation Permit provisions is to permit the establishment and operation of cottage food operations within the home, pursuant to Section 113758 of the California Health and Safety Code, while minimizing any impacts of such businesses on adjacent properties or the general neighborhood.

B.    Review Process

Cottage Food Operations shall require Minor Site Plan Review approval in accordance with the procedures and requirements of PMC 17.26.110.

C.    Mandatory Conditions of Approval

Cottage Food Operations may be permitted on property used for residential purposes pursuant to PMC 17.26.110 and provided that the use if operated pursuant to the following conditions of operation:

1.    The operator of a Cottage Food Operation must reside within the residential unit in which the facility is operated. The Cottage Food Operation Permit shall not be transferable to another operator or transferable to another site.

2.    Each Cottage Food Operation shall conform to all State and County laws, regulations and requirements.

3.    Within thirty (30) days of receipt of a Minor Site Plan Review permit for a Cottage Food Operation, the operator of such facility shall present proof of receipt of a Permit for same from the County of Los Angeles, Environmental Health Services, Department of Public Health.

4.    That the Cottage Food Operation shall be clearly incidental to the use of the structure as a dwelling.

5.    No physical conversions or alterations to the residential nature and character of the residential unit where a Cottage Food Operation is being conducted shall be allowed in conjunction with the Cottage Food Operation.

6.    No Cottage Food Operation shall be located along any dead end street or cul-de-sac on which a day care facility is currently operating. The boundary of a parcel or lot containing a cottage food operation in any structure shall be separated from the boundary of any other parcel or lot containing a cottage food operation by not less than three hundred (300) feet.

7.    A Cottage Food Operation shall be conducted only within an enclosed living area of the dwelling unit and shall not occupy more than 25 percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling. A Cottage Food Operation Permit shall not utilize any outdoor area, any accessory structure, or any garage or carport utilized to satisfy the off-street parking requirements.

8.    No greater than one cottage food employee, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 113758(b)(1), and not including a family member or household member of the cottage food operator, shall be permitted on the premises of the cottage food operation.

9.    If direct sales are proposed at the site of the cottage food operation, no third parties or customers shall be permitted to dine at the Cottage Food Operation.

10.    No outdoor sales shall be allowed at the site of the cottage food operation.

11.    No Cottage Food Operation shall sell, or offer for sale, from the residence food items prepared from that residence between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.

12.    Commercial delivery of items used in a Cottage Food Operation shall be prohibited between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

13.    Cottage food operations shall not create noise levels in excess of those allowed in residential areas in the Noise Element of the General Plan.

14.    There shall be no storage of equipment, inventory, or supplies in an attached garage, an accessory structure, or outside of the dwelling (including inside of a storage building that is not a “structure”;

15.    Parking Requirements. For single family homes, parking spaces in the property’s garage or carport and driveway shall be available for the actual parking demand created by the use, including parking spaces for the applicant’s own vehicles, parking spaces for employees if employees are present, and one parking space for customers if direct sales on the property are proposed. For apartments and multifamily developments, the cottage food operator’s designated space(s) shall be available for the actual parking demand created by the use, including parking spaces for the applicant’s own vehicles, parking spaces for employees if employees are present, and one parking space for customers if direct sales on the property are proposed.

16.    The Cottage Food Operation operator shall contract with the local waste disposal company for additional trash removal services, as deemed necessary by the Director of Planning.

17.    No signage or advertisement identifying the Cottage Food Operation shall be permitted at the premises except as may be required by federal, state and/or local agencies. No vehicles with any signs indicating that the premises are being used for the business shall be parked within view of the public right-of-way.

18.    Gross annual sales shall not exceed the amount specified in California Health and Safety Code Section 113758.

19.    The City shall have the right to inspect the premises in which the Cottage Food Operation is located during reasonable times.

D.    Modification or Revocation by the Planning Director

The Planning Director may periodically review any Cottage Food Operation Permit to ensure that it is being operated in a manner consistent with the conditions of operation and in a manner which is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the Planning Director deems that there is sufficient evidence to modify or revoke the Cottage Food Operation Permit, this shall be accomplished in accordance with the requirements of PMC 17.26.120(E).

E.    Lapse of approval

1.    A Cottage Food Operation Permit, approved under the provisions of this Section, shall become null and void upon expiration of a business license issued in conjunction with the Cottage Food Operation Permit and will require the filing of a new application, including applicable fees, with the City.

2.    Where a Cottage Food Operation Permit has been revoked pursuant to PMC 17.26.120(E), a new application for the same or substantially the same Cottage Food Operation may not be filed within one (1) year of the date of revocation.

17.91.030 Accessory Dwelling Unit Standards
A.    Purpose and intent

Accessory dwelling units (ADU) are a valuable form of housing in California. Accessory dwelling units provide housing for family members, students, the elderly, in-home health care providers, the disabled, and others, within existing neighborhoods. It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for accessory dwelling units, pursuant to Section 65852.2 of the Government Code. The intent is to provide the opportunity for establishment of additional rental housing in the community, while preserving the integrity of existing residential areas and preventing negative health, safety, aesthetic, traffic, and other impacts. By the adoption of this Section the City finds that accessory dwelling units are consistent with the General Plan. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-004, adopted by City Council March 6, 2018.)

B.    Development standards

Where permitted by the zone, an accessory dwelling unit shall be allowed subject to the following standards:

1.    Use limitations. The accessory dwelling unit shall be used solely as the primary residence of the property owner or as a rental unit and shall not be sold separately from the principal dwelling unit. If the single-family dwelling unit and the accessory dwelling unit are simultaneously used by different families, either the primary single-family dwelling unit or the accessory dwelling unit shall be occupied by the property owner. A deed restriction, acceptable to the City Attorney, specifying the use limitations for the accessory dwelling unit shall be prepared by the property owner and recorded on the property. The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the principal dwelling unit and may be rented separately from the principal dwelling unit. Accessory dwelling units must comply with all provisions of this Section as well as the underlying zoning district. In instances where there is conflict this Section shall govern.

2.    Permissible zones. An accessory dwelling unit may be permitted only on properties in A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MX zones, subject to, or in conjunction with, the construction of an owner-occupied single-family detached dwelling unit.

3.    One (1) unit per lot. Only one (1) accessory dwelling unit may be permitted per lot of record.

4.    Yards. No additional yards or setbacks are required for the conversion of a garage or permitted accessory structure to an accessory dwelling unit, and a yard of not less than five (5) feet from the side and rear property lines is required for an accessory dwelling unit that is constructed above an existing garage.

5.    Height. Accessory dwelling units shall be limited to two (2) stories or to the maximum height of the applicable zoning district.

6.    Lot coverage. The maximum lot coverage provisions of the zone shall apply.

7.    Special requirements for attached accessory dwelling units:

a.    Attached accessory dwelling units can be either attached to or within an existing dwelling unit.

b.    Attached accessory dwelling units shall not have a total floor area exceeding either (i) fifty (50%) percent of the proposed or existing dwelling unit, excluding garages, or (ii) one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

c.    The minimum unit size for residential zones shall not apply to the accessory dwelling unit. The minimum permitted unit size shall conform to the requirements of the California Building Standards Code.

8.    Special requirements for detached accessory dwelling units:

a.    Detached accessory dwelling units shall not have a total floor area exceeding either (i) fifty (50%) percent of the floor area of the existing or proposed dwelling unit, excluding garages, or (ii) one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet.

b.    The minimum unit size for residential zones shall not apply to the accessory dwelling unit. The minimum permitted size shall conform to the requirements of the California Building Standards Code.

c.    Detached accessory dwelling units shall not be located between the primary dwelling unit and the front property line.

9.    Parking requirements:

a.    One (1) parking space is required per accessory dwelling unit and may be provided through tandem parking.

b.    Parking for the accessory dwelling unit is allowed in rear and side yard areas. No parking is allowed in front yard areas.

c.    When a garage or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an accessory dwelling unit or converted to an accessory dwelling unit, the replacement parking spaces shall be provided in the same manner as they would be required if there was not an accessory dwelling unit on the property.

10.    Parking exemptions. An accessory dwelling unit is not required to have its own parking space in any of the following instances:

a.    The accessory dwelling unit is within one-half (1/2) mile of a public transit stop as measured by the path a pedestrian would lawfully take via City rights-of-way;

b.    The accessory dwelling unit is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district;

c.    The accessory dwelling unit is part of the existing primary residence or an existing accessory structure;

d.    When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the accessory dwelling unit;

e.    When the accessory dwelling unit is within one (1) block of a car share parking spot; or

f.    The accessory dwelling unit does not have at least one (1) bedroom.

11.    Passageways. No passageway or unobstructed pathway extending from a street to one (1) entrance of the accessory dwelling unit shall be required in conjunction with the construction of the accessory dwelling unit. For these purposes, “passageway” means “passageway” as that term is defined by Government Code 65852.2 as it may be amended from time to time, which, at the time this municipal code section was enacted, provided in part, “‘passageway’ means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the accessory dwelling unit.”

12.    Driveway access. The driveway serving the primary dwelling unit may also serve the accessory dwelling unit.

13.    Design and materials. Accessory dwelling units shall be designed and constructed with materials that are comparable to and compatible with the primary residence and other residences in the vicinity. The lot shall retain a single-family appearance from the street, and shall not create a second entrance, or other street side modifications which would signal the presence of an accessory dwelling unit. However, the addresses of both units shall be displayed so that they are clearly visible from the street.

14.    Utility service. Accessory dwelling units are not considered new residential uses for the purposes of calculating local agency connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service. An accessory dwelling unit may utilize the existing utility services to the primary residence or use separate utility services.

15.    Nonconforming properties. Any conditions pertaining to parking, building code, and property development standards of the zone that are nonconforming for the primary use shall be corrected, to the extent feasible, prior to the commencement of construction. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-004, adopted by City Council March 6, 2018.)

C.    Review process

An accessory dwelling unit shall be subject to administrative approval pursuant to PMC 17.26.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-04, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-003, adopted by City Council August 1, 2017.)

17.91.040 Senior Housing Requirements
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for senior housing developments. The intent is to prevent the creation of any adverse impacts to the occupants of neighboring dwellings while ensuring that adequate services and facilities are available to serve the special housing needs of senior citizens.

B.    Development standards

All senior housing shall conform to the following standards, except that when existing multi-family residential uses are converted to senior housing, the reviewing authority may revise or waive any development standard determined to be infeasible, due to the project’s design, size or physical development: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

1.    Property requirements. The parcel upon which the senior housing facility is to be established shall conform to all standards of the underlying land use district. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

2.    Occupancy limitations. Residential occupancy shall be limited to single persons over 55 years of age or married couples of which one spouse is over 55 years of age. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6, adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

3.    Density. The number of dwelling units for senior housing projects shall be based on the underlying General Plan designation. Congregate care facilities which do not include individual kitchen facilities shall not be subject to density provisions.

4.    Minimum floor area. The minimum floor area for each residential unit shall be as follows:

Studio:

410 square feet

One-bedroom:

510 square feet if kitchen-dining living areas are combined. 570 square feet if kitchen-dining living areas are separate.

Two-bedroom:

610 square feet if kitchen-dining living areas are combined. 670 square feet if kitchen-dining living areas are separate.

5.    Common facilities. The development may provide one or more of the following specific internal common facilities for the exclusive use of the residents:

a.    Central cooking and dining room(s).

b.    Beauty and barber shop.

c.    Small scale drug store not exceeding 1,000 square feet.

d.    Small scale medical offices or clinics.

e.    Community garden or greenhouse.

f.    Workshop areas.

6.    Recreation and entertainment facilities. Common recreational and entertainment facilities of a size and scale consistent with the number of living units shall be provided. The minimum size shall equal 100 square feet for each living unit. Open space areas shall be located with convenient access from the units they serve and shall be protected from sun and wind through placement, design and landscaping.

7.    Laundry facilities. Common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility, consistent with the number of living units and the Uniform Building Code may be required. Such facilities shall have keyed access for tenants only. Each residential unit shall be plumbed and wired for a washing machine and dryer.

8.    Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking, and the following:

a.    All required off-street parking shall be located maximum one-hundred and fifty (150) feet from at least one entrance to the residential building that it serves.

b.    If a shuttle stop is located on the property, shaded waiting areas and adequate and suitably striped paved areas for shuttle parking shall be provided adjacent to the shuttle stops.

c.    Senior citizen/congregate care parking requirements may be adjusted on an individual project basis, subject to a parking study based on a project location and proximity to services for senior citizens including, but not limited to medical offices, shopping areas, mass transit, etc.

9.    Bus turnouts and shelters. A bus turnout and shelter may be required as determined by the reviewing authority if the project is located on a designated arterial and adjacent to existing/future bus route(s).

10.    Driveways. Driveway approaches shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, rough-textured concrete, landscaped medians or similar features. Stamped concrete shall not be allowed to meet this requirement.

11.    Handicapped access. The main pedestrian entrance to the development, common areas, and the parking facility shall be provided with handicapped access.

12.    Security. The project shall be designed to provide maximum security for residents, guests, and employees.

13.    Safety requirements. Indoor common areas and living units shall be handicap equipped or adaptable and be provided with all necessary safety equipment (e.g., safety bars, etc.), as well as emergency signal/intercom systems or other measures determined by the reviewing authority.

14.    Lighting. Adequate internal and external lighting including walkways shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the residential neighborhood.

15.    Trash areas. Trash areas shall be dispersed throughout the complex. Trash areas not located within a building shall be paved and located a minimum of five (5) feet from the private street or drive aisle. Such areas shall be consistent with the standards contained in PMC 17.85.010. One trash area shall be provided for the first ten (10) units or fraction thereof, and one for each additional ten (10) units or fraction thereof.

16.    Other requirements. Senior group housing shall conform with all local, state, and federal requirements.

C.    Review process

Senior housing shall be subject to the applicable review requirements of the zone district.

17.91.050 Manufactured Home Parks
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for manufactured home parks. The intent is to prevent the creation of any nuisance or annoyance to the occupants of neighboring areas while allowing establishment and operation of the manufactured home park.

B.    General development standards

All manufactured home parks shall be constructed in the following manner:

1.    Minimum site size. A site proposed for a manufactured home park shall be a minimum five (5) gross acres in size.

2.    Density. The overall density of the project shall not exceed the maximum density permitted by the General Plan.

3.    Manufactured home space requirements

a.    Minimum size. The manufactured home sites shall average minimum three thousand (3,000) square feet, but no site shall be smaller than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

b.    Minimum width. Minimum average width of a manufactured home site shall be forty-two feet (42’) for sites designated for a single width manufactured home, or thirty (30) feet plus the width of the manufactured home for sites designated for double width or wider manufactured homes.

c.    Frontage. Each manufactured home site shall abut directly upon an interior drive aisle for a minimum of thirty (30) feet.

4.    Yards. Minimum setbacks for individual manufactured home spaces, measured from the edge of internal streets and space lines as follows, shall be as follows:

a.    Front setback shall be minimum ten (10) feet.

b.    Side setback shall be either minimum five (5) feet on each side, or zero lot line on one side and ten (10) feet on the opposite side. On corner manufactured home sites or lots, the side yard adjoining the manufactured home park or subdivision street shall not be less than ten (10) feet.

c.    Rear setback shall be minimum ten (10) feet.

d.    Structural separation between any two dwelling units shall be minimum ten (10) feet.

5.    Exterior boundaries. All exterior boundaries of the manufactured home park or subdivision shall appear similar to conventional residential developments and shall be screened by a decorative wall, fence or other comparable device a minimum of six (6) feet in height. A minimum six (6) foot wide landscaped area shall be provided along the inside of the perimeter wall which may include the required yards of the adjoining manufactured home sites. Where a perimeter wall is located adjacent to a public right-of-way, a minimum of twelve (12) feet of landscaping shall be provided between the wall and the edge of curb, excluding the sidewalk. Landscaping shall be provided as approved by the City Landscape Architect.

6.    Lot coverage. Maximum space coverage (unit and its accessory structure(s)) shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of the home site space.

7.    Common areas. A minimum of 20% of the site shall be devoted to common usable open space. Useable open space areas shall not include rights-of-way, vehicle parking areas, areas adjacent to or between structures less than 15± feet in width, private yards or slopes greater than 3:1. The area to be utilized for common recreation facilities shall have a minimum aggregate area of three hundred (300) square feet per manufactured home space or lot.

8.    Amenities. All manufactured home parks shall provide recreational amenities within the site which may include: swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter – barbecue area; court game facilities such as tennis, basketball, or racquetball; improved softball or baseball fields; or day care facilities. The type of amenities shall be approved by the Planning Commission and provided according to the following schedule:

 

Units

Amenities

0-9

0

10-50

1

51-100

2

101-200

3

201-300

4

Add 1 amenity for each 100 additional units or fraction thereof.

9.    Facilities. The following facilities shall be provided in each manufactured home park:

a.    Manufactured home park office. Every manufactured home park shall include a permanent building for office use. Such building may include a single family dwelling for the exclusive use of the owner or manager.

b.    Laundry rooms. Every manufactured park shall have one or more laundry rooms. Laundry drying lines shall not be permitted on the mobile home sites.

c.    Mail boxes. Each manufactured home site shall be equipped with a receptacle for mail deliveries in accordance with the standards of the local post master.

d.    Telephone. The manufactured home park shall contain at least one public telephone for the use of the park residents.

e.    Storage areas. Areas used for storage of travel trailers, boats, or other such items may be established in a manufactured home park provided they are adequately screened from public view.

f.    Utilities. All utility distribution facilities, including television antennae service lines serving individual mobile home sites, shall be placed underground. The owner is responsible for compliance with the requirements of this Section, and he/she shall make all the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities for the installation of such facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestal, concealed ducts, and other appurtenant facilities necessary to such underground facilities may be placed above ground. Water and sewer distribution facilities shall be installed in conformance with specifications of the City Engineer. All manufactured home sites must be served with water, gas, electricity, television cable, and city sewers.

10.    Design. No manufactured home shall be installed in a manufactured home park if more than ten (10) years have elapsed between the date of the manufacture of the manufactured home and the date of an application for the issuance of a building permit to install the unit. Each unit shall be equipped with skirting or provided with a support pad which is recessed, in order to give the appearance of the manufactured home being located on-grade.

11.    Internal streets. Streets shall be designed to provide convenient traffic circulation within the manufactured home park or subdivision. The following minimum standards shall apply unless modified by the City Engineer: the minimum width of any street shall be thirty (30) feet including the curbs; the streets shall be paved in accordance to standards established by the City Engineer; and concrete roll curbs shall be provided on each side of the street. Sidewalks shall be provided along internal streets/drive aisle where deemed appropriate.

12.    Driveways. Driveway approaches into manufactured home parks shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, rough-textured concrete, landscaped medians or similar features.

13.    Pedestrian access. All recreation facilities and common areas shall be conveniently located within the park or subdivision and be accessible via pedestrian pathways and sidewalks. Such accessways shall also be provided to off-site walkways to provide access to schools, parks, bus stops and commercial areas.

14.    Parking. The manufactured home park shall be provided with parking and access as required by Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-street Parking Standards. In addition, common recreation and laundry areas serving over forty (40) manufactured homes shall have sufficient parking to accommodate one (1) automobile for every ten (10) manufactured home sites over the number of forty (40) that are served by the facility. If garages are provided, a minimum of twenty (20) feet shall be provided between the face of the garage door and the back of sidewalk.

15.    Landscaping. Common open space areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan approved under the Conditional Use Permit. Landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with such plans by the property owner in perpetuity. In addition to the perimeter trees, the equivalent of one (1) tree shall be planted for each manufactured home lot or space, either within the individual spaces or in common areas.

16.    Lighting. Adequate internal and external lighting, including lighting of walkways, shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the residential neighborhood.

17.    Trash areas. Trash areas shall be dispersed throughout the park. Trash areas not located within a building shall be paved and located a minimum of five (5) feet from the private street or drive aisle. One trash area shall be provided for the first 10 units, and one for each additional 10 units or fraction thereof.

18.    Animals. Dogs and other household pets shall not be permitted to run at large in any manufactured home park. Bird aviaries, poultry, and other farm animals shall not be permitted in a manufactured home park.

19.    Signs

a.    Bulletin signs. Each manufactured home park shall have a bulletin board for the listing of each manufacture home site and the name of the occupant thereof pursuant to Chapter 17.88 PMC. The bulletin board shall be located outside the office and shall be lighted at night.

b.    Directional signs. Adequate signs indicating directions, parking areas, recreation areas, and street names, shall be established and maintained within the manufactured home park. Such signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area.

c.    Individual site signs. Signs or name plates not exceeding two (2) square feet in area and displaying the name and address only of the occupant of the manufactured home may be erected at each manufactured home site.

d.    Park signs. Signs which identify or advertise the manufactured home parks may be erected pursuant to an approved sign permit. Such signs must be located on the premises and shall not be more than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area. They shall not be animated or illuminated except by indirect non-flashing light.

20.    Transient spaces. Transient manufactured home sites shall include all sites that are occupied with manufactured homes for ninety (90) days or less. Not more than ten (10) percent of the manufactured home sites may be used for transient manufactured home sites. Sites reserved for transient manufactured homes shall be so designated on the plans submitted with the application for the manufactured home park Conditional Use Permit. All requirements of this Section shall fully apply to transient spaces. Manufactured homes which are smaller than specified in this Section may occupy such designated transient manufactured home sites for periods up to ninety (90) days.

C.    Review process

Manufactured home parks shall be subject to Conditional Use Permit approval in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, where permitted by the zone district.

17.91.060 Manufactured Home Subdivisions
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for manufactured home subdivisions. The intent is to prevent the creation of any nuisance or annoyance to the occupants of neighboring areas while allowing establishment and operation of the manufactured home subdivisions.

B.    Development standards

All manufactured home subdivisions shall be constructed in the following manner:

1.    Minimum site size. A site proposed for a manufactured home subdivision shall be minimum five (5) acres in size.

2.    Density. The overall density of the project shall not exceed the maximum density permitted by the General Plan.

3.    Minimum lot size. Minimum lot size within a manufactured home subdivision shall be 5,000 square feet.

4.    Yards. Minimum setbacks for individual manufactured home spaces, measured from the edge of internal streets and space lines as follows, shall be as follows:

a.    Front setback shall be minimum ten (10) feet;

b.    Side setback shall be either minimum five (5) feet on each side, or zero lot line on one side and ten (10) feet on the opposite side; On corner mobile-home sites or lots, the side yard adjoining the mobile home park or subdivision street shall not be less than ten (10) feet;

c.    Rear setback shall be minimum ten (10) feet;

d.    Structural separation between any two dwelling units shall be minimum ten (10) feet.

5.    Exterior boundaries. All exterior boundaries of the manufactured home park or subdivision shall appear similar to conventional residential developments and shall be screened by a decorative wall, fence or other comparable device minimum six (6) feet in height. A minimum six (6) foot wide landscaped area shall be provided along the inside of the perimeter screen which may include the required yards of the adjoining manufactured home sites. Where a perimeter wall is located adjacent to a public right-of-way, a minimum of twelve (12) feet of landscaping shall be provided between the wall and the edge of curb, excluding the sidewalk. Landscaping shall be provided as approved by the City Landscape Architect.

6.    Lot coverage. Maximum space coverage (unit and its accessory structure(s)) shall be seventy-five percent (75%) of the home site lot.

7.    Common areas. Minimum thirty percent (30%) of the site shall be devoted to common usable open space. Useable open space areas shall not include rights-of-way, vehicle parking areas, areas adjacent to or between structures less than 15-feet in width, private yards or slopes greater than 3:1. The area to be utilized for common recreation facilities shall be a minimum aggregate area of three hundred (300) square feet per manufactured home space or lot.

8.    Amenities. All manufactured home subdivisions shall provide recreational amenities within the site which may include: swimming pool; spa; clubhouse; tot lot with play equipment; picnic shelter – barbecue area; court game facilities such as tennis, basketball, or racquetball; improved softball or baseball fields; or day care facilities. The type of amenities shall be approved by the Planning Commission and provided according to the following schedule:

Units

Amenities

0-9

0

10-50

1

51-100

2

101-200

3

201-300

4

Add 1 amenity for each 100 additional units or fraction thereof.

9.    Design. No manufactured home shall be installed in a manufactured home subdivision if more than ten (10) years have elapsed between the date of the manufacture of the manufactured home and the date of an application for the issuance of a building permit to install the unit. Each unit shall be equipped with skirting or provided with a support pad which is recessed, in order to give the appearance of the manufactured home being located on-grade.

10.    Parking. Parking shall be provided as required for single family residences pursuant to Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking. A minimum of twenty (20) feet shall be provided from the garage door face to the back of sidewalk.

11.    Internal circulation. Internal vehicular circulation shall be via local public streets or private streets as provided for in Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking. Streets shall be designed to provide convenient traffic circulation within the manufactured home park or subdivision. The following minimum standards shall apply unless modified by the City Engineer: the minimum width of any street shall be thirty (30) feet including the curbs; the streets shall be paved in accordance to standards established by the City Engineer; and concrete roll curbs shall be provided on each side of the street. Sidewalks shall be provided along internal streets/drive aisle where deemed appropriate.

12.    Driveways. Driveway approaches into manufactured home subdivisions shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, rough-textured concrete, landscaped medians or similar features.

13.    Pedestrian access. All recreation facilities and common areas shall be conveniently located within the park or subdivision and be accessible via pedestrian pathways and sidewalks. Such accessways shall also be provided to off-site walkways to provide access to schools, parks, bus stops and commercial areas.

14.    Landscaping. Common open space areas shall be landscaped in accordance with a landscape plan approved under the Conditional Use Permit. Landscaping shall be maintained in accordance with such plans by the designated homeowner’s association in perpetuity. In addition to the perimeter trees, a minimum of one (1) tree shall be planted on each lot.

15.    Lighting. Adequate internal and external lighting, including lighting of walkways, shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the residential neighborhood.

16.    Trash area. Each individual lot within the subdivision shall be responsible for trash service as a single family residence. Trash areas and enclosures shall be provided for common recreation facilities as deemed necessary.

17.    Utilities. All on-site utilities shall be installed underground.

18.    Homeowner’s associations. A homeowner’s association shall be formed for any manufactured home subdivision. Such association shall be responsible for maintenance of common recreation facilities, common open space areas, common landscape areas, pedestrian pathways, private streets/drive aisles and other common areas identified on the subdivision map.

19.    Signs. Subdivision signs may be permitted in accordance to Chapter 17.88 PMC.

C.    Review process

Manufactured home subdivisions shall be subject to approval of a subdivision map and a Conditional Use Permit, pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC, where permitted by the zone district.

17.91.070 Closures of Mobile Home Parks
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-2 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

A.    Findings and Declaration of Purpose.

Mobilehome owners make considerable investments in purchasing, maintaining, and improving their mobilehomes, but must rent a space for the home in a mobilehome park and cannot easily move the mobilehome due to the high cost and risk of damage involved in moving a mobilehome. Further, park owners prefer to rent any vacant spaces to new homes and frequently refuse to rent a space to a homeowner wishing to relocate a home that is not new. In recognition of the unique situation and vulnerability of mobilehome owners created by these facts, the State Mobilehome Residency Law, Civil Code Section 798, et seq. and Government Code Sections 65863.7 and 66427.4, limit the grounds on which mobilehome owners may be evicted from a mobilehome park, protect their right to sell their mobilehomes in place in a mobilehome park and authorize local jurisdictions to impose reasonable measures to mitigate the adverse impacts on displaced mobilehome owners when a mobilehome park closes or converts to another use. Pursuant to these state laws, this Section provides a procedure and standards for reviewing applications for change of use and closure of mobilehome parks, determining reasonable mitigation measures and protecting residents from tactics such as intimidation, designed to pressure mobilehome owners to relocate without receiving assistance pursuant to this Section. Without such assistance mobilehome owners may lose the investment in their homes, which may be their only asset, and may not be able to relocate to decent, affordable housing.

B.    Definitions

Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Application and Relocation Impact Report--Data on Mobilehome Owners and Park Residents--Duty to File.

1.    Prior to a change of use of a mobilehome park, an application therefor and a relocation impact report (“RIR”) complying with the requirements of this Section must be filed with the Director. No application shall be deemed complete or processed for consideration and approval until an application and RIR meeting all the requirements of this Section have been filed. No oral or written announcement or notice that a mobilehome park is closing or changing the use of a mobilehome park, or will be applying to do so, may be made before an application for change of use has been filed pursuant to this Section. The City Council, by resolution, may impose a fee for review of the application and RIR.

2.    The RIR shall contain the following information:

a.    A description of any proposed new use.

b.    A timetable for conversion of the park.

c.    A legal description of the park.

d.    The number of spaces in the park, length of occupancy by the current occupant of each space, and current rental rate for each space.

e.    The date of manufacture and size of each mobilehome by space.

f.    Appraisals of the on-site value, depreciated replacement value and removal value of the mobilehome of each eligible resident in the park.

A qualified appraiser shall be selected by the City and the cost of the appraisals shall be borne by the applicant. The appraisals shall identify those mobilehomes which cannot be moved due to type, age or other considerations.

g.    The total number of mobilehome residents, broken down space by space to identify owner or renter occupancy, principal or second home occupancy, residents under 16 years of age, residents 60 years of age or over, residents who are handicapped, any remaining mortgage and its terms, the purchase date and price paid by the mobilehome owner, the cost incurred by the mobilehome owner in improving the home and the amount and terms of any remaining mortgage. This information shall be provided on a questionnaire developed by the Director and sent to the residents by the Director who shall use the information in evaluating the application and any appropriate relocation assistance, provided, however, that the questionnaires shall remain confidential and that, to the extent possible, the Director shall maintain the confidentiality of the personal financial information contained in the questionnaire.

h.    The name and mailing address of each eligible resident, mobilehome tenant, mobilehome resident, resident mobilehome owner and legal owner of a mobilehome in the park.

i.    The purchase price of condominiums similar in size to the mobilehomes within a reasonable distance, and the rental rates and moving costs involved in moving to an apartment or other rental unit within a reasonable distance, including but not limited to, fees charged by moving companies and any requirement for payment of the first and last month’s rent and security deposits.

j.    A list of comparable mobilehome parks within a fifty-mile radius of the applicant’s mobilehome park. For each comparable park, the list shall state the criteria of that park for accepting relocated mobilehomes, rental rates and the name, address and telephone number of the park representative having authority to accept relocated homes, including any written commitments from mobilehome park owners willing to accept displaced mobilehomes.

k.    Estimates from two (2) moving companies as to the minimum and per mile cost of moving each mobilehome, including tear-down and setup of mobilehomes and moving of improvements such as porches, carports, patios, and other moveable amenities installed by the residents. Said moving companies shall be approved by the Director prior to inclusion in the final RIR.

l.    Proposed measures to mitigate the adverse impacts of the conversion upon the mobilehome park residents.

m.    Identification of a relocation specialist to assist residents in finding relocation spaces and alternate housing. The specialist shall be selected by the applicant, subject to the City’s approval, and shall be paid for by the applicant.

D.    Notice to Existing and Prospective Occupants Regarding Pending Change in Status of Park – Relocation Assistance.

When an application for change of use of a mobilehome park has been filed with the Director, the applicant shall give notice to all existing tenants of the subject park, and all prospective mobilehome purchasers and prospective mobilehome tenants within the park, prior to commencement of escrow to purchase the home and execution of any rental agreement, that the application for change of use has been filed and that they may not be entitled to relocation assistance pursuant to this Section. The park owner shall obtain a signed acknowledg¨ment of receipt of such notice from each tenant and prospective purchaser or tenant and file it with the Director. Provided all requirements of Civil Code Section 798.80 or successor statute have been complied with, tenants of the mobilehome park shall have the right of first refusal to purchase the mobilehome park prior to its sale to some other individual or entity.

E.    Application for Change of Use – Public Hearing – Findings.

1.    a.    Upon the filing of an application for change of use and RIR, or for exemption from the requirements of Government Code §65863.7, the Director shall examine the same and advise the applicant in writing within 30 days after receipt thereof whether it is complete. The application for a change of use and RIR shall be accepted for filing without the appraisals and confidential tenant information required by subsection (C)(2)(f) of this Section, but the application shall not be deemed complete until that information has been supplied by the applicant. If the applicant fails to provide the information required by subsection (C)(2)(f) of this Section within 120 days of filing the application, the application shall be deemed withdrawn.

b.    An application for exemption from the requirements of Government Code Section 65863.7 shall specify whether it is for a partial or complete exemption and shall provide documentary evidence of the qualification for any exemption allowed by Government Code Section 65863.7. The application shall contain the information required in subsection (C)(2) of this Section except that it need not provide the information required by subsections (C)(2)(f), (i), (l) of this Section. Further, while the applicant must identify a qualified relocation specialist, the requirement that the services of the specialist be paid for by the applicant may be waived.

2.    Not less than thirty days prior to the scheduled public hearing before the Planning Commission, the park owner shall, by certified mail or personal delivery, transmit to the registered and legal owner of each mobilehome occupying a site within the mobilehome park and to each resident a copy of the RIR and notice of the date, time and place of the public hearing on the application.

3.    Not less than fifteen days prior to the scheduled public hearing before the Planning Commission on the RIR, the park owner shall file with the Director a verification that he has complied with the requirements of this Section pertaining to notices and transmittal of copies of the RIR and with all notice requirements in Government Code Section 65863.7, et seq. The form and manner of such verification shall be subject to approval by the City Attorney.

4.    Planning Commission Hearing, Findings and Advisory Decision.

Upon review of an application for change of use or exemption and the RIR and consideration of the written and oral evidence received at the hearing, the Commission shall render its findings and recommendation to the City Council by resolution within 95 days of the date the application and RIR were accepted as complete. In rendering its advisory decision, the Commission may recommend reasonable measures not exceeding the reasonable costs of relocation to mitigate the adverse impacts on eligible residents displaced by the change of use, which may include, but are not limited to, the following:

a.    Payment of the cost of physically moving the mobilehome to a new site, including tear down and setup of mobilehomes, including, but not limited to, movable improvements such as patios, carports and porches.

b.    Payment of a lump sum based on consideration of the first and last month’s rent and any security deposit at the new mobilehome park.

c.    Payment of a lump sum based on consideration of any differential between rental rates at the closing mobilehome park and the new mobilehome park during the first year of the new tenancy.

d.    For residents whose mobile¨home cannot be relocated to a comparable park within a 50-mile radius of the closing mobilehome park, payment of a lump sum based upon consideration of the value of the mobilehome, including resident improvements (i.e., landscaping, porches, carports, etc.), any mortgage obligations of the resident on the mobilehome, and the costs of purchasing a mobilehome on-site in a comparable park or acquiring other comparable replacement housing.

e.    Provision of a replacement space within a reasonable distance of the closing mobilehome park.

f.    Notwithstanding any other provision in this Section, the total of the mitigation measures required shall be subject to and shall not exceed the limitation in Government Code Section 65863.7 which provides: “the steps taken to mitigate shall not exceed the reasonable costs of relocation.”

g.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section, if the mobilehome park closure or cessation in use is the result of an adjudication of bankruptcy, the park owner shall not be required to pay relocation assistance. (See Government Code Section 65863.7(f).)

5.    City Council Hearing, Findings and Decision.

a.    The application for change of use and any application for exemption shall be set for hearing before the City Council within 45 days of the date of the Planning Commission resolution recommending the mitigation measures to be imposed on the change of use of a park or exemption, pursuant to Government Code Section 65863.7, from the provision of relocation assistance.

b.    The City Council, after review and consideration of the application, the RIR and the written and oral evidence received at the hearing, shall by resolution render its findings and decision within 80 days of the date of the Planning Commission resolution.

c.    The City Council may impose reasonable measures not exceeding the reasonable costs of relocation to mitigate the adverse impacts of the change of use on eligible mobilehome residents pursuant to subsection (E)(4) of this Section. The decision of the City Council shall be final. Pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, the statute of limitations for bringing a judicial challenge to any decision concerning a change of use of a mobilehome park shall be 90 days and notice of the City’s decision to the applicant, park owner, and affected residents shall include notice that the 90 day statute of limitations in Section 1094.6 is applicable.

F.    Measures to Prevent Avoidance of Relocation Assistance Obligations.

1.    No notice or other announcement that a park is closing, or converting to another use, or may close or convert to another use, may be made before the park owner has filed an application for change of use with the City. No signs may be posted on or adjacent to the park property indicating that the park is closed or converted to another use until the application and RIR has been approved and the park owner has executed and filed with the Director a written acceptance of the mitigation requirements imposed on the change of use pursuant to this Section.

2.    Any eligible resident who relocates after an application for a change of use is filed shall be entitled to the relocation assistance imposed as a condition of the change of use even if that resident relocates before the final decision of the City Council determining the required relocation assistance pursuant to this Section.

3.    Each park owner shall send a copy of this Section to each existing and new resident of the Park by certified mail. Signed acknowledgment of receipt of such copy by each existing resident shall be filed with the Director within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this Ordinance. A signed acknowledgment of such copy by each new resident shall be filed with the Director within 15 days of the date the new resident enters a rental agreement with a park or lawfully occupies a mobilehome in the park.

4.    No prospective mobilehome resident who enters escrow to purchase a mobilehome in a park prior to the date an application for change of use is filed and no existing mobilehome resident may be required to sign a waiver, or a lease or rental agreement which includes a waiver, of their rights under this Section. Any waiver of rights under this Section by such a mobilehome resident shall be deemed invalid unless the resident or prospective resident and the park owner obtain the prior approval of the waiver from the Director, who may grant such approval only upon a finding that the waiver is voluntary and was made after being fully informed of the terms of this Section.

G.    Compliance with Relocation Assistance Required as a Condition of Approval of a Change of Use.

1.    The applicant shall execute and record a certificate, and file proof thereof with the Director, accepting the mitigation measures imposed on the approval of a change of use within 90 days of the final resolution approving the change of use and shall give the 6 month notice of the “Termination of Tenancy” and closure of the park required by the Civil Code within 120 days of the adoption of that resolution. A resolution approving a change of use shall automatically become null and void if the certificate accepting the conditions is not filed and executed within 90 days of the date of the final resolution approving the change of use and the notice of “Termination of Tenancy” has not been given within 120 days of that resolution. All mitigation measures imposed on the approval of a change of use shall be fully performed as to each resident prior to that resident’s required vacation of the mobilehome park, unless otherwise provided in the mitigation measure. No eligible resident shall be required to vacate a mobilehome space unless the applicant is in full compliance with all mitigation measures imposed pertaining to such resident, and has otherwise fulfilled the notice requirements of the California Mobilehome Residency Law relating to “Termination of Tenancy.”

2.    No building permit shall be issued for the development of any real property which has been, or is being, converted from a mobilehome park pursuant to this Section unless and until the City has adopted a resolution approving the change of use and the park owner has fully complied with the relocation assistance required by that resolution.

H.    Modification and Revocation of Approved Change of Use.

1.    Modification.

a.    After a change of use has been approved and after the applicant has executed and recorded a certificate of acceptance of the conditions of the resolution approving it, modification of the mitigation measures imposed, including additions and deletions, may be considered upon the filing of a written application by the applicant. Modification may be granted on the grounds that there has been a change in circumstances or new information, which could not reasonably have been known or considered at the time of the hearings on the application, has become available. Examples of such new information or changed circumstances include, but are not limited to, revised plans by the applicant and a change in the availability of relocation spaces. Modification shall not be granted when it would unreasonably prejudice the ability of the residents to relocate to comparable spaces or comparable alternate housing.

b.    Any application for modification shall be subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in subsections E and F of this Section. The decision in connection with a modification request shall take place as with the initial approval.

2.    Revocation.

a.    The City Council may by resolution initiate revocation proceedings on the grounds that the park owner or applicant has violated the provisions of this Section or the terms of the resolution approving the change of use. The resolution shall specify the grounds asserted for revocation of the approval of the change of use by the park and shall set a hearing before the City Council to consider the revocation not sooner than 45 and not later than 60 days after the date of the resolution.

b.    A copy of the resolution shall be sent to the park owner by certified mail or personal delivery together with notice that any response by the park must be filed at least 20 days prior to the date set for the revocation hearing.

c.    The City Council shall render its findings and decision concerning revocation by resolution within 90 days after initiating revocation proceedings.

I.    Expiration and Extension of Approval.

1.    Approval of a change of use shall become null and void if the notice of “Termination of Tenancy” has not been given within the time provided in subsection G of this Section and relocation pursuant to the conditions of approval has not occurred within twelve (12) months of the effective date of the resolution approving the change of use, unless otherwise extended as provided in subparagraph 2 of this subsection I or unless otherwise provided in the resolution approving it.

2.    Upon application by the park owner filed with the Director on or before the time provided for giving the Notice of Termination or the expiration of the approval of the change of use, the date for giving notice and the approval may be extended by the City Council upon a showing of good cause. The request may be denied if the Council finds that the park owner has unreasonably delayed implementation of the mitigation measures or that further delay will result in prejudice or further adverse impacts upon eligible residents remaining in the park. Approval of an extension may be conditioned on reasonable measures designed to mitigate the adverse impacts resulting from the delay. The application for extension shall be subject to the notice and hearing procedures set forth in subsection (H)(2) of this Section.

J.    Enforcement

1.    The City Council may bring a civil action to enforce the terms of this Section or the terms of a resolution approving a change of use.

2.    A violation of this Section or of the terms of a resolution approving a change of use shall be a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of $1,000. Each violation of a section or subsection of this Section shall be a separate violation, each violation of each term of such resolution as to a particular eligible resident shall be a separate violation and each continued day of violation after notice of violation has been given shall constitute a separate violation.

K.    Conflicts

In the event the provisions of this Section conflict with any code, ordinance or regulation of the City, the provisions of this Section shall govern. In the event any provisions of this Section conflict with a provision of State law, this Ordinance shall be interpreted and applied in conformity with State law.

L.    Severability

If any part or provision of this Section, or the application of such to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Section, including the application of such part or provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. To this end the provisions of this Section are severable.

17.91.080 Garage Sales as an Accessory Use
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for garage sales. The intent is to prevent the creation of nuisance or annoyance to the occupants of neighboring dwellings while allowing residents the opportunity to utilize their properties in a limited capacity for the purpose of marketing surplus household goods. Garage Sales are permitted as an incidental use in the A-1, R-1, R-2, R-3 and MX zones.

B.    Standards

Garage sales shall be permitted subject to the following standards:

1.    Garage sales may only be held in zones where it is specifically listed as a permitted accessory use.

2.    Sales shall last no longer than three (3) consecutive days.

3.    Sales shall be held no more than twice annually.

4.    Sales shall be conducted on the property where the seller resides. Multiple family sales are permitted if they are held on the property of one of the sellers.

5.    The merchandise offered for sale shall be limited to the personal goods of the homeowner(s) holding the sale. The offering of merchandise acquired for the purpose of resale is prohibited.

6.    Signs shall be limited to one sign on the property where the sale is being conducted.

17.91.090 Residential Sports Courts
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-002, adopted by City Council December 5, 2012)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for tennis courts and play courts within residential zones. The intent is to preserve the integrity of the existing residential areas by preventing negative health, safety and aesthetic impacts, while allowing residents the opportunity to establish tennis courts or play courts on properties of sufficient size and configuration to accommodate this use.

B.    Development standards

In the A-1, R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zone, a residential sports court shall be permitted as an accessory structure or use on a lot or site containing a primary residential use pursuant to PMC 17.26.120 and subject to the following standards:

1.    Limited use. When located in the rear or side yard of a single family residential structure, a residential sports court shall be used only by the occupants of the principal dwelling, or their non-paying guests. The court shall not be rented, used for paid instructional or commercial purposes and may not be utilized as a sport team practice facility. When located within multiple family residential complexes, a residential sports court shall be used only by occupants of the on-site dwelling units, or their non-paying guests.

2.    Property requirements. One (1) residential sports court (including applicable walls and/or fences) may be permitted on a lot of record

3.    Location. Within the A-1, R-1 and R-2 zone districts, residential sports courts shall be located in the rear or side yard area only and shall not extend into any required setback. No residential sports court may be located between the front lot line and front façade of the primary residential structure. Within the R-3 zone district, courts shall not be located in any required front, rear or side yard setback area.

4.    Yards and building separation. Within the A-1 and R-1 zone district, minimum setbacks for residential sports courts, measured from the property line to the court fence, paved or hard court edge shall be as follows:

a.    Five (5) feet for unlighted sports courts less than ten (10) feet in height.

b.    Ten (10) feet for unlighted sports courts between ten (10) and fifteen feet in height.

c.    Fifteen (15) feet for any lighted sports court.

d.    Structural separation between the residential sports court fence and any other fence, building, or structure shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet.

Within the R-2 and R-3 zone district, structural separation between the court fence, paved or hard court edge and any other fence, building or structure shall be ten (10) feet.

5.    Fence standards. Residential sports court fencing shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height. The fence may be plastic-coated chain link, colored dark green, dark brown or black, or dark-colored mesh netting or wind screen material. No galvanized chain link, or solid fencing is permitted.

6.    Lighting. No lighting for Residential sports courts shall be permitted without conforming to the following minimum standards:

a.    Light standards shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height above the grade of the sports court.

b.    Light fixtures shall be located a minimum of 15 (fifteen) feet from any property line and shall not be located within any front or side yard setback.

c.    Lighting fixtures shall be focused directly downward and be designed with sharp cut-off shields to prevent glare onto adjacent properties.

d.    Lighting for residential sports courts shall not be used between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

7.    Lot coverage. Residential sports courts shall not be included in calculations for lot coverage and may be included in calculations of open space requirements. The graded area for a tennis or game residential sports court shall not exceed 7,700 square feet.

8.    Grading associated with the development of residential play courts shall comply with the following:

a.    Retaining walls constructed for a court exceeding four feet in height at any point along the wall shall be reviewed and approved by the Director of Planning and the City Engineer.

b.    A Residential sports court shall not be located on slopes where the natural terrain prior to grading exceeds a 2:1 grade or within natural drainages.

9.    Screening. A residential sports court shall be adequately screened on all sides facing a rear or side lot line. Such screening shall be composed primarily of landscaping which shall be maintained in a healthy condition. All landscaping and irrigation plans will be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer.

C.    Review process. Residential sports courts shall require Minor Site Plan Review approval in accordance with the procedures and requirements of PMC 17.26.120.

17.91.100 Caretaker’s Residences
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for full-time caretaker’s residences within the OR, A-1, C-3, C-5 and industrial zones. (Regulations for temporary caretaker’s residences are provided in PMC 17.27.030(B)(3)). The intent is to permit caretaker’s residences where a need exists, based on the type of use, for full time security personnel or a superintendent to be present on-site. Caretaker’s residences, where permitted by the zone, are allowed only as an accessory use.

B.    Development standards

In the OR, A-1, C-3, C-5 and industrial zones, a caretaker’s residence shall be permitted as an accessory structure on a lot or site containing a primary open space or recreation, commercial, agricultural, or industrial use, subject to the following standards:

1.    Limited use. A caretaker’s residence may be occupied only by a caretaker or superintendent and their families. No other residential occupancy is permitted. A caretaker’s residence shall not be used as office space.

2.    Property requirements. A caretaker’s residence may be permitted only on properties in the OR, A-1, C-3, C-5 and industrial zones which contain a primary open space or recreation, agricultural, commercial or industrial use. Only one caretaker’s residence shall be permitted per lot of record.

3.    Construction standards. All construction of detached caretaker’s residences shall meet the minimum construction standards for single family residences as contained in PMC 17.41.090(G). All construction of attached caretaker’s residences shall meet the applicable construction standards for multi-family residences contained in PMC 17.42.090(G). All caretaker’s residences shall be affixed to a permanent foundation.

4.    Design and materials. Caretaker’s residences shall be designed and constructed with materials that are comparable to and compatible with any structures constructed for the primary use, if applicable, except that those construction materials which are prohibited under the appropriate construction standard requirements shall not be used for caretaker’s residences.

5.    Driveway access. The driveway serving the primary use shall also serve the caretaker’s residence.

6.    Pedestrian access. Each caretaker’s unit shall be provided with a separate outside entrance, with adequate pedestrian access from a public street to the entrance.

7.    Parking. A minimum of one (1) covered parking space, in a permitted location, shall be provided on the same lot as the caretaker’s residence, in addition to the required parking spaces serving the primary use.

8.    Yards. A caretaker’s residence shall not be constructed within a yard or setback area required by the zone or for the primary use.

C.    Review process. A caretaker’s residence which is added to an existing facility shall be subject to administrative review and approval by the Director of Planning, pursuant to PMC 17.26.040, where permitted by the zone. Caretaker’s residences that are intended to be incorporated into the overall site plan design of the property and constructed at the same time as the primary use shall be reviewed and approved as part of the development application for the primary use.”

17.91.110 Large Residential Care Facilities (Assisted Living Facilities ALFs)
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, March 3, 2010.)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for assisted living facilities. The intent is to ensure that adequate services and facilities are available to meet the special housing needs of individuals who require assistance with day to day living due to a handicap or illness.

B.    Development standards

All assisted living facilities shall conform to the following standards, except that when the facility provides individual units that can be considered “dwelling units” as defined in PMC 17.16.040(D) with individual kitchens, the facility shall be subject to the development standards for senior housing projects (PMC 17.91.040):

1.    Property requirements: The parcel upon which the ALF is to be established shall conform to all standards of the underlying land use and zone district.

2.    Occupancy limitations: Resident occupancy shall be limited to persons which require some form of personal assistance with day to day living due to a handicap or illness and their spouses, and caregivers who live on-site.

3.    Density: Assisted living facilities which do not include individual kitchen facilities shall not be subject to density requirements. If the facility does include individual kitchen facilities and the units can be considered “dwelling units” as defined in PMC 17.16.040(D), the facility shall be subject to the density requirements for the underlying land use and zone district.

4.    Minimum floor area: The minimum floor area of each resident bedroom is subject to the approval of the reviewing authority. If the units can be considered “dwelling units” as defined in PMC 17.16.040(D) with individual kitchens, the minimum floor area shall be subject to the standards for senior housing (PMC 17.91.040(B)(4)).

5.    Resident bedroom requirements: Each resident bedroom shall include bathroom, closet, and areas for sleeping and sitting. All bedrooms shall meet current requirements for handicap accessibility. The bedrooms shall provide the necessary safety equipment (safety bars, etc.), as well as emergency signal/intercom systems.

6.    Common facilities: Assisted living facilities shall provide the following common areas which shall be centrally located and accessible to all residents:

a.    kitchen(s)

b.    dining room(s)

c.    laundry facilities

d.    restrooms

e.    lounges that provide television and areas for socializing and sitting

7.    Recreation and entertainment areas shall also be provided at a minimum of 1200 square feet or 25 square feet per unit, whichever is greater, for facilities with one (1) to one hundred (100) units; and a minimum of 1600 square feet or 10 square feet per unit, whichever is greater, for facilities of over one hundred (100) units. Examples of recreation and entertainment facilities that can be provided to meet the minimum area requirements are as follows but are not limited to:

a.    activity areas

b.    workshops

c.    outdoor patios

d.    walking paths

8.    Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking, and the following:

a.    All required off-street parking shall be located a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from at least one entrance to the facility.

b.    If a shuttle stop is located on the property, shaded waiting areas and adequate and suitably striped paved areas for shuttle parking shall be provided adjacent to the shuttle stops.

c.    Assisted living facilities parking requirements may be adjusted on an individual project basis, subject to a parking study based on the type of care assistance provided, and the location and proximity to services including but not limited to medical offices, shopping areas, mass transit, etc.

9.    Bus turnouts and shelters: A bus turnout and shelter may be required as determined by the reviewing authority if the project is located on a designated arterial and adjacent to existing/future bus route(s).

10.    Driveways: Driveway approaches shall be delineated with interlocking pavers, rough textured concrete, landscaped medians or similar features. Stamped concrete shall not be allowed to meet this requirement.

C.    Other Standards:

1.    Handicapped access. In addition to the handicap requirements for the resident bedrooms listed above, the main pedestrian entrance to the development, common areas, and the parking facility shall be provided with handicapped access. Handrails shall be provided along both sides of corridors accessible to residents.

2.    Elevator access: All assisted living facilities that are two-stories or greater are required to provide an elevator(s). The elevator(s) must be accessible to all rooms above the first floor and large enough to accommodate a gurney.

3.    Security and Lighting: The project shall be designed to provide security for residents, guests, and employees. Adequate internal and external lighting, including walkways, shall be provided for security purposes. The lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way, and of an intensity compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. Internal lighting shall be bright enough to ensure safety.

4.    Trash areas: Trash areas not located within a building shall be paved and located a minimum of five (5) feet from a private street or drive aisle. Such areas shall be consistent with the standards contained in PMC 17.85.010. A minimum of one (1) trash area shall be provided for each building.

5.    Other requirements: Assisted living facilities shall conform with all local, state, and federal requirements.

D.    Review Process

Assisted living facilities shall be subject to the applicable review requirements of the zone district.

17.91.120 Reserved
17.91.130 Sober Living Home
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

A.    Purpose and Intent.

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for Sober Living Homes. The intent is to ensure that there are adequate residential uses for true sober living homes while also protecting residents of residential zones from adverse effects of uses which are not true recovery homes.

B.    Development and Use Standards

1.    Use Restrictions. All Sober Living shall conform to the following definition, requirements and standards:

A Sober Living Home means the use of a residential dwelling structure or unit for a cooperative living arrangement to provide an alcohol and drug free environment for persons recovering from alcoholism or alcohol and/or drug abuse who seek a living environment in which to remain clean and sober; and which demonstrates each of the following identifying characteristics that shall serve to distinguish the sober living home, as a use of residential property, from similar land uses such as drug treatment facilities or community care facilities that are subject to state licensing requirements and from all other uses of residential property:

a.    No more than six persons, including live-in managers, operators, or owners, reside on the premises;

b.    All residents, including live-in managers, operators, or owners, are recovering from alcohol and/or drug abuse;

c.    All residents actively participate in legitimate programs, including, but not limited to, Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics Anonymous (NA) programs, and maintain current records of meeting attendance;

d.    All owners, managers, operators, and residents observe and promote a “zero tolerance” policy regarding the consumption or possession of alcohol and controlled substances, except for prescription medications obtained and used under direct medical supervision;

e.    There is a written policy dealing with the use of drugs or alcohol;

f.    Owners, operators, managers and residents do not provide on-site any of the following services as they are defined by Section 10501(a)(6) of Title 9, California Code of Regulations:

i)    detoxification;

ii)    educational counseling;

iii)    individual or group counseling sessions;

iv)    treatment or recovery planning;

g.    The number of residents subject to the sex offender registration requirements of Penal Code Section 290 does not exceed the limit set forth in Penal Code Section 3003.5 and Chapter 9.10 PMC and does not violate the distance provisions set forth in Penal Code Section 3003 and in Chapter 9.10 PMC;

h.    Residents do not require non-medical care and/or supervision as those terms are defined at Health & Safety Code Section 1503.5 and Section 80001(c)(3) of Title 22 of the California Code of Regulations;

i.    The operators and/or residents maintain current membership in a recognized nonprofit organization of sober living homes that provide a credible quality assurance service for applicants or members or have received a sober living home certification from the State of California Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs; and

j.    Owners, managers, operators, and residents ensure that the property and its use comply with all applicable state and local laws.

2.    Property requirements: The parcel upon which the Sober Living Home is located shall conform to all standards of the underlying land use and zone district.

3.    Occupancy limitation: Resident occupancy shall be limited to six (6) persons.

C.    Review process

Sober Living Homes shall be subject to administrative approval by the Planning Director pursuant to PMC 17.26.030, Zoning Clearance Review.

17.91.140 Alcohol & Drug Treatment Facility
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-01, adopted by City Council March 3, 2010.)

A.    Purpose and Intent.

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for Alcohol & drug treatment facilities which house seven or more persons. The intent is to insure that there are adequate alcohol and drug treatment facilities while also protecting adjacent land uses from adverse effects of such uses.

B.    Development and Use Standards

1.    Use Restrictions. All Alcohol & Drug Treatment Facilities shall conform to the following, requirements and standards:

a.    State License Required. Only facilities licensed as such by the state are permitted pursuant to this Section.

b.    Occupancy Requirements. Occupancy shall be limited to persons recovering from alcoholism or alcohol and/drug abuse.

c.    All residents must actively participate in legitimate programs, including, but not limited to, Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) or Narcotics Anonymous (NA) programs, and maintain current records of meeting attendance;

d.    All owners, managers, operators, and residents observe and promote a “zero tolerance” policy regarding the consumption or possession of alcohol and controlled substances, except for prescription medications obtained and used under direct medical supervision;

e.    There is a written policy dealing with the use of drugs or alcohol;

f.    The number of residents subject to the sex offender registration requirements of Penal Code Section 290 does not exceed the limit set forth in Penal Code Section 3003.5 and Chapter 9.10 PMC and does not violate the distance provisions set forth in Penal Code Section 3003 and in Chapter 9.10 PMC;

g.    Owners, managers, operators, and residents ensure that the property and its use comply with all applicable state and local laws.

2.    Property requirements:

a.    The parcel upon which the Alcohol & Drug Free Residential Recovery Home is located shall conform to all standards of the underlying land use and zone district.

b.    Location.

i)    The facility shall be accessible to necessary support services.

ii)    To avoid over-concentration of Alcohol & drug treatment facilities, there shall be a five-thousand-foot separation requirement as measured from the nearest outside building walls between the subject use and any sober living home or other alcohol & drug treatment facility.

iii)    An alcohol & drug treatment facility shall not be located within 1,000 feet of a public or private school (pre-school through twelfth grade), universities, colleges, student housing, senior housing, child care facilities, public parks, or businesses licensed for on- or off-site sales of alcoholic beverages as measured from any point on the outside walls of the shelter to the nearest property line of the noted use.

c.    Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking, and the following:

i)    All required off-street parking shall be located a maximum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from at least one entrance to the facility.

ii)    If a shuttle stop is located on the property, shaded waiting areas and adequate and suitably striped paved areas for shuttle parking shall be provided adjacent to the shuttle stops.

iii)    Parking requirements may be adjusted on an individual project basis, subject to a parking study based on the type of care assistance provided, and the location and proximity to services including but not limited to medical offices, shopping areas, mass transit, etc.

d.    Bus turnouts and shelters: A bus turnout and shelter may be required as determined by the reviewing authority if the project is located on a designated arterial and adjacent to existing/future bus route(s).

Chapter 17.92
COMMERCIAL USES
17.92.010 Drive-Through Facilities
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for drive-through facilities provided with other commercial uses including but not limited to restaurants and financial institutions. The intent is to ensure that such developments do not have negative impacts on traffic, safety, air quality, and visual character of the area they are located in.

B.    Vehicle reservoir areas

1.    Adequate reservoir capacity for vehicles to enter a facility safely and efficiently shall be provided for all drive-through development projects. Required storage capacities are identified below. Reduced requirements may be allowed when sufficient evidence is provided, to the satisfaction of the reviewing authority, to demonstrate that such reduction will not impair traffic safety on the site. For land uses not identified, reservoir capacity shall be subject to the approval of the reviewing authority.

 

Drive-Through Facility Type

Vehicle Reservoir Required

Bank

10 spaces per service position, to a maximum of 25 total.

Retail or laundry

4 spaces per service position.

Restaurant

6 spaces at ordering locations; 3 spaces between ordering and pick-up locations.

Car washes, full

service

2 spaces per approach line, 10 minimum. Drying area: 2 spaces per approach line, 8 minimum.

Car washes, self

service

Two spaces on each position approach. Drying area: 2 spaces per approach line, 8 minimum.

Car washes,

automated

6 spaces on each approach.

Car washes, express

6 spaces minimum on each approach. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 12-001, adopted by City Council May 2, 2012.)

Service station

1 space per service row of gasoline pumps.

Lubrication/oil change service

2 spaces per service bay.

2.    The minimum reservoir area does not include the vehicle(s) being served. Each reservoir space shall be eleven (11) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long. Reservoir areas may not block aisles, driveways, or access to parking spaces.

C.    Development standards

1.    Site design should locate the drive-through aisle so that pedestrians do not need to cross the aisle in order to access main building entrance from the parking lot or street. If a pedestrian walkway intersects a drive-through aisle, the walkway shall be highlighted with enhanced paving and lighting, and shall be located for maximum visibility of pedestrians from vehicles.

2.    Drive-through aisles shall have a minimum fourteen (14) foot width on curves and a minimum eleven (11) foot width on straight sections, with a minimum inside turning radius of fifteen (15) feet.

3.    Drive-through aisles shall be constructed with (PCC) concrete.

4.    Drive-through aisles and structures shall be set back from the ultimate curb face of an adjacent public right-of-way a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet.

5.    Drive-through lanes should be screened from public view by orientation of the building and provision of landscaping berming, low screen walls or a combination thereof.

6.    Menu boards shall face away from the street and comply with Chapter 17.88 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

7.    Drive-through aisles shall not exit directly onto a public right-of-way. When drive-thru aisles are oriented toward a public right-of-way, sufficient screening shall be provided so that automobile headlights do not shine into the public right-of-way.

8.    Drive-through restaurants within an integrated shopping center shall have an architectural style consistent with the theme established in the center. The architecture of any drive-through restaurant must provide compatibility with surrounding uses in form, materials, colors, scale, and other design elements.

9.    Other than menu boards, signs for drive-through services shall conform to PMC 17.88.100(I).

D.    Review process

All drive-through facilities shall be subject to the review process set forth in each zone. All drive-through facilities shall be reviewed by the Development Advisory Board. In making the decision for approval of the proposed drive-through facility, the reviewing authority shall consider possible air quality, traffic safety, and visual impacts of the proposed facility, as well as consistency with this Section and other applicable provisions of the Zoning Code.

17.92.020 Outdoor Seating Areas
A.    Purpose and intent

Outdoor seating areas can enhance the pedestrian ambience of commercial areas and are encouraged. However, reasonable regulation of outdoor seating is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. The purpose of this Section is to set forth the conditions and requirements under which outdoor seating areas may be permitted to operate by approval of the Planning Department, Building Department and an encroachment permit.

B.    Definitions

An outdoor seating area is a group of tables and chairs and its authorized decorative and accessory devices situated and maintained upon private or public property or upon the public sidewalk for the use in connection with the consumption of food and beverage sold to the public from or in an adjoining restaurant.

C.    Development standards

Any outdoor seating area shall be developed and operated in conformance with the following standards in addition to any other applicable standards and regulations.

1.    An outdoor seating area may be established where permitted by the zone.

2.    A restaurant may be permitted to operate an outdoor seating area provided that the restaurant conforms to all applicable codes and ordinances.

3.    An outdoor seating area may be located on the private property or on the public sidewalk. Any outdoor seating area located on the public sidewalk shall be subject to issuance of an encroachment permit and must be immediately adjacent to and abutting a restaurant. The area in which the outdoor seating area is located shall extend no further along the sidewalk’s length than the actual sidewalk frontage of the operating restaurant. Any outdoor seating area located within the public right-of-way must also provide proof of sufficient liability insurance to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.

4.    An outdoor seating area may be located on a private or public sidewalk only where the sidewalk is wide enough to adequately accommodate both the usual pedestrian traffic in the area and the proposed outdoor seating area. There shall be a minimum six (6) foot clear distance or fifty (50) percent of the sidewalk width, whichever is greater, free of all obstructions in order to allow adequate pedestrian movement.

5.    All tables and chairs shall be set back not less than three (3) feet from any curb and from any street or barrier and shall not be situated within eight (8) feet of any designated bus stop.

6.    The area in which the outdoor seating area is authorized shall be identified in a manner which will clearly separate and delineate it from the areas of the sidewalk which will remain open to pedestrian traffic.

7.    All outdoor dining furniture, including tables, chairs, umbrellas, and planters, shall be movable. Umbrellas must be secured with a minimum base of not less that sixty (60) pounds. Outdoor amplified music or speakers shall be reviewed at the time of application and shall require a Conditional Use Permit.

8.    No signing may be allowed within any outdoor seating area, except for the name of the operating establishment on awning(s) or umbrella valance(s).

9.    The following requirements apply to outdoor seating areas which are operated exclusively by an adjacent restaurant for service to other portions of said restaurant:

a.    The outdoor preparation of food or busing facilities are prohibited at outdoor cafes. The presetting of tables with utensils, glasses, napkins, condiments, and the like is prohibited. All exterior surfaces within the cafe shall be easily cleanable and shall be kept clean at all times by the permittee. Restrooms for the outdoor seating area shall be provided in the adjoining restaurant and the outdoor seating shall be counted in the restroom requirements for the restaurant.

b.    Trash and refuse storage for the outdoor seating area shall not be permitted within the outdoor dining area or on adjacent sidewalk areas and the permittee shall be responsible to remove all the trash and litter as they accumulate. The permittee shall be responsible to maintain the outdoor dining area including the sidewalk surface and furniture and adjacent areas in a clean and safe condition.

c.    Hours of operation shall be identical to those of the adjacent restaurant, unless reduced by the reviewing authority. Tables, chairs, and all other furniture used in the operation of an outdoor cafe shall be removed from the sidewalk and stored indoors whenever the restaurant is not in operation.

d.    No parking shall be required for the outside seating area, provided that no more than twenty (20) percent of the total seating provided by the restaurant is outdoor seating. Otherwise, parking shall be provided pursuant to Chapter 17.87 PMC.

10.    The City shall have the right and power, acting through the Director of Planning, or his or her designee, to prohibit the operation of an outdoor seating area at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of sidewalk area. Such problems or conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals and similar events, parades, repairs, to the street or sidewalk, or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the permittee shall be given prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the outdoor cafe will be prohibited by the City, but any failure to give prior notice shall not affect the right and power of the City to prohibit the operation of the outdoor seating area at any given time.

D.    Review process

An outdoor seating area proposed in conjunction with a new restaurant shall be reviewed in conjunction with the application for the related restaurant. An outdoor seating area proposed for an existing restaurant shall be subject to approval of a modification to the approval for the existing restaurant. Any outdoor seating area located in the public right-of-way shall be subject to issuance of an Encroachment Permit. Any outdoor seating area in which alcoholic beverages will be served shall be subject to the provisions of PMC 17.92.080.

In connection with approval of any outdoor seating area, the reviewing authority shall make findings that the proposed operation meets the requirements of this Section. The reviewing authority may impose such conditions in granting such approval as deemed needed to assure that the proposed operation will meet the operating requirements and conditions set forth in this Section and to assure that the public safety and welfare will be protected.

The right to operate an outdoor seating area may be revoked by the Planning Commission upon a finding that one or more of the conditions of this Section have been violated, or that the outdoor seating area is being operated in a manner which constitutes a nuisance, or that the operation of the outdoor seating area unduly impedes or restricts the movement of pedestrians past the outdoor seating area.

17.92.030 Kennels
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for kennels located in the A-1 (Light Agriculture) Zone. The intent is to protect health and welfare of the surrounding residents and citizens in general by preventing potential negative impacts related to odor, noise, traffic, visual appearance, health and safety.

B.    Standards Kennels shall be established and operated in accordance with the following requirements:

1.    No kennel shall be established on a parcel containing less than five (5) acres.

2.    Kennels are permitted only as an accessory use on parcels which contain a dwelling unit for the residence of the kennel operator.

3.    Kennels shall be conducted and operated in accordance with standards established by the Los Angeles County Animal Control office for construction and operation of kennels.

4.    Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.87 PMC; however, in no event shall the number of spaces be less than five (5).

5.    All signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC, Signs.

6.    The disposal of animal waste shall be in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws.

7.    The location of any animal enclosures shall be in accordance with PMC 17.30.090(D).

C.    Review process

Kennels in Zone A-1 shall be subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC.

17.92.040 Veterinary Clinics and Animal Hospitals
A.    Purpose and intent

These regulations are provided to establish standards for development and operation of veterinary clinics and animal hospitals, in order to protect the health and welfare of adjacent residents by preventing potential negative impacts related to odor, noise, traffic, visual appearance, disposal of wastes or other aspect of such business.

B.    Standards

1.    The following standards apply to any veterinary clinic or animal hospital established in the City.

a.    Off-street parking facilities shall be provided as required by Chapter 17.87 PMC. In no event shall the number of parking spaces provided be less than five (5) spaces for a facility.

b.    All signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC, Signs.

c.    The disposal of dead animals and waste shall be in portable, closed refuse containers, which shall be kept inside the building until removal from the premises. The applicant shall submit to the City, and it shall be made a condition of approval, satisfactory evidence that the applicant has made arrangements for the proper and adequate disposal of dead animals and refuse.

d.    The buildings and equipment on the premises shall be provided and maintained in accordance with standards and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times.

e.    All small animal care and, to the extent feasible, large animal care, shall be conducted within an enclosed and sound controlled building. All animal enclosures shall be located in accordance with the provisions of PMC 17.30.090(D).

2.    The following standards shall apply to veterinary clinics established in the A-1 (Light Agriculture) Zone.

a.    No clinic shall be established on a parcel containing less than five (5) gross acres.

b.    Veterinary clinics are permitted only as an accessory use on parcels which contain a dwelling unit in which the veterinarian resides.

c.    The practice may include large or small animal patients.

3.    The following standards shall apply to veterinary clinics and animal hospitals permitted in zones other than A-1.

a.    The practice shall be limited to small animals and shall include only dogs, cats and other household pets as patients.

b.    The operation shall be conducted in a completely enclosed and sound controlled building and in such a way as to produce no objectionable noise or odors outside the building. The building materials and methods of odor control shall be acceptable to the Commission as adequately reducing emitted noise and odors.

c.    Landscaping, screening and other aspects of the development shall conform with the applicable requirements of Division 8.

C.    Review process

Veterinary clinics and small animal hospitals shall be permitted as specified in the applicable zone district.

17.92.050 Adult-Oriented Businesses
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-4 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

A.    Purpose and intent

The purpose of this Section is to regulate Adult-Oriented Businesses in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community from the harmful secondary effects brought about by the unregulated operation of Adult-Oriented Businesses. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to: depreciation of property values; increased vacancy rates in residential and commercial areas; increased criminal activity; increased litter, noise, and vandalism; and interference with the enjoyment of residential property in the vicinity of such businesses. The provisions of this Section have neither the purpose or intended effect of: (1) imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative material; (ii) denying access by adults to adult-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the U.S. or State Constitutions; or (iii) denying access by distributors or exhibitors of adult-oriented materials or entertainment to their intended market.

B.    Definitions

For the purposes of this Section, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the following definitions shall apply:

1.    Adult-Oriented Businesses. “Adult-Oriented Businesses” means any of the following:

2.    Adult arcade. The term “adult arcade” as used in this Section, is an establishment where, for any form of consideration, on or more still or motion picture projectors, or similar machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons each, are used to show films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

a.    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store. The terms “adult bookstore”, “adult novelty store”, or “adult video store” as used in this Section, is an establishment that has twenty (20 percent or more of its stock in books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, adult-oriented merchandise or of photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, or distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities and/or specified anatomical areas. An adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store shall not include mail order businesses or wholesale businesses with no patrons on the premises. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

b.    Adult cabaret. The term “adult cabaret” as used in this Section, means a nightclub, restaurant, or similar business establishment which: (1) regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) which regularly features persons who appear semi-nude; and/or (3) shows films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

c.    Adult hotel/motel. The term “adult hotel/motel”: as used in this Section, means a hotel or motel or similar business establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which, (1) provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions thirty (30) percent to more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction of description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and (2) rents, leases, or lets any room for less than a ten (10) hour period, or rents, leases, or lets any single room more than twice in a 24-hour period.

d.    Adult motion picture theater. The term “adult motion picture theater” as used in this Section, is a business established where, for any form of consideration, films, computer generated images, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and thirty (30) percent or more of the number of which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual actives or specified anatomical areas.

e.    Adult theater. The term “adult theater” as used in this Section, means a business establishment which, for any form of consideration regularly features live performances, for an audience on this premises, which performances either: (1) are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities; and/or (2) regularly featured entertainers who appear semi-nude. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-6, adopted by City Council October 9, 1997.)

f.    Modeling studio. The term “modeling studio” as used in this Section, means a business which provides, for pecuniary compensation, monetary or other consideration, hire or reward, or on a voluntary basis, figure models who, for the purposes of sexual stimulation of patrons, appear either nude or semi-nude or display “specified anatomical areas” to be observed, sketched, photographed, painted, sculpted or otherwise depicted by persons on the premises. “Modeling studio” does not include schools maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. “Modeling studio” further does not include a studio or similar facility owned, operated, or maintained by an individual artist or group of artists, and which does not provide, permit, or make available “specified sexual activities”. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-6, adopted by City Council October 9, 1997.)

3.    Adult-Oriented merchandise. The term Adult-Oriented Merchandise” as used in the Section, means sexually oriented implements or paraphernalia, such as, but not limited to: dildos; auto sucks; adult-oriented vibrators; edible underwear; benwa balls; inflatable orifices; anatomical balloons with orifices; simulated vaginas, and similar adult-oriented devices which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

4.    Church. The term “church” as used in this Section, is a structure which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.

5.    Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon. As used in this Section, the term “distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” shall mean and refer to the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon” the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. See Pringle v. City of Covina, 115 Cal. App. 3 151 (1981).

6.    Establishment of an Adult-Oriented Business. As used in this Section, to “establish” an Adult-Oriented Business shall mean and include any of the following:

a.    The opening or commencement of any Adult-Oriented Business as a new business;

b.    The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an Adult-Oriented Business, to any Adult-Oriented Business defined herein;

c.    The addition of any of the Adult-Oriented Businesses defined herein to any other existing Adult-Oriented Business; or

d.    The relocation of any such Adult-Oriented Business.

7.    Park. As used in this Section, the term “park” means a park, trail, recreation center, sports complex, golf course or athletic field within the City which is under the control, operation or management of the City or other public agency. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-6, adopted by City Council October 9, 1997.)

8.    Regularly Features. The term “regularly features” with respect to an adult theater or adult cabaret means a regular and substantial course of conduct. The fact that live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities occurs on two (2) or more occasions within a thirty (30) day period; three (3) or more occasions within a sixty (60) day period; or four (4) or more occasions within a one hundred and eighty (180) day period, shall to the extent permitted by law be deemed to be a regular and substantial course of conduct.

9.    School. The term “school” as used in this Section, is any child or day care facility, or an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, offering instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code and maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, middle or junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college, or university.

10.    Semi-nude. As used in this Section, the term “semi-nude” means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, buttocks, areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices.

11.    Specified anatomical areas. As used in this Section, “specified anatomical areas” shall mean and include any of the following:

a.    Less than completely and opaquely covered human (i) genitals or pubic region; (ii) buttocks; and (iii) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola;

b.    Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered;

c.    Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection (B)(11)(a) or (b) of this Section.

12.    Specified sexual activities. As used in this Section, “specified sexual activities” shall mean and include any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering:

a.    The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast;

b.    Sex acts, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy;

c.    Masturbation, actual or simulated;

d.    Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections (B)(12)(a) through (c) of this Section.

13.    Substantially Enlarged. The term “substantially enlarged” as used in this Section means the increase in floor area occupied by an Adult-Oriented Business by more than ten percent (10%) of its floor area as it existed at the time an Adult-Oriented Regulatory Permit was issued for the business.

C.    Development standards

1.    Location Requirements

a.    An Adult-Oriented Business shall not be established or located in any zone of the City other than the Service Commercial (C-5) and Light Industrial (M-1) Zones and shall not violate any of the following separation requirements:

(i)    The Adult-Oriented Business is not proposed to be within 1,000 feet of any other Adult-Oriented Business located within or outside of the City; and

(ii)    The Adult-Oriented Business is not proposed to be within 1,000 feet of any residential use or zone located within or outside of the City; and

(iii)    The Adult-Oriented Business is not proposed to be within 1,000 feet of any park, church, school or primary alcohol use, excluding convenience stores, located within or outside of the City.

b.    The distances set forth above shall be measured as a straight line from the primary entrance of the Adult-Oriented Business to the property so used without regard to intervening structures.

D.    Review process

1.    Adult-oriented businesses shall be subject to Site Plan Review approval in accordance with Chapter 17.21 PMC, where permitted by the Zoning Ordinance.

2.    Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 17.20.070, the reviewing authority shall hold a hearing on an application for a Site Plan Review for an adult oriented business within four (4) months of the date the application is deemed complete and shall make a decision on the application within five (5) months of the date the application is deemed complete, unless an extension to these time limits is agreed to in writing by the applicant. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

E.    Required findings for approval

Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 17.21.050, the reviewing authority shall approve a Site Plan Review for an adult-oriented business if the reviewing authority is able to make affirmative findings based on all of the following criteria:

1.    The structure in which the proposed use will occur and the site plan for the property are consistent with the General Plan and either comply with or are concurrently conditioned to comply with the location standards and development and performance standards set forth in this Section;

2.    The proposed site and use will be in compliance with all other objective development requirements as set forth in this Ordinance and in Chapter 5.04 PMC, to the extent such requirements are not in conflict with the provisions of this PMC 17.92.050.

F.    Existing Adult-Oriented Businesses.

1.    Any Adult-Oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this Section in violation hereof shall be deemed a non-conforming use.

2.    Any Adult-Oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this Section which becomes non-conforming due to the location criteria enumerated in subsection C of this Section shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the location criteria of this Section, not later than twenty (20) years following the effective date of those criteria.

3.    Any Adult-Oriented business lawfully operating on the effective date of this Section which becomes non-conforming due to either the design or performance standards enumerated in PMC 5.04.400(I) shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with said design standards and performance standards, not later than one (1) year following the effective date of this Section.

4.    Any Adult-Oriented business lawfully operating on the date of being annexed by the City which becomes non-conforming due to the location criteria enumerated in subsection C of this Section shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with the location criteria of this Section, not later than twenty (20) years following the effective date of those criteria.

5.    Any Adult-Oriented business lawfully operating on the date of being annexed by the City which becomes non-conforming due to either the design or performance standards enumerated in PMC 5.04.400(I) shall cease operation, or otherwise be brought into full compliance with said design standards and performance standards, not later than one (1) year following the effective date of this Section.

6.    An Adult-Oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is not rendered a non-conforming use by the subsequent location of: (i) a residential use or zone within 1,000 feet of the Adult-Oriented business; or (ii) a park, church, school or primary alcohol use, excluding convenience stores, within 1,000 feet of the Adult-Oriented business. This exemption shall only apply if the Adult-Oriented business is continuous, which means that interruptions cannot exceed six (6) months.

17.92.060 Reserved
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-4 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

17.92.070 Alcohol Beverage Establishments
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995; Zoning Ordinance Amendment 04-01 adopted by City Council July 11, 2005.)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for alcoholic beverage establishments to ensure that such businesses are appropriately located and operated so as not to pose a significant threat to the public health, safety, peace and welfare.

B.    Definitions

Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Conditional Use Permit Requirement

1.    No new Alcoholic Beverage Establishment shall be established unless a permit has first been obtained pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits.

2.    In addition to the information required by Chapter 17.22 PMC, the following shall be included with the Conditional Use Permit application:

a.    An interior floor plan of the proposed establishment drawn to scale indicating the total gross floor area and the percentage of gross floor area devoted to sale of alcoholic beverages. The percentage of gross floor area devoted to sale of alcoholic beverages shall be calculated based on the following criteria:

i.    Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments – The percentage of gross floor area devoted to sale of alcoholic beverages shall include any areas utilized for the sale, storage or display of alcoholic beverages.

ii.    On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments – The percentage of gross floor area devoted to sale of alcoholic beverages shall include any areas utilized for the sale, storage or display of alcoholic beverages. Additionally, the percentage of gross floor area devoted to sale of alcoholic beverages shall include any bar service area(s), associated seating area(s), dance floor(s) and storage area(s).

b.    A vicinity map indicating the location of the proposed establishment and the distance separation from those uses specified in the location standards of this Section.

3.    In addition to the findings required by Chapter 17.22 PMC, prior to approving or conditionally approving a Conditional Use Permit for an Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, the approval authority shall find that the proposed use is consistent with the purpose of this Section. In making the required findings, the approval authority may consider the following:

a.    Whether the proposed establishment would result in an Over Intensification of alcoholic beverage establishments. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

b.    Whether the proposed establishment would be located in a High Crime Area.

c.    Information in the surrounding area.

d.    The hours of operation of the proposed establishment.

D.    Location Standards

1.    Alcoholic Beverage Establishments within the C-4 (Commercial Center) zone district or the Palmdale Trade and Commerce Center Specific Plan are not subject to the location standards identified below. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

2.    Primary and Other Alcoholic Beverage Establishments. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

a.    New Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishments shall be separated from existing sensitive and similar uses based on the location standards specified below: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

 

On-Sale

Off-Sale

Other (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

Religious Assembly

500

500

200

*Public or Private K-12 School, Learning/Tutoring Center or Commercial Day Care (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

500

1,000

500

Public Parks, Recreation Centers, or Public Libraries(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

500

500

500

**Residential Uses or Residentially Designated Property

500

500

500

Existing Bona Fide Restaurants

500

500

0

Existing Incidental Alcoholic Beverage Establishment

500

500

0

Existing Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishment

1,000

1,000

500

Hospitals

1,000

1,000

500

Sexually Oriented Business

1,000

1,000

1,000

*    Includes both existing school facilities and undeveloped school sites as identified by the applicable School District.

**    Includes both existing residential uses and areas designated for future residential land uses on the General Plan Land Use Map.

b.    For purposes of this Section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or suite wall where a Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishment is proposed to be conducted, to the nearest building or suite wall of an existing use or nearest property line if there is no structure. For school uses, the distance shall be measured from the nearest portion of the building or suite wall where the Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishment is proposed to the nearest property line of an existing or future school site.

c.    Any Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishment may apply for modification of the location standards specified in this subsection. A request for modification of the location standards shall be submitted in conjunction with the Conditional Use Permit application for the proposed establishment and shall be reviewed concurrently by the approving authority for the Conditional Use Permit application. The approving authority shall approve or disapprove the request and shall make all of the following findings, in addition to the Conditional Use Permit findings, in permitting modification of the location standards: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 06-02, adopted by City Council January 3, 2007), (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

i.    It will serve a Specific Demand not Currently Served within one-quarter mile of the project location. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

ii.    It will not adversely affect nearby property. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

iii.    It will not encourage the development of an adult entertainment area or otherwise promote community blight. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

3.    Bona Fide Restaurants and Incidental Alcoholic Beverage Establishments

a.    Bona Fide Restaurants and new Incidental Alcoholic Beverage Establishments shall be separated from existing sensitive and like uses as based on the following location standards:

 

On-Sale

Off-Sale

Bona Fide Restaurant

Religious Assembly

500

0

0

*Public or Private K-12 Schools and Commercial Day Care (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

500

0

0

Public parks, Recreation Centers, or Public Libraries (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

500

0

0

**Residential Uses or Residentially Designated Property

300

0

0

Existing Bona Fide Restaurants

0

0

0

Existing Incidental Alcohol Beverage Establishment

300

0

0

Existing Primary Alcoholic Beverage Establishment

300

0

0

Hospitals

1,000

0

0

Sexually Oriented Business

1,000

1,000

1,000

*    Includes both existing school facilities and undeveloped school sites as identified by the applicable School District. Excludes schools that operate as a “Learning / Tutoring Center”. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

**    Includes both existing residential uses and areas designated for future residential land uses on the General Plan Land Use Map.

b.    For purposes of this Section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or suite wall where an Incidental Alcoholic Beverage Establishment is proposed to be conducted, to the nearest building or suite wall of an existing use or nearest property line if there is no structure. For school uses, the distance shall be measured from the nearest portion of the building or suite wall where the Incidental Alcoholic Beverage Establishment is proposed to the nearest property line of an existing or future school site. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

c.    Any Incidental Alcoholic Beverage Establishment may apply for modification of the location standards specified in this subsection. A request for modification of the location standards shall be submitted in conjunction with the Conditional Use Permit application for the proposed establishment and shall be reviewed concurrently by the approving authority for the Conditional Use Permit application. The approving authority shall approve or disapprove the request and shall make all of the following findings, in addition to the Conditional Use Permit findings, in permitting modification of the location standards: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 06-02, adopted by City Council January 3, 2007), (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

i.    It will serve a Specific Demand not Currently Serviced within one-quarter mile of the project location. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

ii.    It will not adversely affect nearby property.

iii.    It will not encourage the development of an adult entertainment area or otherwise promote community blight.

E.    Development Standards (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

1.    All Alcoholic Beverage Establishments (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

All new alcoholic beverage sales activities shall be designed, constructed, and operated to conform to all of the following operational standards: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

a.    That it does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

b.    That it does not jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

c.    That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities within the premises or in close proximity of the premises, including but not limited to disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking, excessive loud noises, especially in the late night or early morning hours, traffic violations, curfew violations, lewd conduct, or police detentions and arrests. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

d.    That it complies with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code §§ 24200, 24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with the requirements of the Municipal Code for an annual City business license. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

2.    Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment

In addition to any conditions imposed by the approval authority, Off-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments that require a Conditional Use Permit shall comply with the following development standards.

a.    No beer or wine shall be displayed within five (5) feet of the cash register or the front door unless such item is in a permanently affixed cooler.

b.    No sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a walk-up or drive-in window.

c.    No display or sale of alcoholic beverages shall be made from an ice tub. An “ice tub” is a vessel filled with ice that displays single servings of alcoholic beverages for customer self-service.

d.    No beer or wine advertising shall be located on motor fuel islands and no self-illuminated beer or wine advertising shall be located on buildings or windows of establishments where motor vehicle fuels are sold or stored.

e.    Alcoholic beverages and non-alcoholic beverages shall be stocked and displayed separately.

f.    The establishment shall be a member of the “Business Watch Program.”

g.    Litter and trash receptacles shall be conveniently located inside and outside the establishment, and trash and debris shall be removed from the premises on a daily basis.

h.    The exterior of the establishment, including all signs, accessory buildings and structures, shall be maintained free of litter and graffiti at all times. Graffiti shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of written notice from the City.

i.    The sales area shall be located so that the clerk and customer are fully visible from the street at the time of the sales transaction.

j.    The cash register and sales area shall be illuminated so as to provide clear observation for law enforcement surveillance.

k.    To discourage nuisance activities, establishments shall be prohibited from selling single serve containers as defined herein. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

l.    Alcoholic beverages shall not be consumed on the premises.

m.    Loitering in the public right-of-way, parking area and in front of adjacent properties shall be prohibited.

n.    Window signs shall comply with Chapter 17.88 PMC, Signs, and shall be located so as to provide a clear and unobstructed view of the cash register and sales area from the parking lot and street.

o.    The establishment shall conspicuously post the following signs:

i.    Interior and exterior signs stating that consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises is prohibited by law.

ii.    Exterior signs stating Penal Code Section 602.1 and PMC 9.44.050. Such signs shall be clearly visible from the establishment’s parking area and shall include the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department phone number.

iii.    An interior sign stating: “We ID everyone under 30 years of age for alcohol sales.” The dimensions of such sign shall be at least eight (8) inches by eleven (11) inches. If the predominant language of the establishment’s clientele is not English, then the sign shall also be that language.

p.    Public telephones shall be located within the establishment and shall be programmed to allow only out-going calls.

q.    A copy of any operational conditions of approval imposed on the establishment shall be conspicuously posted on the premises. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

r.    No coin-operated games shall be permitted in any establishment that is located in a High Crime Area.

s.    Exterior lighting of the parking area and premises shall be provided at a level sufficient for recognition of the features of a person at any point on the property. Lighting shall conform to PMC 17.86.030, Lighting, and shall not produce glare or illuminate nearby residential properties.

t.    A security camera system approved by the Public Safety Office shall be installed on the premises, shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the City. The system must be capable of producing a retrievable image on film or tape that can be made a permanent record and that can be enlarged through projection or other means. Video or digital recordings generated by the system shall be maintained for thirty (30) days. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

u.    The establishment shall implement preventive architectural design features, as approved by the Public Safety Office and the Planning Director, to maintain security of the premises. Such features shall control access to the facility, open sight lines, lighting levels, ambient noise levels and circulation patterns. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

v.    Special security measures such as security guards, door monitors and burglar alarm systems may be required as a condition of approval. This will be determined on a case-by-case basis upon review by the Planning Director, the Public Safety Office and the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

w.    The sale of distribution to the customer of paper of plastic cups in quantities less than their usual and customary packaging is prohibited. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

3.    On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments, Bona Fide Restaurants and Other Alcoholic Beverage Establishments (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

In addition to any conditions imposed by the approval authority, On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishments, Bona Fide Restaurants and Other Alcoholic Beverage Establishments that require a Conditional Use Permit shall comply with the following development standards. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

a.    Litter shall be removed from the exterior of the establishment as required and no less frequently than once each day the establishment is open.

b.    The exterior of the establishment, including all signs, accessory buildings and structures, shall be maintained free of litter and graffiti at all times. Graffiti shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of written notice from the City.

c.    Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption off the premises, unless permitted by State law under the applicable Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

d.    Alcoholic beverages shall not be consumed in the parking area or other exterior areas. This prohibition does not apply to City-approved outdoor eating-places that are adequately separated from direct public access.

e.    Exterior lighting of the parking area and premises shall be provided at a level sufficient for recognition of the features of a person at any point on the property. Lighting shall conform to PMC 17.86.030, Lighting, and shall not produce glare or illuminate nearby residential properties.

f.    A copy of any operational of approval imposed on the establishment shall be conspicuously posted on the premises. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

g.    Public telephones shall be located within the establishment and shall be programmed to allow only out-going calls.

h.    The establishment shall be a member of the “Business Watch Program.”

i.    The establishment shall conspicuously post an interior sign stating: “We ID everyone under 30 years of age for alcohol sales.” The dimensions of such sign shall be at least eight (8) inches by eleven (11) inches. The language of such sign shall be English, as well as the predominant language of the establishment’s clientele.

j.    The establishment shall implement preventive architectural design features, as approved by the Public Safety Division and the Planning Director, to maintain security of the premises. Such features shall control access to the facility, open sight-lines, lighting levels, ambient noise levels and circulation patterns.

k.    Special security measures such as security guards, door monitors and burglar alarm systems may be required as a condition of approval. This will be determined on a case-by-case basis upon review by the Planning Director, the Public Safety Division and the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department.

4.    Entertainment, as defined by PMC 5.04.460, shall not be conducted, except where an Entertainment Permit has been approved by the City Council. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

F.    Training Requirement

1.    Each person who sells or serves alcoholic beverages in any of the following venues shall successfully complete Responsible Beverage Service Training: (1) at a temporary use that requires a Temporary Alcoholic Beverage Sales Permit; (2) in a new Alcoholic Beverage Establishment; or (3) in an existing Non-CUP Alcoholic Beverage Establishment that the City has determined has knowingly allowed Nuisance Activities on the premises. The program shall be completed within sixty (60) days of assuming the position that involves sale or service of alcoholic beverages, and shall be periodically completed again not less than once every three (3) years.

2.    Records of successful completion of Responsible Beverage Service Training shall be maintained on the premises of the temporary use or the Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, and shall be presented to City and Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department representatives upon request.

3.    Alcoholic Beverage Establishments with 25 or more employees that maintain a corporate policy and training program for the sale of alcoholic beverages, which incorporates the RBS Best Practices of the Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, may elect to provide a copy of the corporate policy in place of the training requirement for each employee. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

G.    Annual Administrative Program Fee (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

The owner of each Alcoholic Beverage Establishment, whether permitted through the approval of a Conditional Use Permit or a Deemed Approved use, shall pay an annual administrative program fee to cover the cost of administering an outreach and education program, monitoring and enforcement activities. The amount of the fee shall be established by resolution of the City Council and may be adjusted as necessary to ensure that revenues collected do not exceed the costs incurred by the City for alcohol regulation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

H.    Deemed Approved (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

1.    All Alcoholic Beverage Establishments that are legal nonconforming uses as of the effective date of this ordinance shall automatically become Deemed Approved uses as of the effective date of this ordinance and shall no longer be considered legal nonconforming. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

2.    Each Deemed Approved use shall retain its deemed approved status as long as it complies with the following performance standards: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

a.    That it does not result in adverse effects to the health, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

b.    That it does not jeopardize or endanger the public health or safety of persons residing or working in the surrounding area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

c.    That it does not result in repeated nuisance activities, as defined herein, within the premises or in close proximity of the premises. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

d.    That it complies with all provisions of local, state or federal laws, regulations or orders, including but not limited to those of the ABC, California Business and Professions Code §§ 24200, 24200.6, and 25612.5, as well as any condition imposed on any permits issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with the requirements of the Municipal Code for an annual City business license. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

e.    That its upkeep and operating characteristics are compatible with and will not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties and the surrounding neighborhood. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

f.    That the establishment is in compliance with the training requirements identified in subsection F of this Section. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

3.    The occurrence of any of the following shall terminate the Deemed Approved status of the alcoholic beverage establishment and require the approval of a Conditional Use Permit in order to continue the alcoholic beverage establishment use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

a.    There is a Substantial Change in Mode or Character of Operation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

b.    There is a Break in Service. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

4.    The City shall notify the business owner of each Deemed Approved Alcoholic Beverage Establishment of the uses deemed approved status. The notice shall be sent by U.S. First Class Mail and shall include a copy of the performance standards in this Section. The notice shall also provide that the activity is required to comply with all performance standards and that the activity is required to comply with all other aspects of the Deemed Approved regulations. Failure of any person to receive notice given pursuant to this Section shall not affect the Deemed Approved status of the use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

5.    The Planning Commission may periodically review any Deemed Approved use to ensure that it is being operated in a manner consistent with the performance standards or in a manner which is not detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to properties in the vicinity. If, after review, the Commission deems that there is sufficient evidence to warrant a full examination, then a public hearing date shall be set. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

6.    After setting a date for public hearing, the Planning Director shall notify the owners of the deemed approved use in question. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail and shall state that the Planning Commission will be reviewing the use for possible revocation of its Deemed Approved status. It shall also state the date, time and place of hearing. The public hearing shall be conducted and notice given in accordance with PMC 17.20.020. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

7.    The Planning Director shall fully investigate the evidence and prepare a report for the Planning Commission’s consideration. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission shall make one of the following determinations and take such accompanying action: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

a.    Find that the use is being conducted in an appropriate manner and that no action to modify or revoke the Deemed Approved status of the use; or, (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

b.    Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and impose such reasonable conditions that in the judgment of the Commission are necessary to ensure compliance with the performance standards on the Deemed Approved use; or, (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

c.    Find that the use is not being conducted in an appropriate manner and that the measures are not available to mitigate the impacts of the Deemed Approved use. Upon making this determination, the Commission may revoke the Deemed Approved status of the use. Any continued operation of the alcoholic beverage use shall require a Conditional Use Permit. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

8.    An appeal of the determination of the Planning Commission may be made in accordance with PMC 17.20.110. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 15-01, adopted by City Council September 2, 2015.)

17.92.080 Outdoor Retail Sales
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995 and Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for outdoor retail sales uses established as primary uses including swap meets, flea markets and other similar outdoor retail uses. The intent of these regulations is to prevent potential negative impacts relating to noise, traffic, visual appearance, health and safety.

B.    Development standards

Primary outdoor retail sales uses shall conform to the following standards in addition to all other applicable standards and regulations:

1.    The minimum lot area shall conform with the requirements set forth in the applicable zone district.

2.    In addition to required parking lot and setback landscaping, additional on-site landscaping may be required to be installed and permanently maintained to reduce visual and noise impacts, as deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority.

3.    Parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

4.    All outdoor retail activities shall be screened from public view, public rights-of-way, or less intensive land use districts. Landscaping, screen walls, berming or other approved means of screening may be used, in accordance with Chapter 17.86 PMC, Landscaping, Lighting, Screening and Walls.

5.    Areas designated for outdoor retail sales shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any major or secondary arterial, or from any adjacent residential designation or use and shall include a minimum of ten (10) feet of landscaping.

6.    An all-weather ground surface material, such as but not limited to asphalt, gravel or decomposed granite, shall be installed in all areas utilized for outdoor retail sales and related services. Principal walkways shall be surfaced in compliance with the Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations. Parking areas shall be surfaced in accordance with PMC 17.87.050.

7.    All signs visible from the public right-of-way shall comply with Chapter 17.88 PMC, Signs.

8.    Retail sales shall not include the sale of adult-oriented merchandise, firearms, or off-sale alcohol.

9.    Outdoor retail uses shall not include mechanical carnival rides, except with the approval of a Temporary Use Permit for a specific event or activity.

10.    Outdoor retail uses shall not include the use of amplified sound, except with the approval of a Temporary Use Permit for a specific event or activity.

11.    Permanent sanitary facilities shall be provided on-site in accordance with City policies for commercial uses.

12.    On-site lighting shall be installed in accordance with PMC 17.86.030, Lighting Requirements.

13.    An adequate number of trash enclosures and receptacles shall be provided on site, as deemed appropriate by the reviewing authority.

14.    Food areas shall be specifically designated and provided with an adequate number of trash receptacles and seating.

15.    Outdoor retail sales shall conform with all local, state, and federal requirements.

C.    Review process

Outdoor retail sales uses shall be subject to the approval process as specified in the applicable zone district.

17.92.090 Convenience Stores
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for convenience stores. The intent is to provide for convenience shopping needs of the surrounding neighborhoods and/or automobile users while preventing potential negative impacts relating to noise, traffic, visual appearance, health and safety, loitering, alcohol consumption, and blight on the property.

B.    General standards

In addition to compliance with all other applicable statutes, ordinances and regulations, the following location and operation regulations shall apply to convenience stores where permitted by Conditional Use Permit:

1.    No video or arcade type of games shall be installed or operated on the premises.

2.    The site shall not have direct access on a residential collector or local residential street.

3.    All signage shall comply with Chapter 17.88 PMC. Temporary removable copy signs are expressly prohibited.

4.    The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times.

5.    Trash receptacles shall be provided at each building entrance and at convenient locations inside and outside of the convenience store.

6.    A bicycle rack shall be installed in a convenient location visible from the inside of the store.

7.    All public restrooms that are provided shall be accessible only from the inside of the store.

8.    Any security lighting, site lighting or illuminated signage shall be designed and/or directed so as not to adversely affect adjacent residential areas.

9.    Public pay telephones provided on-site shall not be set up for incoming calls. Public telephones shall be featured with call out service only.

10.    Convenience stores which sell beverages containing alcohol shall comply with the requirements of PMC 17.92.070. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

11.    The minimum site area shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet, unless the convenience store includes the sale of gasoline, then the minimum lots size shall be one (1) acre (gross). (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

12.    Direct vehicular access shall be provided to any adjacent commercial development whenever possible. Joint entrances with adjacent commercial developments shall be considered in order to minimize the number of curb cuts.

C.    Standards for concurrent sales of alcohol and gasoline

1.    No beer or wine shall be displayed within five feet of the cash register or the front door unless it is in a permanently affixed cooler.

2.    No advertisement of alcoholic beverages shall be displayed at motor fuel islands.

3.    No sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-in window.

4.    No display or sale of beer or wine shall be made from an ice tub.

5.    No beer or wine advertising shall be located on motor fuel islands and no self-illuminated advertising for beer or wine shall be located on buildings or windows.

6.    Employees on duty between the hours of 10 p.m. and 2 a.m. shall be at least 21 years of age to sell beer and wine.

D.    Review process

Convenience stores shall be subject to Conditional Use Permit approval in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC.

17.92.100 Sales, Rental and Leasing of Vehicles, Recreational Vehicles, and Equipment
A.    Purpose and intent

These regulations establish specific standards for establishments engaged in the sales, rental or leasing of used automobiles and trucks; marine craft; recreational vehicles; motorcycles; mobile homes; and heavy equipment. The intent of these regulations is to prevent potential negative impacts relating to noise, traffic, visual appearance, health and safety.

B.    Development standards

The above described uses shall conform to the following standards in addition to all other applicable standards and regulations:

1.    The minimum site area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet net.

2.    Display areas, storage areas and customer parking areas shall be separated and clearly distinguished from each other.

3.    All parts and accessories shall be stored within a fully enclosed structure. No discarded parts or equipment or permanently disabled or wrecked vehicles shall be located on the premises other than within a fully screened storage area, and no such items shall project above the screen wall as seen from any public right-of-way or from any common or public areas of adjacent residential or commercial developments.

4.    All permitted repair and servicing of merchandise and all equipment necessary for such service and repair shall be located entirely within a fully enclosed building. The openings to such repair facilities shall not face any arterial street, except that pedestrian opening may be allowed. Repair of mobile homes, trailers, campers, and other excessively large motorized vehicles not able to fit inside the repair structure may be allowed outside only when conducted within an area that is completely screened from public view.

5.    Mobile home display areas must maintain a minimum setback of ten (10) feet between mobile homes, and shall have skirting installed on all sides of the mobile home which are visible from public view.

6.    For those uses not authorized to utilize a trailer or a mobile home as an office, a permanent office structure as defined by the latest adopted version of the Building Code, containing no less than three hundred (300) square feet shall be constructed on the site.

7.    All on-site parking and loading shall comply with Chapter 17.87 PMC.

8.    All landscaping shall be installed and permanently maintained pursuant to the following standards in addition to the provisions of Chapter 17.86 PMC.

a.    No less than fifteen (15) percent of the display area shall be permanently landscaped and provided with a permanent irrigation system. This landscaping shall be in addition to and shall not include the required landscaped setbacks.

b.    A combination of berm-type landscaping, raised landscape planters and/or low-profile walls reaching a height of approximately thirty (30) inches but not exceeding thirty-six (36) inches shall be used to define the display and storage areas.

9.    All on-site signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC.

C.    Review process

Used automotive, marine craft, recreational vehicle, motorcycle, mobile home and heavy equipment sales, rental and leasing establishments shall be subject to Site Plan Review approval in accordance with Chapter 17.21 PMC or to Conditional Permit approval in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, as specified by the applicable Zone District.

17.92.110 Automobile Service Stations/Auto Repair
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for automotive service stations and auto repair facilities. The intent is to prevent potential negative impacts relating to noise, traffic, visual appearance, health and safety. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

B.    Development standards

Automobile service stations and auto repair facilities shall comply with the following standards in addition to all other applicable requirements: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

1.    The minimum lot size shall be one (1) acre (gross).

2.    All activities and operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure, except as follows:

a.    The dispensing of petroleum products, water, and air.

b.    The provisions of emergency service of minor nature.

c.    The sale of items via vending machines which shall be placed next to the main structure in a designated area not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet, and which must be screened from public rights-of-way.

3.    The cashier location within a service station shall provide direct visual access to the pump islands and the vehicle parking adjacent to the islands. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

4.    Interior drive aisles between pump islands shall be a minimum of 30 feet in width.

5.    There shall be a minimum distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet between curb cuts along a street frontage.

6.    The width of a driveway may not exceed thirty-six (36) feet at the sidewalk.

7.    Outside storage of motor vehicles is prohibited.

8.    No vehicles may be parked on sidewalks, parkways, driveways, or aisles.

9.    No vehicle may be parked on the premises for the purpose of offering same for sale.

10.    Landscaping shall comprise a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the service station site area, exclusive of required setbacks, and shall be provided and permanently maintained according to the standards provided in Chapter 17.86 PMC and as required by the reviewing authority. Landscaping for automobile repair facilities will be provided as required by the zone district in which the facility is located, as required by Chapter 17.86 PMC, and as required by the reviewing authority. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

11.    Opening of service bays shall not face public rights-of way and shall be designed to minimize the visual intrusion onto adjoining properties.

12.    No used or discarded automotive parts or equipment or disabled, junked, or wrecked vehicles may be located in any required parking space, or in any open area outside the main structure. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

13.    All light sources, including canopy, perimeter, and flood, shall be energy efficient, stationary, and shielded or recessed within the roof canopy so that the service station shall be indirectly visible and light is deflected away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Lighting shall not be of such high intensity as to cause a traffic hazard or adversely affect adjoining properties; the illumination level shall not exceed fifty (50) footcandles at any point on the site. No luminair shall be higher than fifteen (15) feet above the finished grade. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

14.    Automobile service station restroom entrances shall be concealed from view from adjacent properties or public rights-of-way by planters or decorative screening. Restrooms provided within auto repair facilities shall be accessed from the building interior only. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

15.    Noise from bells or loudspeakers shall not be audible beyond the property line at any time.

16.    All parking, loading, circulation aisles, and pump island bay areas shall be constructed with (PCC) concrete.

17.    Repair services within service stations shall be limited to Light or General Repair only (as defined in PMC 17.16.010); heavy repair services within a service station shall require a Conditional Use Permit where permitted by the zone district. Auto repair facilities shall be subject to the development review process specified by the applicable zone district. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

18.    Signs shall conform to PMC 17.88.100(J) and other applicable sign provisions in Chapter 17.88 PMC.

C.    Review process

Service stations and auto repair facilities shall be subject to Site Plan Review approval in accordance with Chapter 17.21 PMC or to Conditional Permit approval in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, as specified by the applicable zone district. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-6 adopted by City Council April 10, 1996.)

17.92.120 Day Care, Commercial
A.    Purpose and intent

The purpose of these standards is to ensure that day care facilities are designed and constructed to provide quality care of the community’s children in a safe and nurturing setting, in a location where the facility will not be adversely impacted by surrounding land uses.

B.    Development standards

The following standards apply to any day care facility which is established as a primary commercial use or as an accessory use within a church or other social or community facility. Standards for large family day care are contained in PMC 17.26.090.

1.    Location:

a.    A day care facility shall be located no closer than three hundred (300) feet from any gasoline pump, underground gasoline storage tank, or any other storage of explosives or hazardous materials. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2 adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

b.    A day care facility shall be located no closer than five hundred (500) feet from any primary or incidental alcohol-related use, as defined in PMC 17.92.070.

c.    A day care facility shall be located no closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any sexually-oriented or adult business as defined in PMC 17.16.190.

d.    A day care facility shall not be located within any area subject to a Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) of 65 or greater, or within an Airport Protection Zone, as depicted on the General Plan Maps.

e.    Except as an accessory use to serve employees on the site, a day care facility shall not be established in an industrial or manufacturing zone.

f.    In approving a location for a day care facility, the City shall evaluate any adverse effects which may impact children from excessive truck traffic, air emissions, noise, adjacent land uses or other environmental issues affecting the proposed site.

2.    Drop-off areas

a.    To provided for the safe pick-up and delivery of children, an area shall be provided on the site designated for this purpose which all have a minimum of one vehicle loading space per twenty (20) children.

b.    Drop-off zones shall be located near the facility entryway, in such a way that children will not have to cross the parking lot or any traffic areas to enter the building.

c.    Drop-off zones shall be located and designed so that there shall be no queueing of vehicles onto the adjacent street or right-of-way.

d.    A one-way circulation pattern is encouraged.

3.    Play space

a.    A fenced outdoor play area shall be provided with a minimum area of seventy-five (75) square feet per child.

b.    Indoor play areas shall be provided with a minimum area of thirty-five (35) square feet per child.

c.    Restroom facilities shall be provided with a minimum of one toilet per fifteen (15) children.

4.    Signage, landscaping, lighting, screening and trash enclosures shall be provided in accordance with Division 8.

C.    Review process

Day care facilities shall be subject to Site Plan Review approval in accordance with Chapter 17.21 PMC or to Conditional Permit approval in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, as specified by the applicable zone district.

17.92.130 Conversion of Residential Structures to Non-residential Uses
A.    Purpose and intent

The purpose of this Section is to provide standards to ensure the orderly transition of areas from residential uses to non-residential uses such as office uses or certain retail uses.

B.    Development standards

The following standards shall apply to any residential structure converted to a non-residential use:

1.    If access drive to rear of lot is less than twenty (20) feet in width, a turnaround shall be provided for vehicles exiting the site, and clear sight shall be provided between the driveway and the rear of the lot.

2.    A residential garage may be used to provide required on-site parking.

3.    All structures used for commercial or institutional purposes shall be brought into conformance with the applicable requirements of the building code, fire department, Americans with Disabilities Act, health department, or any other applicable City, County, State or Federal provision.

4.    Setbacks and yards established for the original structure may be deemed to meet setback and yard requirements for the Zone, provided that if the structures are non-conforming as to setbacks and yards, no additional encroachments into yard areas shall be allowed.

5.    Any non-residential use shall be connected to a public sewer system.

6.    Additional landscaping may be required to buffer the non-residential use from adjacent residential uses.

C.    Special sign requirements

Because of the permitted mix of non-residential uses within an existing residential neighborhood, the following special sign requirements shall apply for as long as residential uses exist within three hundred (300) feet of a non-residential use.

1.    No sign shall be internally illuminated.

2.    No neon lighting shall be permitted.

3.    Monument signs shall not exceed a height of four (4) feet or an area of thirty-two (32) square feet.

4.    No painted window signs shall be permitted.

D.    Review process

Conversion of a residential structure to a non-residential use shall be subject to Site Plan Review approval in accordance with Chapter 17.21 PMC or to Conditional Permit approval in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, as specified by the applicable zone district for the proposed use.

17.92.140 Massage as an Accessory Use
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 96-3 adopted by City Council January 8, 1997.)

A.    Purpose and Intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for the provision of massage as an accessory use to a primary business. The intent is to provide for limited massage services in conjunction with other specific service and medical uses and to authorize corporate massage services to be provided for the employees of specified commercial or industrial businesses.

B.    Development Standards

In addition to all other conditions and restrictions that may be imposed by statute, ordinance or regulation, the following requirements apply to massage as an accessory use.

1.    Massage as an Accessory Use.

a.    Massage may be provided as follows:

(i)    As an accessory use in conjunction with an approved health club, athletic club, gym, hotel with one hundred or more rooms, beauty salon, barber shop or suntan parlor, when permitted in the zone district where the primary use is permitted.

(ii)    As an accessory use in conjunction with an approved physician’s, surgeon’s, chiropractor’s, osteopath’s or physical therapist medical practice, when permitted in the zone district where the primary use is permitted.

b.    For the purposes of this Section, an accessory use means a use where only one permitted massage technician is on-duty at any one time and which requires only one massage table or chair, provided that any such table conforms to the applicable provisions of PMC 5.04.560(F)(1)(h).

c.    For the purposes of accessory massage uses in conjunction with an approved physician’s, surgeon’s, chiropractor’s, osteopath’s or physical therapist’s medical practice, massage treatments may only be provided for medical purposes to patients of that medical practice or patients of a different caregiver, on a referral or prescription basis only. In no event may massage services be provided on a walk-in, self-referral basis.

d.    Massage as an accessory use must be administered by a massage technician who has been issued a permit and a business license pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and who is in compliance with PMC 5.04.560(J), Massage Technicians – General Provisions.

e.    The accessory massage use must be incidental to the primary business or business location, and the owner of the primary business is not required to obtain a separate massage establishment permit for this accessory use. The owner of the primary business is responsible for the massage activities of all massage technicians employed at the location and must comply with PMC 5.04.560(F)(1)(a) through (e), (g) and (h) and (F)(2)(b) through (o), Massage Establishment – Facility and Operating Requirements.

f.    The business license relating to the primary use is subject to revocation if any of the massage activities are in violation of this Section or in violation of any other conditions or restrictions that are imposed upon the primary use for the purpose of regulating massage as an accessory use.

2.    Corporate Massage as an Accessory Use.

a.    Corporate massage may be provided as an accessory use within an approved commercial or industrial business, for the employees of that business only, when corporate massage is permitted in the zone district where the primary use is permitted.

b.    For the purposes of this Section, a corporate massage use means a use which requires only one chair to be utilized at any one time.

c.    Corporate massage must be administered by a massage technician who has been issued a permit and a business license pursuant to PMC 5.04.560 and who is in compliance with PMC 5.04.560(J), Massage Technicians – General Provisions.

d.    The corporate massage service must be incidental to the primary business, and the owner of the primary business is not required to obtain a separate massage establishment permit for this accessory use. The owner of the primary business is responsible for the massage activities of all massage technicians employed or rendering services at the location and must comply with PMC 5.04.560(F)(1)(a), (c), (d) and (g) and (F)(2)(c), (e) through (h) and (j) through (o), Massage Establishment – Facility and Operating Requirements.

e.    The business license relating to the primary use is subject to revocation if any of the massage activities are in violation of this Section or in violation of any other conditions or restrictions that are imposed upon the primary use for the purpose of regulating massage as an accessory use.

17.92.150 Tobacco/Smoking Products Retailer
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 08-02, adopted by City Council January 6, 2010)

A.    Purpose and Intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for retail establishments which sell Tobacco/Smoking Products, to ensure that such businesses are appropriately located and operated so as not to pose a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.

B.    Definitions

Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-03, adopted by City Council July 2, 2014. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Conditional Use Permit Requirement

1.    No new Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer use shall be established unless a permit has first been obtained pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits.

2.    In addition to the information required by Chapter 17.22 PMC, the following shall be included with the Conditional Use Permit application:

a.    An interior floor plan of the proposed establishment drawn to scale indicating the total gross floor area and the percentage of merchandise which consists of tobacco or smoking products and paraphernalia.

b.    A vicinity map indicating the location of the proposed establishment and the distance separation from those uses specified in the location standards of this Section.

D.    Location Standards

1.    A new Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer use shall be separated from existing sensitive uses based on the location standards specified below:

Use

Distance

*Public or Private K-12 School or Commercial Day Care

500 feet

Hospitals, Public Parks and Libraries, and Recreation Centers

500 feet

*    Includes both existing school facilities and undeveloped school sites as identified by the applicable School District; excludes Small and Large Family Day Care.

 

2.    For purposes of this Section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or suite wall where a Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer use is proposed to be conducted, to the nearest building or suite wall of an existing use or nearest property line if there is no structure. For school and park uses, the distance shall be measured from the nearest portion of the building or suite wall where the Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer use is proposed to the nearest property line of the school or park site.

E.    Development Standards

In addition to any conditions imposed by the approval authority, retail sales of tobacco and Smoking Products that require a Conditional Use Permit shall comply with the following development standards:

1.    The Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer shall comply with all applicable local, State, and Federal laws regarding the advertising, display, or sales of Tobacco/Smoking Products.

2.    Only store employees shall have immediate access to the Tobacco Products, Smoking Products and/or Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person, business or Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any Tobacco Product or Smoking Product by means of Self-Service Display or by means other than vendor-assisted sales.

3.    No Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer shall sell or transfer a Tobacco Product, Smoking Product or Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia to another person who appears to be under the age of twenty–seven (27) years, without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age under state law, to purchase and possess the Tobacco Product, Smoking Product or Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia.

4.    No Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer shall permit any person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of Tobacco Products, to engage or participate in the sale of Tobacco Products or Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia.

5.    No person, business, Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer or other establishment shall sell or offer for sale cigarettes or other Tobacco or Smoking Products not in the original packaging provided by the manufacturer and with all required health warnings.

6.    No permit may be issued to authorize Tobacco Retailing at a location that is licensed under State law to serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises (e.g., an “on sale” license issued by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control) and no license may be issued to authorize Tobacco Retailing at any location offering food for sale for consumption by guests on the premises.

7.    The establishment shall be a member of the “Business Watch Program.”

8.    Litter and trash receptacles shall be conveniently located inside and outside the establishment, and trash and debris shall be removed from the receptacles on a daily basis.

9.    The exterior of the establishment, including all signs, accessory buildings and structures, shall be maintained free of litter and graffiti at all times. Graffiti shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of written notice from the City.

10.    Loitering in the public right-of-way, parking area and in front of the property and adjacent properties shall be prohibited.

11.    No person shall commence Tobacco Retailing until that person first or concurrently obtains a Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer’s permit under PMC 5.04.670.

12.    The establishment shall conspicuously post the following interior sign stating:

“We ID everyone under 27 years of age for tobacco sales.” The dimensions of such sign shall be at least eight (8) inches by eleven (11) inches. If the predominant language of the establishment’s clientele is not English, then a sign shall also be posted in that language.

F.    Training Requirements

1.    Each person who sells Tobacco or Smoking Products or Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia shall successfully complete a responsible tobacco retailing training. The program shall be completed within sixty (60) days of assuming the position that involves sale of Tobacco or Smoking Products and/or Tobacco/Smoking Paraphernalia, and shall be periodically completed again not less than once every three (3) years.

2.    Records of successful completion of responsible tobacco retailing training shall be maintained on the premises, and shall be presented to City and Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department representatives upon request.

G.    Waiver Process

1.    Any Tobacco/Smoking Products Retailer may apply for a waiver from the location standards specified in this subsection. A request for a waiver shall be submitted in conjunction with the Conditional Use Permit application for the proposed establishment and shall be reviewed concurrently by the approving authority for the Conditional Use Permit application. The approving authority shall approve or disapprove the waiver request and shall make all of the following findings in addition to the Conditional Use Permit findings in approving a waiver request for the proposed establishment:

a.    Granting the waiver will serve a specific community need.

b.    Granting the waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare and will not adversely affect nearby property or uses, either directly or indirectly.

c.    Granting the waiver will not be contrary to the purpose of this Section.

H.    Existing Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailers

Any Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer legally established prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to obtain a Conditional Use Permit, and shall not be considered a legal non-conforming use subject to abatement, unless a modification of the approval for the use is sought and the modification is not considered minor subject to PMC 17.26.040. Any existing Tobacco/Smoking Product Retailer use that has been discontinued for a period of 180 days or more shall require a Conditional Use Permit, prior to reestablishing retailing of tobacco / smoking products.

17.92.160 Pawn Shops/Secondhand Stores/Purchase and Sale of Secondhand Tangible Personal Property
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 10-01, adopted by City Council August 4, 2010)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for pawn shops, secondhand stores and businesses which purchase and sell secondhand tangible personal property incidental to their primary business (such as a jewelry store which purchases gold/jewelry) to ensure that such businesses are appropriately located and operated so as to not pose a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare by curtailing the dissemination of stolen property and facilitating the recovery of stolen property.

B.    Conditional Use Permit Requirement

1.    No new Pawn shop, Secondhand store, or business which purchases and/or sells secondhand tangible personal property shall be established unless a permit has first been obtained pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits.

2.    In addition to the information required by Chapter 17.22 PMC, the applicant shall submit a detailed security plan which describes the proposed interior and exterior security measures applicable to the proposed business. The plan shall address issues such as safes to be installed, alarm systems, deployment of any security personnel, funds transportation measures, hours of operation, shift personnel staffing, CCTV applications, type of loss prevention/crime prevention training provided to employees and any other applicable measures.

C.    Development Standards

In addition to any conditions imposed by the approval authority, Pawn shops, Secondhand stores or businesses which purchase secondhand tangible personal property shall comply with the following development standards:

1.    Comply with all applicable local, State, and Federal laws.

2.    No person shall obtain a Conditional Use Permit for a Pawn shop, secondhand store or business which purchases secondhand tangible personal property unless that person first or concurrently obtains a Pawnbrokers/ Secondhand Dealers permit under PMC 5.04.580.

3.    Hours of Operation. No Pawn shop or Secondhand store, nor any employee thereof, shall accept any pledge, or loan any money for personal property, or purchase or receive any goods, wares or merchandise, or any article or thing, or in any manner whatsoever engage in or conduct business as a pawn shop or secondhand store between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. Businesses which purchase seconhand tangible personal property shall not engage in such activity between the hours of 7:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day.

4.    The establishment shall not engage in any transaction with any person under 18 years of age.

5.    The cashier area shall be equipped with a CCTV/Security System with digital recording, playback capability and single image retrieval to aid in criminal apprehension. The recorder should be housed in a secure room away from the cash register/counter area. Recording field should include the cash register area, customer counter area and as a customer is entering/exiting the establishment. Camera(s) focused on the entry/exit should be mounted and angled to capture customer’s faces. Camera(s) should be used in conjunction with public view monitor(s) to create public awareness that a video surveillance system is in place and to discourage criminal acts. Recordings shall be maintained for minimum of 90 days.

6.    The cashier area shall be equipped with a telephone.

7.    The businesses shall be equipped with a central station silent robbery alarm. Employees shall be instructed not to use this alarm as a panic button for other store-related problems in lieu of calling for law enforcement response by telephone.

8.    Alarm buttons or other activation devices shall be placed at the cash register site, in the administration office, and in any other locations deemed appropriate by management.

9.    Storage rooms, including roof access doors, maintenance, mechanical, electrical, and other room doors that contain property that may be susceptible to theft, shall be covered by a silent intrusion alarm system. These systems may terminate at the front desk.

10.    Any office or room where funds are counted should have a solid core door with a minimum thickness of 1¾” and should be secured by a deadbolt lock with a minimum throw of one (1) inch. Door should also include a one-way vision panel with burglary-resistant glazing to provide visual surveillance of the interior of the store.

11.    Outside hinges on all exterior doors shall be installed with non-removable pins when pin-type hinges are used or shall be installed with hinge studs, to prevent removal of door.

12.    Any delivery and/or receiving door(s) shall be equipped with a peephole/vision panel and a delivery notification system.

13.    A security height marker shall be installed on all public entrances/exits.

14.    The premises, while open or closed for business after dark, must be sufficiently lighted by use of interior night-lights.

15.    Window signage shall be limited to no more than 25 percent coverage of window area provided visibility into the building is maintained as stated in PMC 17.88.070.

16.    The use of an ultra violet light shall be required to verify all identification presented.

17.    The establishment shall be required to register in the City of Palmdale Business Watch Program and receive merchant fraud training through the Public Safety Department.

D.    Existing Pawn Shop/Secondhand Store

Any Pawn shop or Secondhand store legally in existence as of the effective date of this ordinance shall have one year in which to bring the business into compliance with this ordinance.

E.    Findings

In addition to the findings required for approval of a Condition Use Permit as listed within PMC 17.22.050 and requirements for revision or modification of a Conditional Use Permit as listed within PMC 17.22.060, the provisions of state law shall also apply.

17.92.170 Car Washes, Express
A.    Purpose and Intent.

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for express car washes facilities. The intent is to insure that express car washes facilities are designed and located in a manner that minimize impacts to adjacent uses, aesthetic impacts, and ensure compatibility with the surrounding uses and neighborhood while at the same time permitting Express Car Wash uses.

B.    Development and Use Standards

Any express car wash use shall be developed and operated in conformance with the following standards in addition to any other applicable standards and regulations:

1.    The car wash use shall operate between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., daily unless otherwise approved by the reviewing authority.

2.    Noise generated by an Express Car Wash use shall not impact existing or future adjacent residential uses in compliance with the Palmdale General Plan Noise Element. Acoustical studies and manufacturers data and information may be requested as needed to demonstrate compliance with this requirement.

3.    Express car wash uses shall utilize a water recycling system incorporating best management practices (BMP’s).

4.    Express car wash tunnels shall be designed so that the exiting service bay, typically containing the drying equipment, does not face residentially designated property or residential uses.

5.    All security lighting, site lighting or illuminated signage shall comply with all Zoning Ordinance requirements and shall be designed and/or directed so as not to adversely impact adjacent residential areas.

6.    Signs shall be posted prohibiting loitering and amplified music at the subject site. Such signs shall be posted within the customer self service area/vacuum areas.

7.    Outdoor detailing services and facilities that include but are not limited to waxing, buffing, and engine steam cleaning shall be prohibited under the Express Car Wash.

8.    Freestanding outdoor vending machines shall be prohibited on the site. Vending machines for auto wash products or other related retail products shall only be designed as through the wall vending machines.

9.    The applicant shall provide a floor plan identifying the areas utilized for retail sales. All proposed retail sales shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Palmdale Zoning Ordinance.

10.    No type of video or arcade games shall be located on the premises.

11.    The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times.

12.    Trash receptacles shall be provided at the building entrance and at convenient locations within the customer self service area/vacuum areas.

13.    All public restrooms that are provided shall be accessible only from the inside the customer waiting area.

17.92.180 Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 14-02, adopted by City Council July 2, 2014.)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments, to ensure that such businesses are appropriately located and operated so as not to pose a significant threat to the public health, safety, and welfare.

B.    Definitions

Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Conditional Use Permit Requirement

1.    No Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments use shall be established unless a permit has first been obtained pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC, Conditional Use Permits.

2.    In addition to the information required by Chapter 17.22 PMC, the following shall be included with the Conditional Use Permit application:

a.    An interior floor plan of the proposed establishment drawn to scale indicating the total gross floor area of the establishment, the areas within the establishment where tattooing and body piercing services are to be conducted, decontamination and sterilization areas, and waiting areas.

b.    The interior floor plan shall identify an area where tattooing and body piercing services are to be applied on intimate body parts where no viewing areas are available from within the establishment or from the exterior of the establishment.

c.    A vicinity map indicating the location of the proposed establishment and the distance separation from those uses specified in the location standards of this Section.

D.    Location Standards

1.    An establishment shall be separated from existing sensitive uses based on the location standards specified below:

 

 

Min. Distance

Other Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments

500

*Public or Private K-12 School or Day Care

500

Public Parks, Recreation Centers, Public Libraries, or Trails, Excluding Bike Lanes

500

All Primary On-Sale Alcoholic Beverage Establishment

500

*    Includes both existing school facilities and undeveloped school sites as identified by the applicable School District.

2.    For purposes of this Section, measurement shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building or suite wall where a Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment is proposed to be conducted, to the nearest building or suite wall of an existing use or nearest property line if there is no structure. For school and park uses, the distance shall be measured from the nearest portion of the building or suite wall where the Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishment use is proposed to the nearest property line of the school or park site.

E.    Development Standards

In addition to any conditions imposed by the approval authority, Tattoo and Body Piercing Establishments shall comply with the following development standards:

1.    The owner of an establishment shall obtain a Health Permit through the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health, operate the facility in a safe and clean manner, maintain written procedures for the operation of the facility, and maintain records of training and equipment sterilization.

2.    All practitioners shall annually register with the County of Los Angeles Department of Public Health, obtain annual blood-borne pathogen training, provide documentation of Hepatitis B vaccination status, obtain specific health information from clients, and obtain “informed consent” from clients, as required by the Department of Public Health.

3.    Records of successful completion of registration and annual renewals of County of Los Angeles Department of Public Health permits for the owner of the establishment and any person providing services in the establishment shall be maintained on the premises, and shall be presented to City employees and Los Angeles County Department of Public Health (DPH), Environmental Health Division inspectors on demand. An electronic copy of such records shall be provided on an annual basis to the Planning Division.

4.    No Tattoo or body piercing shall be performed without first obtaining “Informed Consent” from a client, as required by the Department of Public Health.

5.    No establishment shall provide services to any person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law.

6.    Amplified sound, loud music, shall not be heard outside of the premises; the establishment shall contain all activities within the establishment.

7.    The establishment shall be a member of the “Business Watch Program.”

8.    Litter and trash receptacles shall be conveniently located inside and outside the establishment, and trash and debris shall be removed from the receptacles on a daily basis.

9.    The exterior of the establishment, including all signs, accessory buildings and structures, shall be maintained free of litter and graffiti at all times. Graffiti shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours of written notice from the City.

10.    Loitering in the public right-of-way, parking area and in front of the property and adjacent properties shall be prohibited.

11.    The establishment shall conspicuously post the following interior sign stating:

“We ID everyone under 27 years of age for any request for our services.” The dimensions of such sign shall be at least eight (8) inches by eleven (11) inches. If the predominant language of the establishment’s clientele is not English, then a sign shall also be posted in that language.

17.92.190 Pet Boarding and Daycare
A.    Purpose and Intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for pet boarding and daycare facilities located in the Industrial Zones (M-1, M-2, M-3 and M-4). The intent is to ensure that such uses are compatible with the surrounding areas by preventing potential negative impacts related to odor, noise, traffic, visual appearance, health and safety.

B.    Development Standards

Pet boarding and daycare facilities shall be established and operated in accordance with the following requirements:

1.    Pet boarding and daycare facilities shall be conducted and operated in accordance with standards established by the Los Angeles County Animal Care and Control Department (Los Angeles County Code, Title 10 – Animals).

2.    All pet housing must be inside an enclosed building. Air intake and discharge should be on roof (no penetration of walls allowed without acceptable sound baffling and air filtration). No operable windows allowed, and fixed windows (if provided) must be double glazed. Light from nonoperable skylights is allowed.

3.    Solid fencing a minimum eight (8) feet high shall be provided around all outdoor exercise areas.

4.    Unattended outdoor exercise areas shall be visually screened from other exercise areas such that pets cannot see each other.

5.    Exercise in outdoor areas is not permitted between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

6.    The disposal of animal waste shall be in accordance with applicable Federal, State and local laws.

7.    The location of any animal enclosures shall be in accordance with PMC 17.61.090, 17.62.090, 17.63.090 and 17.64.100, respectively.

8.    Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking; however, in no event shall the number of spaces be less than five (5).

9.    All signage shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.88 PMC, Signs.

C.    Review Process

Pet boarding and daycare uses in Zones M-1, M-2, M-3 and M-4 shall be subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 16-01, adopted by City Council September 7, 2016.)

Chapter 17.93
INDUSTRIAL USES
17.93.010 Dismantling, Junk and Salvage Yards
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to provide standards for dismantling, junk and salvage yards. The intent is to ensure that such uses are compatible with the surrounding areas by preventing potential adverse health, safety, visual, and noise impacts.

B.    Development standards

1.    All operations or storage shall be conducted within an enclosed building or within an area completely enclosed with a solid masonry wall not less than eight (8) feet in height, except as otherwise approved by the reviewing authority based on a determination that adequate alternative screening is provided.

2.    No storage shall be permitted at a height greater than that of the fence or wall enclosing the use.

3.    The minimum site area shall be two and one-half (2-1/2) acres.

4.    The site shall be dustproofed with an approved surface wherever the site is not paved or landscaped.

5.    Repair activities and vehicle loading and unloading shall be prohibited on adjoining streets and alleys.

6.    All hazardous materials resulting from the repair and dismantling operations shall be properly stored and removed from premises in a timely manner. Storage, use, and removal of toxic substances, solid waste, pollution, and flammable liquids, particularly gasoline, paints, solvents, and thinners, shall conform to the applicable federal, state, and local regulations, prior to issuance of Certificate of Occupancy.

7.    The premises shall be kept in a neat and orderly condition at all times.

C.    Review process

Dismantling, junk and salvage yards shall be subject to Site Plan approval, pursuant to Chapter 17.21 PMC, or to Conditional Use Permit approval, pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC, as specified by the applicable zone district.

17.93.020 Automobile Impound Yards
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to provide standards for automobile impound yards. The intent is to ensure that such uses are compatible with the surrounding areas by preventing potential adverse health, safety, visual, and noise impacts.

B.    Development standards

1.    All operations or storage shall be conducted within an enclosed building or within an area completely enclosed with a solid masonry wall not less than eight (8) feet in height, except as otherwise approved by the reviewing authority based on a determination that adequate alternative screening is provided.

2.    No storage shall be permitted at a height greater than that of the fence or wall enclosing the use.

3.    No automobile dismantling or junk and salvage operations shall be permitted, except as otherwise permitted in the zone in which the impound yard is established.

C.    Review process

Automobile impound yards shall be subject to Site Plan Review approval according to Chapter 17.21 PMC or to Conditional Use Permit according to Chapter 17.22 PMC, as specified by the applicable zone districts.

17.93.030 Personal Storage Facilities (Mini-Warehouses)
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to provide standards for personal storage facilities. The intent is to ensure that such uses are compatible with the surrounding areas by preventing potential adverse health, safety, visual, and noise impacts.

B.    Development standards

Personal storage facilities shall be subject to the following standards in addition to all other applicable standards and regulations:

1.    The minimum site area shall be one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

2.    The site shall be entirely paved, except for structures and landscaping.

3.    Projects shall provide building setbacks along the principal frontage as follows: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

a.    Total building length or width up to three hundred (300) feet: thirty (30) foot of building setback.

b.    Total building length or width three hundred one (301) to six hundred (600) feet: forty (40) foot of building setback.

c.    Total building length or width of six hundred one (601) and over: fifty (50) foot of building setback.

4.    If a rear or side yard setback is not required within the applicable zone district, a minimum landscape setback of ten (10) feet shall be provided along side and rear property lines adjacent to existing agricultural, institutional, or residential uses or adjacent to property that is designated for future agricultural, institutional or residential uses. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

5.    If a mini-warehouse project is proposed to be located between or adjacent to an existing building(s), consideration shall be given to the existing pedestrian and vehicular access, existing setbacks, building materials, window and door placement, and colors. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

6.    All building and perimeter walls shall be constructed with both vertical and horizontal architectural elements. No wall plane shall exceed fifty (50) feet in length without an architectural break. Building articulation shall include, but not be limited to: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

a.    A minimum of two (2) different types of materials.

b.    A minimum of four (4) feet of the lower portion of the exterior walls of perimeter fencing and/or building walls to contain a separate material and deeper color than the remainder of the wall plane.

c.    Cornice or similar treatment.

d.    Tile insets or similar elements.

7.    Building and perimeter wall colors shall be constructed of earth toned materials. Accent colors may be utilized for highlights. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

8.    Building facades that face and/or are visible from any public right-of-way shall contain additional articulation and enhancements such as varying building heights, building planes or roof lines, windows or the appearance of windows, mansard or similar roof lines, vertical and horizontal articulations. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

9.    Gates shall be constructed of colors and materials that are architecturally compatible with the associated buildings. The gate shall be maintained in good working order and shall remain closed except when in use. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

10.    Aisle width shall be a minimum of twenty-six (26) feet between interior buildings to provide unobstructed and safe circulation. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

11.    All on-site lighting shall be energy efficient, stationary, and directed away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

12.    Residential quarters for a manager or caretaker may be provided in the development. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

13.    Required parking shall be consistent with PMC 17.87.030. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

14.    All required parking, except that required for the caretaker’s residence, is to be located outside of any vehicle restricting gates. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

15.    A fully enclosed two (2) car garage with a clear and free minimum interior dimension of twenty (20) feet wide and twenty (20) feet long, constructed in compliance with the City Building and Safety Department requirements, shall be provided for any manager or caretaker’s residence. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

16.    If the project contains a manager’s or caretaker’s residence, it shall provide building articulation compatible with the main structure(s), and shall comply with all single-family residential development standards. No push-through air conditioning units are permitted. HVAC units should be ground mounted with adequate screening. If HVAC units are roof mounted, they shall be screened from view from any public right-of-way or from any portion of the project through a continuous parapet. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

17.    Trash enclosures shall be placed at locations convenient to all storage units. The enclosure shall contain a drainage system to allow for convenient cleaning. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

18.    Any vehicle storage (RV, boat, etc.) shall be completely screened from the view from public right-of-way. All vehicle storage must be covered. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

19.    No business activity shall be conducted on the premises other than the rental of storage spaces for inactive storage use and the auction from time to time of abandoned property. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

20.    No flammable or otherwise hazardous materials shall be stored on site. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003.)

21.    Storage facilities located adjacent to residential uses shall have their hours of operation restricted to 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, and 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. on Sundays. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 02-01, adopted by City Council April 23, 2003. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 18-003, adopted by City Council September 4, 2018.)

C.    Review process

Mini-warehouse Storage Facilities shall be subject to Site Plan Review approval according to Chapter 17.21 PMC or to Conditional Use Permit according to Chapter 17.22 PMC, as specified by the applicable zone district.

17.93.040 Commercial Vehicle Parking as an Accessory Use
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 99-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of this Section to establish development standards for commercial vehicle parking. For purposes of this Section, the term “commercial vehicle parking” means the accessory use of property for the parking of vehicles used for commercial purposes unrelated to the principal use or operation conducted on the property. It is the intent of this Section to provide property owners in specified zones with the ability to satisfy a growing need for adequate off-street parking for commercial trucks and vehicles while establishing reasonable development standards designed to ensure that this type of use is located and conducted in a manner that minimizes the potential for adverse effects on the community from noise, traffic, visual, aesthetic, health and safety impacts from the use.

B.    Development standards

Commercial vehicle parking as an accessory use shall conform to the following standards in addition to all other applicable standards and regulations:

1.    Any site used for commercial vehicle parking under this Section shall provide the following number of parking spaces: (i) the total number of required parking spaces for the principle use or uses conducted on the premises; and (ii) one parking space for each commercial vehicle to be parked on site pursuant to this Section. The parking spaces required for the principal use or uses shall not be used or impacted by the commercial vehicle parking under this Section.

2.    Parking areas designated for commercial vehicle parking shall comply with minimum dimension and turn radius requirements as specified by the City Traffic/Transportation Engineer.

3.    No inoperable vehicles shall be parked on the portion of the site that is designated and established for commercial vehicle parking.

4.    Commercial vehicle parking surfaces shall comply with the requirements of the City Engineer and the Director of Planning. Surface improvements shall include measures to control dust and to avoid obstruction of surface drainage flows.

5.    If the proposed use shares a property line with a residential use or zone, the area used for commercial vehicle parking shall maintain a minimum separation of 300 feet from the property line or provide screening as required by the Director of Planning.

C.    Review process

Commercial vehicle parking as an accessory use shall be subject to the following approval process:

1.    To establish commercial vehicle parking as an accessory use to an existing development within zones C-5, M-1 and M-2, a Minor Modification application must be submitted and approved prior to establishing the accessory use.

2.    To establish commercial vehicle parking as an accessory use to a proposed new use in zones C-5, M-1 and M-2, the accessory use must be reviewed and approved by the reviewing authority subject to the approval process for the proposed primary use as specified in the applicable zone district.

Chapter 17.94
PUBLIC AND INSTITUTIONAL FACILITIES
17.94.010 Religious Assembly Uses
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for religious assembly uses. The intent is to preserve the integrity of residential and commercial areas by preventing negative health, safety, aesthetic, and traffic impacts, while allowing for establishment and operation of a religious assembly use within the area. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

B.    Development standards

All religious assembly uses shall comply with the following standards in addition to all other applicable statutes, ordinances, and regulations: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

1.    The minimum size of the lot or area shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, except where such facility is to be located within an existing commercial development.

2.    All structures shall conform to the applicable development standards of the zone and Division 8, standards including but not limited to, setbacks, height and lot coverage of the underlying zone; however, in no event shall a structure utilized for religious instruction, worship, guidance or other congregation of persons be located closer than 20 feet to adjacent residentially designated parcels. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

3.    On-site landscaping shall be consistent with that prevailing in the neighborhood and shall be installed and maintained, pursuant to applicable City Ordinances. Landscaping should be incorporated to reduce visual and noise impacts on surrounding properties, through appropriate screening of parking lots and other areas as deemed appropriate.

4.    Outdoor activities may only be conducted between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Any outdoor activities or events which include the use of tents or which provide amplified sound systems will require approval of a Temporary Use Permit.

5.    Approval of a religious assembly use pursuant to this Section does not permit any school, day nursery, kindergarten or any congregation of persons for purposes other than religious instruction, worship or guidance, except that a commercial day care use may be permitted as an accessory use to the religious assembly use with the approval of a Conditional Use Permit where religious assembly uses are permitted by the Zoning Ordinance and pursuant to PMC 17.92.120. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.) (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

C.    Review process

All religious assembly uses shall be subject to the review process set forth in each zone. All facilities shall be reviewed by the Development Advisory Board. In making the decision for approval of the proposed religious assembly use, the reviewing authority shall consider consistency with this Section and other applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 03-06, adopted by City Council June 25, 2003.)

17.94.020 Golf Courses
A.    Purpose and intent

These regulations establish specific standards for golf courses in order to prevent the creation of any nuisance or annoyance to the occupants of neighboring dwellings while allowing establishment and operation of golf courses and related facilities.

B.    Development standards

Golf courses shall be constructed in the following manner:

1.    Design and irrigation of the golf course shall incorporate the use of native and drought tolerant vegetation and other water conservation techniques.

2.    Treated effluent shall be used for irrigation where available and feasible.

3.    Perimeter walls or fences shall provide a viewshed window design along all public rights-of-way, incorporating a mix of pilasters and wrought iron fencing or equivalent treatment.

4.    All accessory facilities, including but not limited to, clubhouses, maintenance buildings, and half-way club houses shall be designed and located to ensure compatibility and consistency with the overall golf course setting.

5.    Lighting of any facilities including but not limited to driving ranges shall be directed away from residential areas and public rights-of-way and of an intensity appropriate to the given location and site characteristics.

C.    Review process

Golf Courses shall be subject to Conditional Use Permit approval in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC, as specified by the applicable zone district.

17.94.030 Congregate Meal Facilities
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

A.    Purpose and Intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for congregate meal facilities. The intent is to prevent the creation of any adverse impacts to adjacent properties while ensuring that adequate meal services and facilities are available to serve those who are homeless or low income.

B.    Development Standards

All congregate meal facilities shall conform to the following standards:

1.    Property requirements: The parcel upon which the congregate meal facility is established shall conform to all standards of the underlying land use and zone district.

2.    Clientele requirements: Meals shall be provided only to families or individuals who are homeless or low income.

3.    Distance requirements:

a.    No more than one (1) congregate meal facility shall be permitted within ¼ mile (1,320 feet) of another congregate meal facility or transitional housing facility measured from property line to property line.

b.    Congregate meal facilities shall be located a minimum of five hundred (500) feet from any school.

c.    Congregate meal facilities shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any single-family residential zone or use.

4.    Hours of operation: Congregate meal facilities shall only operate between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.

5.    Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

6.    Service restrictions:

a.    All activities associated with the facility, including the serving of food and beverages, shall occur within an enclosed building.

b.    Overnight accommodations are not permitted.

c.    Drive-up or drive through service is not permitted.

d.    Live entertainment is not permitted.

e.    Distribution or consumption of alcoholic beverage on the premises is not permitted.

7.    Handicap access: The facility shall comply with the minimum handicapped requirements.

8.    Security: The facility shall be designed to provide maximum security for all clients and employees. A security plan shall be established and submitted to the Planning Department for review.

9.    Other requirements: Congregate meal facilities shall conform with all local, state, and federal requirements.

17.94.040 Homeless Shelters
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 98-1, adopted by City Council March 10, 1999.)

A.    Purpose and Intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for homeless shelters. The intent is to prevent the creation of any adverse impact to adjacent properties while ensuring that adequate shelter facilities are provided for the homeless.

B.    Development Standards

All homeless shelters shall conform to the following standards:

1.    Property requirements: The parcel upon which the homeless shelter is established shall conform to all standards of the underlying land use and zone district.

2.    Occupancy limitations: Nightly sleeping accommodations shall only be provided for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-05, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

3.    Distance requirements:

a.    No more than one (1) homeless shelter shall be permitted within 300 feet of another homeless shelter, or transitional or supportive housing facility measured from property line to property line. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-5, adopted by City Council September 5, 2012.)

4.    Minimum provisions:

a.    Homeless shelters shall provide at least 35 square feet of sleeping area per bed.

b.    Homeless shelters shall provided at least one (1) toilet, sink and shower for every fifteen (15) beds, or as otherwise required by the Uniform Building Code.

c.    Homeless shelters shall provide on-site supervision at all times. At least one full-time equivalent employee shall be provided for every 20 beds.

5.    Common areas: Any living, dining and/or kitchen areas shall be physically separated from sleeping areas.

6.    Hours of operation: Homeless shelters shall be limited to the hours between 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

7.    Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Chapter 17.87 PMC, Off-Street Parking.

8.    Handicap access: The shelter shall comply with the minimum handicapped requirements.

9.    Security: The shelter shall be designed to provide adequate security for clients and employees. A security plan shall be established and submitted to the Planning Department for review.

10.    Other requirements: Homeless shelters shall conform with all local, state, and federal requirements.

Chapter 17.95
COMMUNICATIONS AND UTILITIES
17.95.010 Electric Distribution Substations
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to provide standards for electric distribution substations that will ensure that such uses are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood by preventing adverse visual, health, safety, and other impacts on the surrounding properties and/or the community.

B.    Development standards

1.    Minimum lot or area size shall be as required by the underlying zone, but in no event less than five thousand (5,000) square feet.

2.    Front yard setback shall be as required by the underlying zone, but in no event less than five (5) feet.

3.    All buildings, structures and landscaping shall be compatible with the development of surrounding properties.

4.    Landscaping walls and other methods as appropriate shall be developed and maintained in all required setback areas and where required to provide adequate screening of interior development in conformance with this Ordinance and as required by the reviewing authority.

C.    Review process

Electric Distribution Substations shall be subject to Site Plan Review as required by Chapter 17.21 PMC where permitted by the zone district.

17.95.020 Satellite Dish Antennae
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to provide standards for satellite dish antennae that will ensure that such uses are compatible with the surrounding neighborhood by preventing adverse health, safety, and other impacts on the surrounding properties and/or the community. Further, these regulations are intended to ensure that the installation, maintenance, or use of certain antennae used to receive video programming is not impaired. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

B.    Development standards for residential and agricultural zones

The installation of dish-type antennae may be permitted in all agricultural and residential zones in accordance with the following:

1.    Number. A maximum of one (1) dish-type satellite antenna shall be permitted per site, in addition to permitted vertical antennae.

2.    Size. The maximum diameter of the satellite dish antenna shall be twelve (12) feet;

3.    Height. The maximum height of the satellite dish antenna shall be fifteen (15) feet measured from the grade to the highest point of the antenna. Roof mounted installations are permitted only if the satellite dish is less than 40 inches in diameter and the dish is mounted so that it does not extend above the roofline and is not visible from any public or private street. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-3, adopted by City Council September 10, 1997.)

4.    Setbacks. The following setbacks shall be required and shall be measured from the property line to the center of the satellite dish:

a.    Minimum rear yard setback shall be ten (10) feet;

b.    Minimum interior side yard setback shall be ten (10) feet;

c.    Minimum street side yard setback shall be fifteen (15) feet;

d.    No dish antenna shall be located within the front yard.

5.    Screening. Satellite dish antennae shall be screened from view from any public street.

C.    Development standards for commercial and industrial zones

The installation of dish-type satellite antennae may be permitted in all commercial and industrial zones in accordance with the following standards:

1.    Dish-type antennae shall not be located within a required front or street side landscape area.

2.    The proposed antenna shall be located, designed, and installed to minimize visibility from adjoining rights-of-way and properties.

3.    Display of antennae on trailers or at other temporary locations on the site will be considered open display of merchandise and shall require visual screening.

D.    Review process

An application for a satellite dish antenna shall be subject to the review and approval of the Planning Director and shall be approved if the application complies with the requirements contained in this Section.

E.    Variances

Notwithstanding the provisions of PMC 17.23.060, a variance from the provisions of this Section may be granted by the Planning Director if necessary to allow the applicant to attain reasonable reception.

17.95.030 Amateur Radio Antennae
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-2, adopted by City Council September 7, 2011)

A.    Purpose and Intent

These regulations apply only to Amateur Radio Antennas in agricultural or residential zones or in residentially developed areas. Amateur Radio Antennas erected in Commercial, Industrial, Open Space or Public Facilities Zones, in locations not residentially developed, are subject to the standards set forth in PMC 17.95.040. Citizen Band radio antennas shall be regulated as Accessory Structures as provided in the underlying zone district.

The regulations adopted herein are the minimum practicable regulations necessary to accomplish the City’s legitimate purpose of protecting all of its citizens and their rights as described herein.

The purposes of this Section are:

1.    To establish an application process and standards for installation of antennas while preserving the attractive appearance of the community;

2.    To promote the public health, safety and welfare and the aesthetic effects, and is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood by preventing adverse visual, health, safety, and other impacts on the surrounding properties and/or the community; and

3.    To accommodate reasonably the needs of licensed amateur radio operators.

B.    Definitions

Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Regulations Generally

1.    No amateur radio antenna or support thereof shall be erected, installed, placed or maintained upon any lot or upon any building or structure except in compliance with this Section.

2.    Any amateur radio antenna structure shall be reviewed for compliance with the standards set forth herein by the Director of Planning. The structure shall be constructed of metal, graphite composite or other durable construction material. No wood structures shall be permitted. The design will provide for the minimum footprint necessary for structural support, but in no case shall the structure footprint, excluding any concrete foundation, exceed four square feet. Any required building permits shall be acquired prior to construction, installation or modification of any antenna structure.

3.    Amateur radios shall be operated in compliance with Federal Communications Commission (FCC) standards including regulations pertaining to frequency interference.

4.    No signage shall be allowed on any antennas and/or antenna structure, except for requisite safety text and other labeling required by law.

5.    No portion of any antenna and/or antenna structure shall be allowed within any required setback area. Any directional antenna that could extend across a property line when rotated is prohibited.

 

6.    No more than one antenna structure shall be permitted on any lot or structure.

D.    Antennas Not Subject to Regulations

The following types of antennas may be installed without Planning Department approval:

1.    Antennas that are mounted directly on a transmitter or receiver, held or aimed by hand or mounted on a portable tripod or support, or a vehicle mounted antenna, are not subject to the regulations contained in this Section.

2.    A building-mounted fixed-height vertical whip antenna or compact horizontal antenna having a maximum height of not more than 10’ above the highest point of the primary structure roof.

3.    A ground-mounted fixed-height vertical or compact horizontal antenna having a maximum height of forty-five (45) feet above grade provided that the antenna is located in the rear yard and does not encroach into any required setback.

4.    Single-element wire antennas and their support lines attached to any combination of trees, existing permitted structures, or a single support pole that does not exceed 2-1/2 inches in diameter, provided that the antenna is located in the rear yard, does not encroach into any required setback, and the highest point of any support pole does not exceed a height of forty-five (45) feet above grade.

E.    Antennas Permitted Through Administrative Zoning Clearance

The following types of antenna/antenna structures may be installed with approval of an administrative zoning clearance, pursuant to the process and requirements set forth in PMC 17.26.030, by the City of Palmdale Planning Department.

The standards described below provide for the maximum size and mass of antenna structure permitted by this Section. The Director of Planning shall review any proposed antenna for the project’s compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. Conditions, including but not limited to, lot size, and topographic conditions which may camouflage the antenna from surrounding properties may dictate approval of a shorter antenna/antenna structure and/or elimination or reduction of the width of any horizontal antenna.

Application for an administrative zoning clearance shall be on the forms provided by the Planning Department, and shall include the information listed in PMC 17.26.110(D) and any required fees as established by the City Council.

1.    Antenna installations intended for use by the City of Palmdale or another governmental agency.

2.    A retractable antenna/antenna structure that meets all of the following characteristics:

a.    The antenna/antenna structure is located on a lot of at least one acre in size;

b.    The antenna/antenna structure does not exceed a maximum height of 45 feet when measured in the nested position;

c.    The antenna/antenna structure does not exceed 75 feet when in operation;

d.    The antenna is a Compact horizontal antenna and does not extend into any required setback;

e.    The antenna/antenna structure is located in the rear yard; and

f.    The antenna is colored to minimize its reflectivity and blend with its surroundings as much as possible.

F.    Antennas Requiring an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit

The following types of antennas may be installed with approval of an Amateur Radio Antenna permit, pursuant to the process and standards set forth in PMC 17.26.110. Application for an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit shall be on the forms provided by the Planning Department, and shall include the information listed in PMC 17.26.110(D) and any required fees as established by the City Council.

The standards described below provide for the maximum size and mass of antenna structure permitted by this Section. The Director of Planning shall review any proposed antenna for the project’s compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood. Conditions, including but not limited to, lot size, and topographic conditions which may help to camouflage the antenna from surrounding properties may dictate approval of a shorter antenna/antenna structure and/or elimination or reduction of the width of any horizontal antenna.

1.    A fixed height antenna/antenna structure that is installed, placed, or maintained at a height that does not exceed 45 feet in height and may include a horizontal antenna that does not exceed a 35-foot turning radius.

2.    A retractable antenna/antenna structure that meets all of the following characteristics:

a.    The antenna/antenna structure shall not exceed a maximum height of 45 feet when measured in the nested position;

b.    The antenna/antenna structure does not exceed 75 feet in height when in operation;

c.    The horizontal antenna does not exceed a 35-foot turning radius and shall not extend into any required setback;

3.    All antennas approved under an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit shall be located within the rear yard and shall be colored to minimize its reflectivity and blend with its surroundings as much as possible.

Findings for Approval of an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit are set forth in PMC 17.26.110(G).

G.    Antennas Requiring a Conditional Use Permit.

Any installation of an antenna that is not otherwise allowed by subsection E or F of this Section shall require a Conditional Use Permit approved by the Planning Commission pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC. Application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be on the forms provided by the Planning Department and shall include the information listed in PMC 17.22.030, and such additional information as requested by the Director of Planning and for amateur radio antennas shall also include the following:

1.    The name, address and call letters of the amateur radio operator;

2.    Manufacturer’s specifications of the antenna structure (if available);

3.    Visual representation to scale of the antenna structure and array, either through manufacturer’s specifications, or through the preparation of project specific elevations drawn to scale and dimensioned so as to fully describe the proposed project.

4.    Information explaining the need for the proposed antenna (for example, if an antenna of a certain size is needed to communicate with a particular location).

5.    Additional findings for approval for antennas requiring an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit or a Conditional Use Permit.

In addition to the findings required for approval of a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to Chapter 17.22 PMC, the Planning Commission shall make the following findings prior to approval of a Conditional Use Permit for an antenna and/or antenna structure:

a.    That the applicant has demonstrated that strict compliance with the requirements for establishment and operation of an Amateur Radio Antenna as specified in PMC 17.26.110(E) would unreasonably interfere with the applicant’s ability to receive or transmit signals, or that strict compliance with said requirements is not, under the circumstances of the particular case, necessary to satisfy the purpose and intent of this Section.

b.    That the antenna, including the antenna structure, shall be located, sized and designed so as to minimize the amount of the antenna that is visible from surrounding properties, public streets and all public rights-of way, recognizing that complete screening may not be possible.

c.    That there is adequate space on the property for the antenna and antenna structure without conflicting with buildings on the property or encroaching into required setback areas.

d.    The antenna would not despoil the primary view of a neighbor.

e.    The antenna/antenna structure is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood with respect to, including but not limited to, scale and massing in comparison to lot size, impact on adjacent properties, and aesthetic impacts.

f.    The permit and any conditions of approval attached thereto would accommodate reasonably the amateur radio operator’s desire for communication, while at the same time requiring the minimum practicable regulation to accomplish the City’s legitimate purpose of protecting the public health, safety, welfare, aesthetics and compatibility with the neighborhood.

In granting the permit, the approving authority may impose conditions reasonably necessary to accomplish the purpose of this Section, provided those conditions do not unreasonably interfere with the ability of the applicant to receive or transmit signals from or to the intended location.

In evaluating the required findings for Conditional Use Permits under PMC 17.22.050(B), in recognition that amateur radio operations provide an important public service, particularly in times of emergency, it shall be presumed that such operations are beneficial and desirous to the community.

H.    Modifications

Any permit or zoning clearance for an amateur radio antenna shall include a condition that the permittee shall report any changes to the antenna and/or antenna structure from that authorized by the permit and shall if necessary obtain a modification to the permit. A modification may be required, for example, if the antenna/antenna structure height will be increased above the height previously approved, the construction design or materials will change, or additional antennas are added to the antenna/antenna structure previously approved. Any change to the antenna and/or antenna structure authorized by a zoning clearance shall be reviewed and approved through submittal of a new zoning clearance application. Any change to the antenna and/or antenna structure authorized by an Amateur Radio Antenna Permit shall be reviewed and approved as set forth in PMC 17.26.110(H). Any change to the antenna and/or antenna structure authorized by a Conditional Use Permit shall be reviewed and approved through the process set forth in PMC 17.22.060.

I.    Time Limit

Any antenna, whether permitted by approval of a zoning clearance, Amateur Radio Antenna Permit or Conditional Use Permit, shall be developed and utilized within a period not to exceed twelve (12) months from and after the date of the granting of such approval, and, if not so developed and utilized, such approval automatically shall become null and void at the expiration of such twelve (12) month period.

J.    Building Permit

When required by the Palmdale Building Code, building permits shall be obtained for the installation of any antenna/antenna structure. The Building Official shall determine that the antenna is in compliance with all applicable sections of the Palmdale Building Code and any local regulations prior to issuance of the building permit.

17.95.040 Communication Facilities
A.    Purpose and Intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to encourage and facilitate a wide variety of communication services and providers to serve businesses and citizens within the City of Palmdale. The City of Palmdale desires to avoid adverse health or aesthetic impacts on the community resulting from the unregulated proliferation of communication facilities throughout the City, and to ensure for the protection of the general health, safety, and welfare of the community and the integrity of public rights-of-way and assets. This ordinance is adopted to set forth the goals and policies of the City of Palmdale that will be used to regulate the permitting, installation, and operation of commercial communications services and facilities within the City. This ordinance is not intended to apply to satellite dish antennae which are regulated in PMC 17.95.020, or to vertical antennae which are regulated in PMC 17.95.030.

B.    Permits Required

1.    Communication facilities are subject to permit review in all residential, commercial, industrial, and special zones according to the following:

Zone

Minor Facility

Major Facility

A-1

Administrative Approval*

Not Permitted

R-1

Administrative Approval*

Not Permitted

R-2

Administrative Approval*

Not Permitted

R-3

Administrative Approval*

Not Permitted

C-1

Administrative Approval*

Not Permitted

C-2

Administrative Approval*

Not Permitted

C-3

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

C-4

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

C-5

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

M-1

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

M-2

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

M-3

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

M-4

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

PF

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

QR

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

OR

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

C-D

Administrative Approval*

Permitted with CUP Approval

*    Administrative Approval may be given through approval of a Minor Modification or Minor Plot Plan review, depending on the proposal.

C.    Supplemental Information

1.    Permit applications for all communication facilities shall be accompanied by the following supplemental materials, unless waived by the Director of Planning:

a.    A Preliminary Report that quantifies the project’s electromagnetic frequency (EMF) radiation exposures and power levels, and compares them with adopted standards.

b.    A plan for the on-going security and inspection of the facility as applicable, which may include but not be limited to provisions for fencing, anti-climbing devices, elevated ladders on towers, and monitoring, to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism.

c.    An alternative site analysis to mitigate visual, land use, or environmental impacts, if required.

d.    A facilities propagation map to ensure that maximum utilization and efficient use of limited communications sites will be achieved. Such a map shall be at a scale no smaller than 1" = .5 miles and shall include the corporate boundaries of the City and the City’s Sphere of Influence.

e.    For a proposed facility within the area affected by the Ari Installation Compatible Use Zone (AICUZ), a report demonstrating compliance with Joint Land Use Committee Policies, including siting and electronic signal interference considerations, and compliance with FAA Regulation 77 (Height and Obstruction Criteria).

D.    Development Standards

In addition to compliance with all other applicable statutes, ordinance, regulations, and policies, the following regulations shall apply to all communication facilities as permitted in PMC 17.95.040(B):

1.    Setbacks

a.    Setbacks shall be those specified for buildings within the respective zone district.

b.    Antenna structures or towers shall not be permitted to be placed in any front yard or street side yard.

c.    Antenna structures shall be located no less than 40 feet from any property zoned or legally used for residential use, unless such location is required for the proper operation of the system, based on the evidence and conclusions of a technical analysis supporting such precise placement.

d.    For antenna structures exceeding 160 feet in height, fall zones may not cross places of public assembly, such as churches or schools.

e.    Antenna structures exceeding 250 feet in height shall be required to have fall zones established that encompass a circular area from the base of the tower whose radius exceeds the height of the tower.

f.    A major facility shall be located at least seven hundred and fifty (750) feet from the nearest existing, legally established major facility (except in the event that such a facility is co-located with another facility.

2.    Height

a.    The maximum height shall be that as specified for structures within the respective zone district. Heights not to exceed twenty feet in excess of the zone district height limit may be approved through CUP approval. Additional height may be granted if the approving authority determines that:

(i)    No feasible alternate location or design is possible;

(ii)    That the increase in height is for community benefit; and

(iii)    That there are circumstances that do not allow the antenna to meet the height standards for the respective zone district.

3.    Landscaping

a.    Residential, Commercial, Industrial, Public Facilities zones – communication facilities shall contain landscape screening around the base of the antenna structure and any accessory structure. Landscaping shall consist of a combination of vines, ground cover, and trees of a minimum of 24-inch box size container at the time of planting.

b.    Agriculture, Open Space, Quarry, and Reclamation zones – Local native vegetation and/or drought tolerant imported stocks shall be used to achieve adequate screening of antenna structures and accessory buildings. Clearing of the site shall be limited to only that amount necessary to comply with fire department requirements.

4.    Fencing

Communication facilities shall be screened and enclosed by use of the following materials:

a.    Where visible from freeways, arterial streets, or a less intensive land use district, wrought iron, decorative masonry block, or similar decorative materials or combination thereof shall be used.

b.    Where a communication facility site is adjacent to a residentially zoned district or legally in use for a residential purpose, a solid decorative block wall, a minimum six feet in height, shall be placed between the facility and the adjacent residential property.

5.    Design Standards

All Communication facilities shall be reviewed for applicable General Plan and Zoning Ordinance compliance, including but not limited to the following:

a.    A facility shall not create or increase non-conformances to the site, such as a reduction of required parking, landscaping, trash enclosures, loading zones, or other required site features.

b.    A facility shall conform to any specific plan, area plan, comprehensive development plan, or other applicable development guidelines.

c.    The height and mass of communication facilities should be the minimum necessary for the applicant’s activity, commensurate with technical, safety, and visual considerations.

d.    Structures shall be located below or integral with the skyline wherever possible.

e.    Facilities that rise above the horizon line shall be painted in non-reflective blue or gray or other colors to blend with the surrounding environment as required by the reviewing authority.

f.    Microwave antennas shall be constructed of open mesh materials as opposed to solid materials.

g.    Antenna structures shall be finished in a neutral color to blend in with the immediate surroundings. Antennas mounted on buildings shall be of a color and finish that matches that of the building and shall be screened by radio frequency (RF) transparent materials that match the color and finish of the building.

h.    Highly reflective surfaces conducive to glare will not be permitted.

i.    No form of advertising or identification will be permitted on the dish or supporting structure other than a manufacturer’s identification tag.

j.    The display of any sign or other graphics on an antenna or support structure is prohibited except for public warning signs, which signs must be placed no higher than eight feet above the base of the antenna.

k.    Antennae and transmitter equipment on roof tops and projecting from walls shall be screened from view unless made an integral part of the design of the building. All antennae and architectural screening shall, to the extent possible, be compatible and integrated with the existing structure. The antenna and equipment building shall be located as far from the edge of the building as possible while still maintaining system performance.

6.    Construction Standards

All communication facilities shall be reviewed for structural engineering, building, electrical, and fire code compliance, and other applicable construction standards. In addition, communication facilities shall comply with the following:

a.    Antennas and structures shall be designed and constructed to achieve all lateral load requirements contained in the Uniform Building Code (UBC).

b.    Any metallic support structures shall be bonded to a grounding rod.

c.    All wires, cables, and utility lines shall be placed underground, except cables attached flush to the surface of a building or to the structure of the antenna. All underground wires and utility lines shall follow the path of least damage.

d.    Equipment shall meet all manufacturer’s specifications and all antennas and screens shall have an outer finish with fire-resistive and corrosive-resistant material.

7.    Conformance with Chapter 12.04 PMC, Underground Utilities.

All communication facilities that are the subject of this Section, are determined to have the definition of “utility” as it is defined by PMC 12.04.010(E), and shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 12.04 PMC, pertaining to underground utilities and encroachment into public rights-of-way.

E.    Operational Requirements

1.    Time Limits

The duration of the approval period for a major facility or a minor facility shall be ten (10) years. An extension of the approval of the permit may be granted by the reviewing authority. New conditions of approval may also be applied to an approval for extension, as may be deemed necessary based upon changing conditions or development in the surrounding area.

2.    Subsequent EMF Report – A subsequent report shall be submitted within six (6) months that quantifies cumulative field measurements of electromagnetic frequency (EMF) radiation power densities and exposures from all antennas installed at or near the subject site. The report shall contain an comparison of the measured results within applicable FCC standards. Failure to prepare and submit the subsequent report by the applicant, or the determination of the City that the project does not meet applicable FCC standards, may constitute grounds for revocation of the use permit.

3.    Permittees may be required to post a bond or other suitable security as a condition of the use permit to guarantee removal of discontinued, or abandoned facilities, and repair of damage to sites, including revegetation.

4.    Discontinued Use

The operator of a lawfully erected facility, and the owner of the premises upon which it is located, shall promptly notify the Director of Planning in writing in the event that use of the facility is discontinued for any reason. In the event that the discontinued use is permanent, the owner(s) and/or operator(s) shall promptly remove the facility, and repair any damage to the premises caused by such removal. All such removal, and repair shall be completed within ninety (90) days after the sue is discontinued, and shall be performed in accordance with all applicable zoning and health and safety and codes requirements. For purposes of this subsection, a discontinued uses shall be permanent unless the facility is reasonably likely to be operative and used within the immediately following three-month period.

5.    Abandonment

Antennas, towers, and accessory structures that have been determined to be inoperative or abandoned for a period of six (6) months shall be removed, unless a new application to re-establish two uses are filed with the City.

6.    Removal by City

The City may remove an abandoned facility, repair any and all damage to the premises caused by such removal, and otherwise restore the premises as in appropriate to be in compliance with applicable code at any time: 1) after thirty (30) days following the notice of abandonment, or 2) following a notice of decision by the Director of Planning, subject to the owner/operator’s right of appeal under the City of Palmdale Municipal Code. The City may, but shall not be required to, store the removed facility (or any part thereof). The owner of the premises upon which the abandoned facility was located, and all prior operators of the facility, shall be jointly liable for the entire cost of such removal, repair, restoration and storage, and shall remit payment to the City promptly after demand therefore is made. The City may, in lieu of storing the removed facility, convert it to the City’s use, sell it, or dispose of it in any manner deemed by the City to be appropriate.

7.    Penalties

The operator of the facility, and the owner(s) of the premises upon which it is located shall be in violation of this Section for failure to timely comply with any requirements hereunder. Each such person shall be subject to penalties for each such violation, pursuant to the City of Palmdale Municipal Code.

8.    City Lien on Property

Until the cost of removal, repair, restoration, and storage is paid in full, a lien shall be placed on the abandoned personal property and any real property on which the facility was located, for the full amount of the cost of removal, repair, restoration, and storage. The Director of Planning shall cause the lien to be recorded in the County of Los Angeles Recorder’s Office.

Division 95.05 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
17.95.05.010 Purpose
The purpose and intent of this Chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of regulations and standards for the permitting, development, siting, installation, design, operation and maintenance of wireless telecommunications facilities in the City’s public right-of-way. These regulations are intended to prescribe clear and reasonable criteria to assess and process applications in a consistent and expeditious manner, while reducing the impacts associated with wireless telecommunications facilities. This Chapter provides standards necessary (A) for the preservation of the public right-of-way in the City for the maximum benefit and use of the public, (B) to promote and protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual resources and the aesthetic quality of the City consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan, and (C) to provide for the orderly, managed and efficient development of wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the State and Federal laws, rules and regulations. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.020 Definitions
Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.95.05.030 Applicability
A.    Applicability. This Chapter applies to the siting, construction or modification of any and all wireless telecommunications facilities proposed to be located in the public right-of-way as follows:

1.    All facilities for which applications were not approved prior to May 4, 2017, shall be subject to and comply with all provisions of this Chapter.

2.    All facilities for which applications were approved by the City prior to May 4, 2017, shall not be required to obtain a new or amended permit until such time as a provision of this Code so requires. Any communication facility that was lawfully constructed prior to May 4, 2017, that does not comply with the standards, regulations and/or requirements of this Chapter shall be deemed a nonconforming use.

3.    All facilities, notwithstanding the date approved, shall be subject immediately to the provisions of this Chapter governing the operation and maintenance (PMC 17.95.05.130, Operation and Maintenance Standards), cessation of use and abandonment (PMC 17.95.05.170, Cessation of Use or Abandonment), removal and restoration (PMC 17.95.05.180, Removal and Restoration – Permit Expiration, Revocation or Abandonment) of wireless telecommunications facilities and the prohibition of dangerous conditions or obstructions by such facilities (PMC 17.95.05.150, No Dangerous Condition or Obstructions Allowed); provided, however, that if a condition of approval conflicts with a provision of this Chapter, the condition of approval shall control until the permit is amended or revoked.

B.    Exclusions. This Chapter does not apply to the following:

1.    Amateur radio facilities;

2.    Over the air reception devices (“OTARD”) antennas;

3.    Facilities owned and operated by the City for its use;

4.    Any entity legally entitled to an exemption pursuant to State or Federal law or City-issued franchise agreement. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.040 Communication Facility Permit Requirements (Discretionary and Ministerial)
A.    General Rule – Major Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Permit Required. All new wireless facilities or collocations or modifications to existing wireless facilities shall require a major wireless telecommunications facilities permit subject to Planning Commission approval unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter.

B.    Discretionary Administrative Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Permit.

1.    Discretionary Permit. The Director may issue a discretionary administrative wireless telecommunications facilities permit for new facilities or collocations or modifications to existing facilities that meet all the following criteria:

a.    The proposal is not located in any location identified in PMC 17.95.05.200, Location Restrictions; and

b.    The proposal complies with all applicable provisions in this Chapter without need for an exception pursuant to PMC 17.95.05.190, Exceptions.

2.    Referral to Commission. The Director may, in the Director’s discretion, refer any application for a discretionary administrative wireless telecommunications facilities permit to the Planning Commission for approval, which approval shall be granted if the commission makes the findings required in PMC 17.95.05.090.

C.    Ministerial Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Permit. Notwithstanding PMC 17.95.05.220, State or Federal Law – Ministerial Requirements, the Director shall approve a ministerial wireless telecommunications permit if all of the following apply:

1.    The facility will comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to:

a.    The Americans with Disabilities Act;

b.    All building and safety requirements, including those within the California Building Standards Code, as amended by the City of Palmdale;

c.    All requirements of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC), including requirements relating to radio-frequency (RF) emissions and limits on interference.

2.    The proposed facility will be installed on either:

a.    An existing pole that meets all of the following requirements:

i.    The pole does not support a traffic control device (examples include stop signs and traffic signals);

ii.    The facility will match the design of the pole; and

iii.    If feasible, all equipment installed on the pole will be the same color as the pole; or

b.    A new light pole that meets all of the following requirements:

i.    The pole meets the City’s design requirements for its own light poles;

ii.    The pole is at least ninety (90) feet away from any existing light pole; and

iii.    Unless requested otherwise by the City in writing, the light on the pole will be illuminated, operated, and maintained consistent with the operation of the other light poles in the City, and the full costs of illumination shall be fully borne by the applicant.

3.    The applicant has provided technical data clearly demonstrating that there is a significant gap in the applicant’s coverage and the facilities proposed are needed to fill that gap.

4.    The City has issued all required encroachment permits and entered into any required franchise agreement(s).

5.    All accessory equipment is housed in a container which is either (a) attached to the pole such that it does not protrude from the pole by more than four (4) inches; is attached more than ten (10) feet above the ground; and is camouflaged to the extent feasible; or (b) installed underground.

6.    Antennas must be:

a.    Mounted symmetrically on top of the pole;

b.    No more than four (4) inches wider in diameter than the existing pole;

c.    The same color as the pole; and

d.    The same shape as the pole (which shape is typically cylindrical).

D.    Master Deployment Plan Permit.

1.    Notwithstanding any other provision of the Municipal Code to the contrary, any applicant that seeks approval for five (5) or more wireless telecommunications facilities in the right-of-way (including new facilities and collocations to existing facilities) may elect to submit an application for a master deployment plan permit subject to Planning Commission approval. Any master deployment plan shall expire thirty-six (36) months after the effective date of the approval unless the Planning Commission establishes a shorter time period. The proposed facilities in a master deployment plan shall be reviewed together at the same time and shall be otherwise subject to the same requirements and procedures applicable to a major communication facility permit. Only facilities in the right-of-way may be covered by a master deployment plan.

2.    A master deployment plan permit shall be deemed an approval for all wireless telecommunications facilities within the plan; provided, however, that an individual encroachment permit shall be required for each communication facility built pursuant to the plan.

3.    Each facility proposed to be constructed pursuant to a master deployment plan permit shall be built in strict compliance with the approved plan. Any deviations or alterations from the approved master deployment plan for an individual communication facility shall be considered as though no master deployment plan permit had been issued and shall require either a major wireless telecommunications facilities permit or an administrative wireless telecommunications facilities permit, as applicable.

4.    An applicant that proposes to amend a master deployment plan permit shall apply to the City and follow the same procedures as would otherwise be required to obtain a new master deployment plan permit.

E.    Other Permits Required. In addition to any permit that may be required under this Chapter, the applicant must obtain all other required prior permits or other approvals from other City departments, or State or Federal agencies. Any permit granted under this Chapter is subject to the conditions and/or requirements of other required prior permits or other approvals from other City departments, State or Federal agencies.

F.    Eligible Applicants. Only applicants who have been granted the right to enter the public right-of-way pursuant to State or Federal law, or who have entered into a franchise agreement with the City permitting them to use the public right-of-way, shall be eligible for a permit to install or modify a communication facility or a communication collocation facility in the public right-of-way.

G.    Speculative Equipment Prohibited. The City finds that the practice of “pre-approving” wireless equipment or other improvements that the applicant does not presently intend to install but may wish to install at some undetermined future time does not serve the public’s best interest. The City shall not approve any equipment or other improvements in connection with a communication facility permit when the applicant does not actually and presently intend to install such equipment or construct such improvements. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.050 Application for Communication Facility Permit
A.    Application.

1.    In addition to the information required of an applicant for an encroachment permit or any other permit required by this Code, each applicant requesting approval of the installation or modification of a communication facility in the public right-of-way shall fully and completely submit to the City a written application on a form prepared by the Director.

2.    No applicant seeking to install wireless antennas shall seek an encroachment permit for fiber or coaxial cable only. Applicants shall simultaneously request fiber installation or other cable installation when seeking to install antennas in the right-of-way.

B.    Application Contents – All Permits. The Director shall develop an application form and make it available to applicants upon request. The supplemental application form for any new communication facility installation in the public right-of-way (regardless of whether it is ministerial or discretionary) shall require the following information, in addition to any information required by subsection C of this Section (for discretionary permits) and all other information determined necessary by the Director:

1.    Contact Information. The name, address, email address, and telephone number of the applicant, owner and the operator of the proposed facility, and the date the application was received by the City.

2.    Written Authorization. If the facility will be located on or in the property of someone other than the owner of the facility (such as a street light pole, utility pole, utility cabinet, vault, or cable conduit), the applicant shall provide a duly executed written authorization from the property owner(s) authorizing the placement of the facility on or in the property owner’s property.

3.    Engineering Plans. Detailed engineering plans of the proposed facility and related report prepared by a professional engineer registered in the State documenting the following:

a.    Height, diameter and design of the facility, including technical engineering specifications, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design, together with evidence that demonstrates that the proposed facility has been designed to be the least visible equipment within the particular technology the carrier chooses to deploy. A layout plan, section and elevation of the tower structure shall be included.

b.    A photograph and model name and number of each piece of equipment included.

c.    Power output and operating frequency for the proposed antenna.

d.    Total anticipated capacity of the structure, indicating the number and types of antennas and power and frequency ranges which can be accommodated.

e.    Sufficient evidence of the structural integrity of the pole or other supporting structure as required by the City.

4.    Justification for Facility. A justification study which includes the rationale for selecting the proposed use; if applicable, a detailed explanation of the coverage gap that the proposed use would serve; and how the proposed use is the least intrusive means for the applicant to provide wireless service. Said study shall include all existing structures and/or alternative sites evaluated for potential installation of the proposed facility and why said alternatives are not a viable option.

5.    Environmental. A completed environmental assessment application.

6.    Request for Exception. If the applicant requests an exception to the requirements of this Chapter (in accordance with PMC 17.95.05.190, Exceptions), the applicant shall provide all information and studies necessary for the City to evaluate that request.

7.    Proof of RF Emission Compliance. For a facility that is not categorically excluded under the FCC regulations for RF emissions, the applicant shall submit an RF exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer acceptable to the City that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any facilities that contribute to the cumulative exposure in the subject area, will comply with applicable Federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include the actual frequency and power levels (in watts effective radio power “ERP”) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits that show the location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that term is defined by the FCC) and also the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the controlled/occupational limit (as that term is defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified for every transmitting antenna at the project site.

8.    FAA Documents. Copies of any documents that the applicant is required to file pursuant to Federal Aviation Administration regulations for the facility.

9.    Fee. An application fee, and a deposit for a consultant’s review as set forth in subsection F of this Section in an amount set by resolution by the City Council and in accordance with applicable law (e.g., California Government Code Section 50030).

10.    RF Exposure Checklist. Completion of the radio frequency (RF) emissions exposure guidelines checklist contained in Appendix A to the Federal Communications Commission’s (FCC) “Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety,” as it may be amended from time to time, to determine whether the facility will be “categorically excluded” as that term is used by the FCC.

11.    Site Plans. Site plan(s) to scale, specifying and depicting the exact proposed location of the pole, pole diameter, antennas, accessory equipment, access or utility easements, landscaped areas, existing utilities, adjacent land uses, and showing compliance with PMC 17.95.05.080, Requirements for Facilities within the Public Right-of-Way.

12.    Traffic Control. If an encroachment permit is required, then the encroachment permit procedures shall control whether (or not) a traffic control plan is required. If no encroachment permit is required, then a traffic control plan is required if either (a) the proposed installation is on any street in a nonresidential zone or (b) the applicant seeks to use large equipment (e.g., crane) and the Director decides to require a traffic control plan.

13.    Other Information. Any other information and/or studies determined necessary by the Director may be required.

C.    Additional Application Contents – Discretionary Permits. In addition to providing all materials required in subsection B of this Section, applications for discretionary permits shall also provide the following:

1.    Owner Authorization. If the applicant is an agent, the applicant shall provide a duly executed letter of authorization from the owner of the facility. If the owner will not directly provide wireless telecommunications services, the applicant shall provide a duly executed letter of authorization from the person(s) or entity(ies) that will provide those services.

2.    Written Description. A full written description of the proposed facility and its purpose.

3.    Mock-Up and Sign. Proof that a temporary mock-up of the facility and sign have been installed at the proposed location for a period of at least thirty (30) calendar days which facility roughly replicates for the public the proposed height and bulk of the proposed structure. If the Director finds the applicant’s cost of complying with this requirement would greatly outweigh the value of such compliance, then the Director may waive the requirement that the applicant install the mock-up (but not the installation of the sign, which still requires an encroachment permit).

a.    Applicant shall obtain an encroachment permit before installing a temporary mock-up and a sign, and must remove the temporary mock-up and sign within five (5) calendar days of receiving a written notice to remove from the Director.

b.    The mock-up and sign shall demonstrate the height and mass of the facility, including all interconnecting cables. The applicant shall not be entitled to install the facility it intends to install permanently. The mock-up may consist of story poles or the like.

c.    The mock-up shall be accompanied by a sign that displays photo simulations depicting before and after images, including any accessory equipment cabinet, and the telephone number of the Public Works Department.

d.    The applicant shall be required to follow any other City practices or processes relevant to the installation of a mock-up and sign as may be provided in a publicly accessible form or document.

e.    After installation of the mock-up, the applicant shall certify that the mock-up accurately represents the height and width of the proposed installation and has been installed consistent with this Code.

4.    Elevations. Scaled elevation plans of proposed poles, antennas, accessory equipment, and related landscaping and screening.

5.    Noise Study. A noise study prepared by a qualified acoustic engineer documenting that the level of noise to be emitted by the proposed communication facility will comply with this Code including PMC 17.95.05.080(A)(16)(b). The Director may waive the requirement for a noise study if the Director finds the cost of creating the study would greatly outweigh the value of receipt of such study.

6.    Propagation Maps. A written description identifying the geographic service area for the subject installation including geographic and propagation maps, that identifies the location of the proposed facility in relation to all existing and planned facilities maintained within the City by each of the applicant, operator, and owner, if different entities, as well as the estimated number of potentially affected uses in the geographic service area. Regardless of whether a master deployment plan permit is sought, the applicant shall depict all locations anticipated for new construction and/or modifications to existing facilities, including collocation, within two (2) years of submittal of the application. Longer range conceptual plans for a period of five (5) years shall also be provided, if available.

a.    In the event the applicant seeks to install a communication facility to address service coverage concerns, full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent sites without the proposed site, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent sites with the proposed site, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed site without all adjacent sites.

b.    If applicant seeks to address service capacity concerns, a written explanation identifying the existing facilities with service capacity issues together with competent evidence to demonstrate the inability of those facilities to meet capacity demands.

7.    CPCN. Certification that applicant is a telephone corporation or a statement providing the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way. If the applicant has a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) issued by the California Public Utilities Commission, it shall provide a copy of its CPCN.

8.    Visual Depiction. Accurate visual impact analysis showing the maximum silhouette, color and finish palette and proposed screening for the facility, including scaled photo simulations from at least three (3) different angles.

9.    Landscape Plan. A scaled conceptual landscape plan showing existing trees and vegetation and all proposed landscaping, concealment, screening and proposed irrigation with a discussion of how the chosen material at maturity will screen the site.

D.    Application Contents – Modification of Existing Facility. The content of the application form for a modification to an existing facility shall be determined by the Director, and shall include but not be limited to the requirements listed in subsections B and C of this Section unless prohibited by State or Federal law.

E.    Effect of State or Federal Law Change. If a subsequent State or Federal law prohibits the collection of any information required by subsection B or C of this Section, the Director is authorized to omit, modify or add to that request from the City’s application form with the written approval of the City Attorney, which approval shall be a public record.

F.    Independent Expert. The Director is authorized to retain on behalf of the City an independent, qualified consultant to review any application for a permit for a communication facility. The review is intended to be a review of technical aspects of the proposed communication facility and shall address any or all of the following:

1.    Compliance with applicable radio frequency emission standards;

2.    Whether any requested exception is necessary to close a significant gap in coverage and is the least intrusive means of doing so;

3.    The accuracy and completeness of submissions;

4.    Technical demonstration of the unavailability of alternative sites or configurations and/or coverage analysis;

5.    The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;

6.    The validity of conclusions reached or claims made by applicant;

7.    The viability of alternative sites and alternative designs; and

8.    Any other specific technical issues identified by the consultant or designated by the City.

The cost of this review shall be paid by the applicant through a deposit pursuant to an adopted fee schedule resolution. No permit shall be issued to any applicant which has not fully reimbursed the City for the consultant’s cost. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.060 Review Procedure
A.    Pre-submittal Conference. Prior to application submittal, the City strongly encourages all applicants to schedule and attend a pre-submittal conference with Public Works Department staff to receive informal feedback on the proposed location, design and application materials. The pre-submittal conference is intended to identify potential concerns and streamline the formal application review process after submittal. Public Works Department staff will endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within approximately five (5) business days after receipt of a written request.

B.    Application Submittal Appointment. All applications must be submitted to the City at a pre-scheduled appointment. Applicants may submit one (1) application per appointment but may schedule successive appointments for multiple applications whenever feasible as determined by the City. City staff will endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within five (5) business days after receipt of a written request.

C.    Notice and Decisions. The provisions in this Section describe the procedures for approval and any required notice and public hearings for an application.

1.    When Hearings Required.

a.    Discretionary Decisions. Any permit application under this Chapter subject to Planning Commission or the Director’s discretionary approval requires notice and a public hearing in accordance with PMC 17.20.020, Notification Procedures.

b.    Ministerial Decisions. The Director may approve or conditionally approve an application for a ministerial application without a public hearing and without issuing prior notice of the decision. For denials see subsection (C)(3) of this Section.

2.    Notice of Decisions.

a.    Planning Commission Decision of Approval. The Planning Commission may approve, or conditionally approve, an application only after the commission makes the findings required in PMC 17.95.05.090, Findings for Discretionary Permits.

b.    Administrative Approvals. The Director may approve, or conditionally approve, an application only after it makes the findings required in PMC 17.95.05.090, Findings for Discretionary Permits. Within five (5) days after the Director approves an application under this Chapter, the Director is directed to place notice of the decision in the U.S. mail, consistent with PMC 17.20.090(C), Effective Date of Land Use Decisions.

3.    Denials.

a.    All final decisions made pursuant to this Chapter shall be in writing and based on substantial evidence in the written administrative record. The written decision shall include the reasons for the decision.

b.    Administrative Denials. If the Director determines that any application submitted for a ministerial or discretionary administrative wireless telecommunications facilities permit does not meet code requirements, the Director shall notify the applicant of said finding in writing, and the application shall be denied effective on the date of issuance of said notice, unless, within ten (10) days of the issuance of the written notice, the applicant requests the application be converted to an application for a major wireless facilities permit application. The Planning Commission shall thereafter hear the application only after a complete application for the major wireless permit has been submitted.

4.    Notice of Shot Clock Expiration.

a.    Notification by Applicant. The City acknowledges there are Federal and State shot clocks which may be applicable to a proposed communication facility. That is, Federal and State law provides time periods in which the City must approve or deny a proposed communication facility. As such, the applicant is required to provide the City written notice of the expiration of any shot clock, which the applicant shall ensure is received by the City (e.g., overnight mail) no later than twenty (20) days prior to the expiration, and until the applicant has provided such notice, the City shall be entitled to conclude that the applicant has consented to the delay, and that the delay is reasonable.

b.    Tolling Agreements. The Director is authorized to enter into an agreement to toll the relevant shot clock requirements, if the form of the agreement meets the approval of the City Attorney.

D.    Appeals. Any aggrieved person or entity may appeal a decision by the Director or the Planning Commission as provided in accordance with the provisions in PMC 17.20.010 et seq. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.070 Reserved
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.080 Requirements for Facilities within the Public Right-of-Way
A.    Design and Development Standards. All wireless telecommunications facilities that are located within the public right-of-way shall be designed and maintained as to minimize visual, noise and other impacts on the surrounding community and shall be planned, designed, located, and erected in accordance with the following:

1.    General Guidelines.

a.    The applicant shall employ screening, undergrounding and camouflage design techniques in the design and placement of wireless telecommunications facilities to ensure that the facility is as visually screened as feasible, to prevent the facility from dominating the surroundings.

b.    Screening shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with surrounding structures using appropriate techniques to camouflage, disguise, and/or blend into the environment, including landscaping, color, and other techniques to minimize the facility’s visual impact as well as be compatible with the architectural character of the surrounding buildings or structures in terms of color, size, proportion, style, and quality.

c.    To the extent feasible, facilities shall be located such that views from a residential structure are not significantly impaired.

2.    Reserved.

3.    Traffic Safety. All facilities shall be designed and located in such a manner to avoid adverse impacts on traffic safety. Among other things, when determining traffic safety impacts, the City will consider the views of the Manual for Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) and whether the proposed installation location is high enough and far enough away from the street to minimize the risk of high profile vehicles colliding with the installation.

4.    Blending Methods. All facilities shall have subdued colors and nonreflective materials that blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area and structures.

5.    Equipment. The applicant shall use the least visible equipment possible. Antenna elements shall be flush-mounted, to the extent feasible. All antenna mounts shall be designed so as not to preclude possible future collocation by the same or other operators or carriers. Unless otherwise provided in this Section, antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as possible.

6.    Poles.

a.    Facilities shall be located consistent with PMC 17.95.05.200, Location Restrictions, unless an exception pursuant to PMC 17.95.05.190, Exceptions, is granted.

b.    Only pole-mounted antennas shall be permitted in the right-of-way. All other telecommunications towers are prohibited. (For exceptions see subsection (A)(6)(h) of this Section and PMC 17.95.05.190, Exceptions, and 17.95.05.220, State or Federal Law – Ministerial Requirements.)

c.    Utility Poles. The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches above the height of an existing utility pole, nor shall any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole be less than twenty (20) feet above any drivable road surface. All installations on utility poles shall fully comply with the California Public Utilities Commission general orders, including, but not limited to, General Order 95, as may be revised or superseded.

d.    Light Poles. The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed four (4) feet above the existing height of a light pole. Any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole shall be on the pole, and not on any mast arm.

e.    Replacement Poles. If an applicant proposes to replace a pole in order to accommodate a proposed facility, the pole shall be designed to resemble the appearance and dimensions of existing poles near the proposed location, including size, height, color, materials and style, to the maximum extent feasible.

f.    Pole-mounted equipment, exclusive of antennas, shall be restricted to the smallest possible dimensions and shall not exceed six (6) cubic feet in dimension.

g.    Reserved.

h.    An exception shall be required to place a new pole in the public right-of-way. If an exception is granted for placement of new poles in the right-of-way:

i.    Appearance. Such new poles shall be designed to resemble existing poles in the right-of-way near that location, including size, height, color, materials and style, with the exception of any existing pole designs that are scheduled to be removed and not replaced.

ii.    Ninety (90) feet. Such new poles that are not replacement poles shall be located at least ninety (90) feet from any existing pole to the extent feasible.

iii.    Analysis. A new pole justification analysis shall be submitted to demonstrate why existing infrastructure cannot be utilized and demonstrating the new pole is the least intrusive means possible including a demonstration that the new pole is designed to be the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed facility.

i.    All cables, including, but not limited to, electrical and utility cables, shall be run within the interior of the pole and shall be camouflaged or hidden to the fullest extent feasible. For all wooden poles wherein interior installation is infeasible, conduit and cables attached to the exterior of poles shall be mounted flush thereto and painted to match the pole.

7.    Space. Each facility shall be designed to occupy the least amount of space in the right-of-way that is technically feasible.

8.    Wind Loads. Each facility shall be properly engineered to withstand wind loads as required by this Code or any duly adopted or incorporated code. An evaluation of high wind load capacity shall include the impact of modification of an existing facility.

9.    Obstructions. Each component part of a facility shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, incommode the public’s use of the right-of-way, or safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists so as not to obstruct the intersection sight distance.

10.    Public Facilities. A facility shall not be located within any portion of the public right-of-way interfering with access to a fire hydrant, fire station, fire escape, water valve, underground vault, valve housing structure, or any other public health or safety facility.

11.    Screening. All ground-mounted facility, pole-mounted equipment, or walls, fences, landscaping or other screening methods shall be installed at least eighteen (18) inches from the curb and gutter flow line.

12.    Accessory Equipment. Not including the electric meter, all accessory equipment shall be located underground, except as provided below:

a.    Unless City staff determines that there is no room in the public right-of-way for undergrounding, or that undergrounding is not feasible, an exception shall be required to place accessory equipment above-ground and concealed with natural or manmade features to the maximum extent possible. (But see PMC 17.95.05.040(C), authorizing certain above-ground installations on existing poles.)

b.    When above-ground is the only feasible location for a particular type of accessory equipment and will be ground-mounted, such accessory equipment shall be enclosed within a structure, and shall not exceed a height of five (5) feet and a total footprint of fifteen (15) square feet, and shall be fully screened and/or camouflaged, including the use of landscaping, architectural treatment, or acceptable alternate screening. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened and/or camouflaged. Also, while pole-mounted equipment is generally the least favored installation, should pole-mounted equipment be sought, it shall be installed as required in this Chapter.

c.    In locations where homes are only along one (1) side of a street, above-ground accessory equipment shall not be installed directly in front of a residence. Such above-ground accessory equipment shall be installed along the side of the street with no homes facing it.

13.    Landscaping. Where appropriate, each facility shall be installed so as to maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage and shrubs. Additional landscaping shall be planted, irrigated and maintained by applicant where such landscaping is deemed necessary by the City to provide screening or to conceal the facility.

14.    Signage. No facility shall bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning or other signage required by law or permitted by the City.

15.    Lighting.

a.    No facility may be illuminated unless specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency. Beacon lights are not permitted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency.

b.    Legally required lightning arresters and beacons shall be included when calculating the height of facilities such as towers, lattice towers and monopoles.

c.    Any required lighting shall be shielded to eliminate, to the maximum extent possible, impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.

d.    Unless otherwise required under FAA or FCC regulations, applicants may install only timed or motion-sensitive light controllers and lights, and must install such lights so as to avoid illumination impacts to adjacent properties to the maximum extent feasible. The City may, in its discretion, exempt an applicant from the foregoing requirement when the applicant demonstrates a substantial public safety need.

e.    The applicant shall submit a lighting study which shall be prepared by a qualified lighting professional to evaluate potential impacts to adjacent properties. Should no lighting be proposed, no lighting study shall be required.

f.    Nothing in this subsection (A)(15) is intended to prevent the installation of wireless facilities camouflaged on or within light poles if the light poles meet the City’s design requirements for its own light poles.

16.    Noise.

a.    Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.

b.    At no time shall equipment noise from any facility exceed an exterior noise level of fifty-five (55) dBA three (3) feet from the source of the noise if the facility is located in the public right-of-way adjacent to a business, commercial, manufacturing, utility or school zone; provided, however, that for any such facility located within five hundred (500) feet of any property zoned residential or improved with a residential use, such equipment noise shall not exceed forty-five (45) dBA three (3) feet from the source of the noise.

17.    Security. Each facility shall be designed to be resistant to, and minimize opportunities for, unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions that would result in hazardous situations, visual blight or attractive nuisances. The Director may require the provision of warning signs, fencing, anti-climbing devices, or other techniques to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism when, because of their location and/or accessibility, a facility has the potential to become an attractive nuisance. Additionally, no lethal devices or elements shall be installed as a security device.

18.    Modification. Consistent with current State and Federal laws and if permissible under the same, at the time of modification of a communication facility, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be replaced with equipment that reduces visual, noise and other impacts, including, but not limited to, undergrounding the equipment and replacing larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually intrusive facilities.

19.    The installation and construction approved by a communication facility permit shall begin within one (1) year after its approval or it will expire without further action by the City.

B.    Conditions of Approval. In addition to compliance with the design and development standards outlined in this Section, all facilities shall be subject to the following conditions of approval (approval may be by operation of law), as well as any modification of these conditions or additional conditions of approval deemed necessary by the approving party:

1.    As-Built Drawings. The permittee shall submit an as-built drawing within ninety (90) days after installation of the facility. As-builts shall be in an electronic format acceptable to the City which can be linked to the City’s GIS.

2.    Contact Information. The permittee shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact and site information on a form to be supplied by the City. The permittee shall notify the City of any changes to the information submitted within thirty (30) days of any change, including change of the name or legal status of the owner or operator. This information shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

a.    Identity, including the name, address and twenty-four (24) hour local or toll free contact phone number of the permittee, the owner, the operator, and the agent or person responsible for the maintenance of the facility.

b.    The legal status of the owner of the communication facility.

3.    Assignment. The permittee shall notify the City in writing at least ninety (90) days prior to any transfer or assignment of the permit. The written notice required in this Section must include: (a) the transferee’s legal name; (b) the transferee’s full contact information, including a primary contact person, mailing address, telephone number and email address; and (c) a statement signed by the transferee that the transferee shall accept all permit terms and conditions. The Director may require the transferor and/or the transferee to submit any materials or documentation necessary to determine that the proposed transfer complies with the existing permit and all its conditions of approval, if any. Such materials or documentation may include, but shall not be limited to: Federal, State and/or local approvals, licenses, certificates or franchise agreements; statements; photographs; site plans and/or as-built drawings; and/or an analysis by a qualified radio frequency engineer demonstrating compliance with all applicable regulations and standards of the Federal Communications Commission. Noncompliance with the permit and all its conditions of approval, if any, or failure to submit the materials required by the Director shall be a cause for the City to revoke the applicable permits pursuant to and following the procedure set on in PMC 17.95.05.180, Removal and Restoration – Permit Expiration, Revocation or Abandonment.

4.    Signs. At all times, all required notices and/or signs shall be posted on the site as required by the Federal Communications Commission, California Public Utilities Commission, any applicable licenses or laws, and as approved by the City. The location and dimensions of a sign bearing the emergency contact name and telephone number shall be posted pursuant to the approved plans.

5.    Security. Permittee shall pay for and provide a performance bond or other form of security approved by the City Attorney’s office, which shall be in effect until the facilities are fully and completely removed and the site reasonably returned to its original condition, to cover permittee’s obligations under these conditions of approval and this Code. The security instrument coverage shall include, but not be limited to, removal of the facility. (The amount of the security instrument shall be calculated by the applicant in its submittal documents in an amount rationally related to the obligations covered by the bond and shall be specified in the conditions of approval.) Before issuance of any building permit, permittee must submit said security instrument.

6.    Noise Complaints. If a nearby property owner or occupant registers a noise complaint and City forwards the same to the permittee (personally identifiable information may be redacted), the permittee shall have ten (10) business days to file a written response regarding the complaint which includes any applicable remedial measures. If the City determines the complaint is valid and the applicant has not taken any steps to minimize the noise, the City may hire a consultant to study, examine and evaluate the noise complaint and the permittee shall pay the fee for the consultant if the site is found in violation of this Chapter. The matter shall be reviewed by the Director. If the Director determines sound proofing or other sound attenuation measures should be required to bring the project into compliance with the Code, the Director may impose conditions on the project to achieve said objective.

7.    Permit Expiration. A condition setting forth the permit expiration date in accordance with PMC 17.95.05.160, Permit Expiration, shall be included in the conditions of approval.

8.    Additional Conditions. The communication facility shall be subject to such conditions, changes or limitations as are from time to time deemed necessary by the Director for the purpose of: (a) protecting the public health, safety, and welfare; (b) preventing interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and/or (c) preventing damage to the public right-of-way or any adjacent property. The City may modify the permit to reflect such conditions, changes or limitations by following the same notice and public hearing procedures as are applicable to the underlying permit for similarly located facilities, except the permittee shall be given notice by personal service or by registered or certified mail at the last address provided to the City by the permittee.

9.    No Permit Transfer. The permittee shall not transfer the permit to any person prior to the completion of the construction of the facility covered by the permit, unless and until the transferee of the permit has submitted the security instrument required by subsection (B)(5) of this Section (Security).

10.    Property Rights. The permittee shall not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change, or interfere with any existing structure, improvement or property without the prior consent of the owner of that structure, improvement or property. No structure, improvement or property owned by the City shall be moved to accommodate a communication facility unless the City determines that such movement will not adversely affect the City or any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all costs and expenses related to the relocation of the City’s structure, improvement or property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to an encroachment permit issued for any facility within the public right-of-way, the permittee shall provide the City with documentation establishing to the City’s satisfaction that the permittee has the legal right to use or interfere with any other structure, improvement or property within the public right-of-way to be affected by applicant’s facilities.

11.    Liability. The permittee shall assume full liability for damage or injury caused to any property or person by the facility.

12.    Repair Obligations. The permittee shall repair, at its sole cost and expense, any damage including, but not limited to, subsidence, cracking, erosion, collapse, weakening, or loss of lateral support to City streets, sidewalks, walks, curbs, gutters, trees, parkways, street lights, traffic signals, improvements of any kind or nature, or utility lines and systems, underground utility line and systems, or sewer systems and sewer lines that result from any activities performed in connection with the installation, use, and/or maintenance of a communication facility in the public right-of-way. The permittee shall, at a minimum, restore such areas, structures and systems to the condition in which they existed prior to the installation or maintenance that necessitated the repairs. Such time period for correction shall be based on the facts and circumstances, danger to the community and severity of the disrepair. Should the permittee not make said correction within the time period allotted the City Engineer shall cause such repair to be completed at permittee’s sole cost and expense.

13.    Drip Line. No facility shall be permitted to be installed in the drip line of any tree in the right-of-way.

14.    Insurance. The permittee shall obtain, pay for and maintain, in full force and effect until the facility approved by the permit is removed in its entirety from the public right-of-way, an insurance policy or policies of public liability insurance, with minimum limits of two million dollars ($2,000,000) for each occurrence and five million dollars ($5,000,000) in the aggregate, that fully protects the City from claims and suits for bodily injury and property damage. The insurance must name the City and its elected and appointed Council members, boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers as additional named insureds, be issued by an insurer admitted in the State of California with a rating of at least a A:VII in the latest edition of A.M. Best’s Insurance Guide, and include an endorsement providing that the policies cannot be canceled or reduced except with thirty (30) days’ prior written notice to the City, except for cancellation due to nonpayment of premium. The insurance provided by permittee shall be primary to any coverage available to the City, and any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the City and its elected and appointed Council members, boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers shall be excess of permittee’s insurance and shall not contribute with it. The policies of insurance required by the permit shall include provisions for waiver of subrogation. In accepting the benefits of the permit, permittee hereby waives all rights of subrogation against the City and its elected and appointed Council members, boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers. The insurance must afford coverage for the permittee’s and the wireless provider’s use, operation and activity, vehicles, equipment, facility, representatives, agents and employees, as determined by the City’s Risk Manager. Before issuance of any building permit for the facility, the permittee shall furnish the City Risk Manager certificates of insurance and endorsements, in the form satisfactory to the City Attorney or the Risk Manager, evidencing the coverage required by the City.

15.    Indemnification. To the fullest extent permitted by law, permittee and any contractors or subcontractors working on its behalf agree to indemnify the City of Palmdale, its officers, employees, agents and elected and appointed boards (hereinafter “City indemnitees”) for any loss, claim, demand, cause of action, cost, expense, damage, obligation or liability which arises out of or is in any way connected with the installation, use, and maintenance of the communication facility, including any acts or omissions, willful misconduct or negligent conduct, whether active or passive, on the part of permittee, its contractors or subcontractors, and regardless of any acts, omissions or negligence (whether active or passive) of any person or entity indemnified hereunder. At their own expense, permittee and, as applicable, any contractors or subcontractors working on its behalf, shall defend any suit, claim or action against the City indemnitees founded upon such loss, claim, demand, cause of action, cost, expense, damage, obligation or liability. Permittee shall ensure that the contract of any contractor or subcontractor working under the permit contain an indemnity agreement, requiring the contractor or subcontractor to indemnify and defend the City indemnitees pursuant to the terms set forth above. Permittee shall indemnify the City indemnitees, and save them harmless from any and all loss, damage, costs, expenses and attorney’s fees suffered or incurred on account of any breach of the aforesaid obligations and covenants, and any other provision or covenant of this Section.

16.    Hold Harmless. Additionally, to the fullest extent permitted by law, the permittee, and every permittee and person in a shared permit, jointly and severally, shall defend, indemnify, protect and hold the City and its elected and appointed Council members, boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers harmless from and against all claims, suits, demands, actions, losses, liabilities, judgments, settlements, costs (including, but not limited to, attorney’s fees, interest and expert witness fees), or damages claimed by third parties against the City for any injury claim, and for property damage sustained by any person, arising out of, resulting from, or in any way related to the communication facility, or to any work done by or use of the public right-of-way by the permittee, owner or operator of the communication facility, or their agents, excepting only liability arising out of the sole negligence or willful misconduct of the City and its elected and appointed Council members, boards, commissions, officers, officials, agents, consultants, employees and volunteers.

17.    Cabinet Removal. Should the utility company servicing the facility with electrical service not require the use of an above-ground meter cabinet, the permittee shall at its sole cost and expense remove the meter cabinet and any related foundation within ninety (90) days of such service being offered and reasonably restore the area to its prior condition. An extension may be granted if circumstances arise outside of the control of the permittee.

18.    Relocation. The permittee shall modify, remove, or relocate its facility, or portion thereof, without cost or expense to City, if and when made necessary by (a) any public improvement project, including, but not limited to, the construction, maintenance, or operation of any underground or above-ground facilities including but not limited to sewers, storm drains, conduits, gas, water, electric or other utility systems, or pipes owned by City or any other public agency, (b) any abandonment of any street, sidewalk or other public facility, (c) any change of grade, alignment or width of any street, sidewalk or other public facility, or (d) a determination by the Director that the communication facility has become incompatible with public health, safety or welfare or the public’s use of the public right-of-way. Such modification, removal, or relocation of the facility shall be completed within ninety (90) days of notification by City unless exigencies dictate a shorter period for removal or relocation. Modification or relocation of the facility shall require submittal, review and approval of a modified permit pursuant to the Code including applicable notice and hearing procedures. The permittee shall be entitled, on permittee’s election, to either a pro rata refund of fees paid for the original permit or to a new permit, without additional fee, at a location as close to the original location as the standards set forth in the Code allow. If the facility is not modified, removed, or relocated within said period of time, City may cause the same to be done at the sole cost and expense of permittee. Further, due to exigent circumstances including those of immediate or imminent threat to the public’s health and safety, the City may modify, remove, or relocate wireless telecommunications facilities without prior notice to permittee provided permittee is notified within a reasonable period thereafter.

19.    Written Approval of Conditions. Permittee shall agree in writing that the permittee is aware of, and agrees to abide by, all conditions of approval imposed by the communication facility permit within thirty (30) days of permit issuance. The permit shall be void and of no force or effect unless such written consent is received by the City within said thirty (30) day period.

20.    Right-of-Way Agreement. Prior to the issuance of any encroachment permit, permittee may be required to enter into a right-of-way agreement with the City in accordance with the City’s past practice.

21.    “Permittee” shall include the applicant and all successors in interest to this permit. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.090 Findings for Discretionary Permits
No discretionary permit shall be granted for a communication facility unless the approving party makes all of the following findings:

A.    The proposed facility has been designed and located in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, including this Chapter.

B.    Either (1) the design and location for the proposed installation is least intrusive on the purposes of this Chapter; or (2) there is no feasible alternative design or location that would be less intrusive on the purposes of this Chapter. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.100 Reserved
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.110 Nonexclusive Grant
No permit or approval granted under this Chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public right-of-way of the City for any purpose whatsoever. Further, no approval shall be construed as any warranty of title. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.120 Emergency Deployment
A COW shall be permitted for the duration of an emergency declared by the City or at the discretion of the Director. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.130 Operation and Maintenance Standards
All wireless telecommunications facilities must comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards:

A.    Repairs. Unless otherwise provided herein, all necessary repairs and restoration shall be completed by the permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent within forty-eight (48) hours:

1.    After discovery of the need by the permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent; or

2.    After permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent receives notification from the City.

B.    Contact Information. Each permittee of a communication facility shall provide the Director with the name, address and twenty-four (24) hour local or toll free contact phone number of the permittee, the owner, the operator and the agent responsible for the maintenance of the facility (“contact information”). Contact information shall be updated within seven (7) days of any change.

C.    Good Condition. All facilities, including, but not limited to, telecommunication towers, poles, accessory equipment, lighting, fences, walls, shields, cabinets, artificial foliage or camouflage, and the facility site shall be maintained in good condition, including ensuring the facilities are reasonably free of:

1.    General dirt and grease;

2.    Chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint;

3.    Rust and corrosion;

4.    Cracks, dents, and discoloration;

5.    Missing, discolored or damaged artificial foliage or other camouflage;

6.    Graffiti, bills, stickers, advertisements, litter and debris;

7.    Broken and misshapen structural parts; and

8.    Any damage from any cause.

D.    Landscaping. All trees, foliage or other landscaping elements approved as part of the facility shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and the permittee, owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping. No amendment to any approved landscaping plan may be made until it is submitted to and approved by the Director.

E.    Replacement. The permittee shall replace its facilities, after obtaining all required permits, if maintenance or repair is not sufficient to return the facility to the condition it was in at the time of installation.

F.    Routine Inspections. Each facility shall be operated and maintained to comply with all conditions of approval. Each owner or operator of a facility shall routinely inspect each site to ensure compliance with the same and the standards set forth in this Chapter. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.140 Reserved
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.150 No Dangerous Condition or Obstructions Allowed
No person shall install, use or maintain any facility which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers or is reasonably likely to endanger the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such facility unreasonably interferes with or unreasonably impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, permitted sidewalk dining, permitted street furniture or other objects permitted at or near said location. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.160 Permit Expiration
A.    Ten (10) Year Expiration. Unless Government Code Section 65964, as it may be amended, authorizes the City to issue a permit with a shorter term, a permit for any communication facility shall be valid for a period of ten (10) years, unless pursuant to another provision of this Code it lapses sooner or is revoked. At the end of ten (10) years from the date of issuance, such permit shall automatically expire.

B.    Renewal. A permittee may apply for a new permit within one hundred eighty (180) days prior to expiration. Said application and proposal shall comply with the City’s current code requirements for wireless telecommunications facilities. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.170 Cessation of Use or Abandonment
A.    Abandonment. A communication facility is considered abandoned and shall be promptly removed as provided herein if it ceases to provide wireless telecommunications services for ninety (90) or more consecutive days unless the permittee has obtained prior written approval from the Director which shall not be unreasonably denied. If there are two (2) or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the facility.

B.    Notice of Abandonment. The operator of a facility shall notify the City in writing of its intent to abandon or cease use of a permitted site or a nonconforming site (including unpermitted sites) within ten (10) days of ceasing or abandoning use. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the operator of the facility shall provide written notice to the Director of any discontinuation of operations of thirty (30) days or more.

C.    Remedies. Failure to inform the Director of cessation or discontinuation of operations of any existing facility as required by this Section shall constitute a violation of any approvals and be grounds for:

1.    Litigation;

2.    Revocation or modification of the permit;

3.    Acting on any bond or other assurance required by this Chapter or conditions of approval of the permit;

4.    Removal of the facilities by the City in accordance with the procedures established under this Code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; and/or

5.    Any other remedies permitted under this Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.180 Removal and Restoration – Permit Expiration, Revocation or Abandonment
A.    Removal at Permit Termination. Upon the expiration date of the permit, including any extensions, earlier termination or revocation of the permit or abandonment of the facility, the permittee, owner or operator shall remove its communication facility and restore the site to its natural condition except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the City. Removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the City. The facility shall be removed from the property, at no cost or expense to the City.

B.    Failure to Remove. Failure of the permittee, owner or operator to promptly remove its facility and restore the property within ninety (90) days after expiration, earlier termination or revocation of the permit, or abandonment of the facility, shall be a violation of this Code. Upon a showing of good cause, an extension may be granted by the Director where circumstances are beyond the control of the permittee after expiration. Further failure to abide by the timeline provided in this Section shall be grounds for:

1.    Prosecution;

2.    Acting on any security instrument required by this Chapter or conditions of approval of permit;

3.    Removal of the facilities by the City in accordance with the procedures established under this Code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; and/or

4.    Any other remedies permitted under this Code.

C.    Summary Removal. If the Director or City Engineer determines that the condition or placement of a communication facility located in the public right-of-way constitutes a dangerous condition, obstruction of the public right-of-way, or an imminent threat to public safety, or determines other exigent circumstances require immediate corrective action (collectively, “exigent circumstances”), the Director or City Engineer may cause the facility to be removed summarily and immediately without advance notice or a hearing. Written notice of the removal shall include the basis for the removal and shall be served upon the permittee and person who owns the facility within five (5) business days of removal and all property removed shall be preserved for the owner’s pick-up as feasible. If the owner cannot be identified following reasonable effort or if the owner fails to pick up the property within sixty (60) days, the facility shall be treated as abandoned property.

D.    Removal of Facilities by City. If the City removes a facility in accordance with nuisance abatement procedures or summary removal, any such removal shall be without any liability to the City for any damage to such facility that may result from reasonable efforts of removal. In addition to the procedures for recovering costs of nuisance abatement, the City may collect such costs from the performance bond posted and to the extent such costs exceed the amount of the performance bond, collect those excess costs in accordance with this Code. Unless otherwise provided herein, the City has no obligation to store such facility. Neither the permittee, owner nor operator shall have any claim if the City destroys any such facility not timely removed by the permittee, owner or operator after notice, or removed by the City due to exigent circumstances. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.190 Exceptions
A.    Federal Law – Planning Commission Exception. The City Council recognizes that Federal law prohibits a permit denial when it would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services and the applicant proposes the least intrusive means to provide such services. The City Council finds that, due to wide variation among wireless facilities, technical service objectives and changed circumstances over time, a limited exemption for proposals in which strict compliance with this Chapter would effectively prohibit personal wireless services serves the public interest. The City Council further finds that circumstances in which an effective prohibition may occur are extremely difficult to discern, and that specified findings to guide the analysis promotes clarity and the City’s legitimate interest in well-planned wireless facilities deployment. Therefore, if any applicant demonstrates that strict compliance with any provision in this Chapter, as applied to a specific proposed personal wireless services facility, would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, the Planning Commission may grant a limited, one (1) time exemption from strict compliance with the requirements of this Code subject to the provisions in this Section.

B.    Required Findings. The Planning Commission shall not grant any exception unless the applicant demonstrates by a preponderance of the evidence all the following:

1.    The proposed wireless facility qualifies as a “personal wireless services facility” as defined in United States Code, Title 47, Section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii);

2.    The applicant has provided the City with a clearly defined technical service objective and a clearly defined potential site search area;

3.    The applicant has provided the City with a meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why any alternative location(s) or design(s) suggested by the City or otherwise identified in the administrative record, including but not limited to potential alternatives identified at any public meeting or hearing, are not technically feasible or potentially available; and

4.    The applicant has provided the City with a meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why the proposed location and design deviations are the least noncompliant location and design necessary to reasonably achieve the applicant’s reasonable technical service objectives.

C.    Scope. The Planning Commission shall limit its exemption to the extent to which the applicant demonstrates such exemption is necessary to reasonably achieve its reasonable technical service objectives. The Planning Commission may adopt conditions of approval as reasonably necessary to promote the purposes in this Chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare.

D.    Independent Consultant. The City shall have the right to hire, at the applicant’s expense, an independent consultant to evaluate issues raised by the exception and to submit recommendations and evidence in response to the application. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.200 Location Restrictions
Wireless telecommunications facilities are strongly disfavored in certain areas. Therefore, the following locations are permitted when an exception has been granted pursuant to PMC 17.95.05.190, Exceptions:

A.    Public right-of-way of local streets as identified in the General Plan if within the residential zones.

B.    Public right-of-way if mounted to a new pole that is not replacing an existing pole in an otherwise permitted location. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.210 Effect on Other Ordinances
Compliance with the provisions of this Chapter shall not relieve a person from complying with any other applicable provision of this Code. In the event of a conflict between any provision of this Chapter and other sections of this Code, this Chapter shall control. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

17.95.05.220 State or Federal Law – Ministerial Requirements
A.    Ministerial Permitting.

1.    If it is determined by the City Attorney that State or Federal law prohibits discretionary permitting requirements for certain wireless telecommunications facilities, such requirement shall be deemed severable and all remaining regulations shall remain in full force and effect. Such a determination by the City Attorney shall be in writing with citations to legal authority and shall be a public record. For those facilities, in lieu of a site plan review or a conditional use permit, a ministerial administrative permit shall be required prior to installation or modification of a communication facility, and all provisions of this Chapter that would otherwise apply to the discretionary permit shall be applicable to any such facility with the exception that the required permit shall be reviewed and administered as a ministerial permit by the Director rather than as a discretionary permit. Any conditions of approval set forth in this provision or deemed necessary by the Director shall be imposed and administered as reasonable time, place and manner rules.

2.    Notwithstanding subsection (A)(1) of this Section, the determination that would otherwise be made by the City Attorney may be made by the Director if the Director’s determination is made upon a form approved by the City Attorney which form is designed to ensure compliance with the requirements of subsection (A)(1) of this Section.

B.    Changed Law. If, subsequent to the issuance of the written determination pursuant to subsection A of this Section, and before the issuance of a wireless telecommunications permit, the City Attorney determines that the law has changed and that discretionary permitting is permissible, the City Attorney shall issue such determination in writing with citations to legal authority and all discretionary permitting requirements shall be reinstated. The City Attorney’s written determination shall be a public record.

C.    Enforceable Laws. All installations permitted pursuant to this Chapter shall comply with all Federal and State laws including but not limited to the American with Disabilities Act and the California Building Standards Code. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 17-001, adopted by City Council April 4, 2017.)

Chapter 17.96
HAZARDOUS WASTE FACILITIES
17.96.010 Intent and Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a uniform conditional use permit application and review process for hazardous waste facilities consistent with the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan and to ensure protection of the health, safety, welfare, quality of life, and the environment of the residents of Palmdale.

17.96.020 Definitions
Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.96.030 Conditional Use Permit Requirements
A.    No residual repository shall be permitted in the City. All other new facilities or expansions to existing facilities are to be considered discretionary land uses and will require a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter and Chapter 17.22 PMC. The Planning Commission shall act to recommend approval or denial to the City Council, who shall act to approve or deny the Conditional Use Permit.

B.    Off-site facilities shall be located in areas designated on the General Plan land use map for medium or heavy industrial use, except that transfer stations may be located in areas designated for light industrial use if all the findings set forth below are met:

1.    The proposed facility shall not be in substantial conflict with the City’s General Plan.

2.    The nature, condition and development of adjacent uses, buildings and structures shall be considered, and no proposed facility shall be permitted where such use will adversely affect or be materially detrimental to said adjacent uses, buildings or structures.

3.    The site for a proposed facility shall be adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this Ordinance, or as required by the Planning Commission, City Council or Local Assessment Committee as a condition in order to integrate said use with the uses in the neighborhood.

4.    The site for a proposed facility shall be served by highways or streets adequate in width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate, and to assure the safe transport of hazardous waste to the proposed facility.

17.96.040 Application of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)
All applications for off-site facilities shall follow the procedures set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21000-21177. In addition, all applications shall comply with the following provisions:

A.    Except as otherwise noted, all facilities regulated under this Chapter are “projects” subject to the provisions of State law including, but not limited to, the California Environmental Quality Act, the State CEQA guidelines and the City’s CEQA guidelines.

B.    Review of facility applications will in general require development of an environmental impact report (EIR) unless the Director determines otherwise, by finding that the proposed facility meets all of the conditions set forth in PMC 17.96.040(C)(1) through (3), below. Any proposed incineration facility will require development of an EIR. Health risk and environmental risk assessments must be conducted for any proposed off-site facility, and on-site incinerator facility, to the satisfaction of the Planning Director, Local Assessment Committee, Planning Commission and City Council, as based on well-defined and credible assumptions detailing the results of a “worst-case” scenario with regard to actual and potential threat to public health and safety and the environment.

C.    A negative declaration may be prepared for an on-site facility which does not include an incinerator, or for an off-site transfer station facility if the Director determines:

1.    The facility is sized to serve only the needs of local waste producers; and

2.    The facility will not accept acutely hazardous wastes, extremely hazardous wastes, infectious hazardous wastes, or wastes containing the constituents listed in the list of extremely hazardous substances prepared by the federal Environmental Protection Agency based on the requirements of Section 313 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986; and

3.    The Director finds that the initial environmental study conducted pursuant to CEQA demonstrates that there is no potential significant impact to the environment, or to the public health and safety.

4.    The City shall be the lead agency for the review of all facility applications regulated by this Ordinance;

D.    An initial study shall be required for all hazardous waste facility applications.

E.    The Director may hire additional consultants to review the draft EIR and risk assessments, or any special studies, and the responses to public comments on these documents, and the proposed CEQA mitigation measures required by CEQA. The applicant shall reimburse the City for all such costs.

F.    All consultants will be selected by the City. The applicant will in no way be involved in the preparation of environmental documentation for the proposed facility, except to provide funding and any necessary data, and to provide public comments on the draft, as it chooses.

17.96.050 Applications
All applications for land use decisions will be filed with the Director accompanied by the appropriate fees.

17.96.060 Fees
The applicant will pay all costs related to City processing and review of the facility application, the preparation, review and administration of all documentation and programs prepared pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and all activities of the local assessment committee related to the facility application review and processing. All fees are payable to the Department, and are established by the Palmdale Fee Resolution. The applicant is responsible for any other fees not specifically identified in this Chapter or the Palmdale Fee Resolution which are necessary and associated with the review and processing of a facility application, as determined by the Director.

A.    The applicant shall pay in advance the complete estimated cost of processing the facility application.

B.    The applicant shall in addition provide in advance a minimum of thirty (30) percent of the EIR preparation costs to the City to defray the City’s cost of providing an independent review by City staff of the EIR or the environmental documents.

C.    In accordance with the Palmdale fee resolution and at the request of the City, the applicant shall supplement, as necessary, the accounts established for the review and processing of a proposed hazardous waste facility, in order to ensure the City’s recovery of all costs and staff time associated with reviewing and processing the application.

D.    The fees specified in the Palmdale Fee Resolution and in PMC 17.96.060 are non-refundable unless the application is withdrawn by the applicant. In this case, up to 80 percent of the total fees paid may be refunded if no work has been performed in the review and processing of the application. In the event that such work has commenced by the City, the amount of the refund shall be further reduced by an amount equal to the proportion of work completed.

17.96.070 Local Assessment Committee
A local assessment committee (LAC) will be formed for all proposed off-site facilities, and with the exceptions noted below, for all proposed on-site facilities. The role of the LAC is to review the application and the environmental documentation, to solicit public comments on the proposed facility application, and to recommend conditions to be attached to the conditional use permit. The conditions shall be written so as to compensate and mitigate the impacts that will be imposed by the facility on the community. Policies and procedures for establishing and administering the LAC are generally defined in Section 25199.7 of California State Health and Safety Code and are hereby incorporated by reference. In addition, the following provisions shall also govern this process:

A.    At the discretion of the City Council, and upon the recommendation of the Director, an LAC need not be formed for a proposed on-site storage or recycling facility which does not include an incinerator, or for any on-site facility for which an environmental impact report is not required.

B.    The LAC will provide comments to the Planning Commission and City Council on the initial study, the draft EIR, the health and environmental risk assessment, and any other necessary special studies required as a part of the facility application or associated environmental review.

C.    The LAC will hold public meetings in accordance with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act with sufficient frequency to keep the public informed of the progress of LAC review and to solicit public comments on the proposed facility.

D.    The LAC may recommend to the City Council that a separate body act as a “standing committee” during the facility’s operational life and closure period to promote ongoing communication between the applicant and the community, and to monitor the adherence of the applicant to its requirements.

17.96.080 Facility Agreement
The facility agreement shall be a binding legal document serving as an attachment to the conditional use permit. The recommended conditions transmitted to the Planning Commission and the City Council by the LAC shall be comprised of a facility agreement documenting areas of both agreement and disagreement between the requests of the LAC and the responses of the applicant. In conducting the dialogue the LAC shall consider, at a minimum, all of the following as recommended conditions to the conditional use permit:

A.    Development of environmental data to determine air, water, noise, cultural resource, biological, public facilities, slope, geotechnical, hydrology, traffic, aesthetics, soil and any other relevant conditions prior to commencement of facility operations.

B.    Ongoing or periodic environmental monitoring requirements including air quality and groundwater, and real-time continuous emissions monitoring for all incinerators. These requirements may be more stringent than those required by responsible agency permits.

C.    Limitations on the use of access routes to and from the facility by vehicles containing hazardous waste.

D.    Immediate notification to the City of any release to the air, water or soil, from an on-site or off-site facility, that is not specifically provided for in one or more operating permits.

E.    Provisions by the applicant of reduced cost waste management services for local hazardous waste producers, and consideration of such services for household hazardous waste producers.

F.    Submittal of quarterly reports to the Department, and to the standing committee if one is formed, providing at a minimum, data on the types and volumes of wastes received and managed, an update of all interactions with local, state and federal permitting agencies and any releases as identified in subsection D of this Section.

G.    Provision for the automatic shutdown of the facility in the event of earthquakes in excess of specified ground accelerations, fires and floods, and resumption of facility operations only following an inspection of the facility by one or more independent agencies which includes the City.

H.    Provisions for encouraging and protecting facility employees and members of the community that raise concerns regarding safe operation of the facility.

I.    Provision for a periodic general review by the Planning Commission and/or City Council of the applicant’s compliance with the facility use permit and the facility agreement, with provisions for modifying the existing conditions or adding new conditions, as appropriate.

J.    Full reimbursement by the applicant of any ongoing or periodic costs incurred by the City in monitoring or enforcing the facility agreement.

K.    Payment of all CEQA mitigation monitoring costs. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, preparation and administration of a mitigation monitoring program for the proposed hazardous waste facility. Such program shall include, at a minimum, identification of:

1.    All required mitigation measures for stated environmental impacts, including the performance and compliance criteria;

2.    Methods by which the needed reporting or monitoring to verify compliance will occur;

3.    The individual or entity that will be responsible for conducting the required monitoring; and

4.    A schedule for when the monitoring and reporting will occur.

L.    Full reimbursement of all extraordinary costs incurred by the City related to provision of emergency or non-emergency services to the facility.

M.    Payment to the City to mitigate or compensate for any other impacts associated with the facility.

N.    Periodic payment into a fund to be used to address any contamination problems that may arise after the thirty (30) year post-closure period.

O.    Provision for renegotiating the entire facility agreement and/or modifying specific provisions based on facility expansion or significant changes in facility operations, or introduction or discovery of new information not considered as a part of the original facility application.

P.    Provision for arbitration, including any associated costs, of any disputes that arise between the applicant and the City regarding the implementation of the facility agreement.

Q.    Provisions for ensuring that any future owners of the facility have the technical capability and experience and the financial resources, necessary to ensure the safe operation and closure of the facility, and have no serious violations of local, state or federal hazardous waste law as determined by City Council.

R.    If the applicant is the appealing party and if the state appeal board issues a final decisions reversing the City’s land use decision in accordance with California State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.14, then the City will return the payment to the applicant.

S.    Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the proposed facility in an orderly and efficient manner, and in general accord with all elements of the General Plan and the intent and purposes of this Ordinance and the City Zoning Ordinance.

17.96.090 Contents of Application
Every application for a facility pursuant to this Chapter shall be made in writing to the Director on the forms provided by the Department, and must be in sufficient detail to facilitate thorough review by the Department. All applications shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fees. An application shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

A.    Name and address of the applicant;

B.    Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the premises involved or that it has written permission of the owner to make such application;

C.    A plot and development plan drawn in sufficient detail to clearly describe the following:

1.    Physical dimensions of the property and structures;

2.    Location of existing and proposed structures, including elevations;

3.    Setbacks and landscaping;

4.    Methods of circulation and parking;

5.    Drainage patterns;

6.    Ingress and egress;

7.    Storage and processing areas;

8.    Proposed utilization of property;

9.    The distance from the facility property line to the nearest adjacent structure, and a description and location of such structure;

10.    The distance to nearest residences, to properties designated in the General Plan for residential use, to proposed or presently zoned residential areas and to immobile populations;

11.    Proximity of the proposed facility to the one hundred (100) year flood prone areas;

12.    Proximity of the proposed facility to any known active or potentially active earthquake faults as defined by the California State Department of Mines and Geology;

13.    The relationship of the proposed facility to all surface water bodies, and all known underground aquifers beneath the facility or beneath the ground adjacent to the facility;

14.    Topographic description and plotting of the property and surrounding area on a topographic map;

15.    A preliminary geological study of the property and surrounding area including data on the permeability of the substrata;

16.    Existing and proposed utilities which service or will be required to service the facility; and

17.    A radius and vicinity map including the project boundary.

D.    A list of adjacent property owners and a map indicating their location relative to the proposed facility;

E.    An environmental assessment questionnaire;

F.    A land use map;

G.    A grading plan;

H.    A title report completed within six (6) months of the date of facility application submittal;

I.    A legal plot map;

J.    Identification of any other hazardous or solid waste facilities presently or in the past owned or operated by the applicant, with copies of all permits and a listing of regulatory and community contracts for each facility, with their affiliations and current phone numbers;

K.    Full disclosure of any past or present permit violations and any past or pending administrative, civil or criminal proceedings or litigation involving any facility in any location presently or in the past owned or operated by the applicant, or proposed for operation by the applicant;

L.    Disclosure of any past or present air, water, soil, or other property contamination that has resulted from any activity of the applicant, or that has occurred at any facility owned or operated by the applicant;

M.    Financial statements from the applicant including proposed means for financing development of the facility, and anticipated costs and revenues associated with operation of the facility;

N.    Detailed information regarding how the applicant will meet state pollution liability insurance requirements for sudden and non-sudden events, and state requirements for funding closure and post-closure costs;

O.    Identification of the amounts (in tons), sources and types of hazardous materials or wastes to be treated or stored at the proposed facility; the geographical location of the producers; the ultimate disposition of the wastes; and anticipated life of the facility. This information will be based on an actual survey of the industries to be served and be representative of the wastes that will be processed at the facility;

P.    Identification of the type(s) of processes that will be used at the facility. For any proposed facility other than storage or recycling, specification of whether any anticipated wastestreams meet the definition of “recyclable material” pursuant to California State Health and Safety Code Section 25120.5 or are listed by the state as recyclable wastes pursuant to California State Health and Safety Code Section 25175. If either of these conditions exist, an explanation of why these wastes should not be recycled shall be provided;

Q.    Identification of all waste water, treated and untreated, generated by the proposed facility, the method and place of final discharge, and a copy of the required state waste discharge permit pursuant to California State Water Code, Division 2, Chapter 4, Article 4, Section 13260, et seq., and national pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit applications, pursuant to 40 Code of Federal Regulations 122;

R.    A copy of the facility’s hazardous materials storage permit application and business plan, pursuant to Section 2.20.140 of the Los Angeles County Code and California State Health and Safety Code Section 25503;

S.    An analysis of visual, noise, and any olfactory impacts associated with the proposed facility and recommended mitigation measures;

T.    An analysis of all anticipated air quality impacts associated with the proposed facility, including the effect of wind patterns at the site, proposed mitigation measures to ensure no degradation of air quality in the area, and a copy of all required permits from the South Coast Air Quality Management District, or any other agency;

U.    Identification of any rare or endangered species of plant or animals within the proposed facility site and recommended impact mitigation measures;

V.    Identification of any cultural resources located on the proposed facility site, including archaeological, paleontological and historical resources, and proposed mitigation measures to ensure no significant impact to cultural resources occurs;

W.    The results of preliminary studies of the impact of the proposed facility on real property values and local employment patterns;

X.    A health and environmental risk assessment based on a worst case accident scenario resulting from an upset condition involving hazardous materials or wastes. If the proposed facility will include any hazardous materials or wastes listed on the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s list of extremely hazardous substances (as per Federal Register Volume 52, No. 77, page 13,397), a risk management prevention program pursuant to Chapter 6.95, Article II, Section 25531 of the California State Health and Safety Code shall also be submitted. Mitigation measures for all potentially significant impacts shall be recommended. The proposed scope, protocol and methodology of the risk assessments will be submitted to the Director for approval prior to the initiation of the risk assessments;

Y.    A health and environmental risk assessment which analyzes, in detail, all possibilities and probabilities of accidents or spills involving hazardous materials or wastes to be used at the site, transportation related accidents from the points of origin to the facility, and any other probabilities requested by either the Director, the Planning Commission or the City Council. The proposed scope, protocol and methodology of the risk assessments will be approved by the Director prior to starting the necessary work. Such analyses shall identify mitigation measures to reduce the identified risks. The risk assessment shall identify the transportation routes which will yield the least risk of accident and environmental impact resulting from trucks hauling hazardous wastes to the proposed facility;

Z.    A business plan pursuant to Chapter 6.95, Article I, Section 25500 of the California State Health and Safety Code shall be submitted which includes a plot plan of the proposed facility, an inventory of chemicals to be used and an emergency response plan. At a minimum, such emergency response plan shall be consistent with any and all applicable City, County, and regional emergency response plans and all City, County, State and Federal regulatory requirements regarding emergency response procedures;

AA.    A plan that identifies an ongoing monitoring program of air, soil, groundwater, and other environmental systems. This plan will include any monitoring requirements imposed by other permitting agencies such as, but not limited to, the South Coast Air Quality Management District, the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the State Department of Health Services;

BB.    Documentation of how the proposed facility will serve the needs of local producers of hazardous waste, including household hazardous wastes;

CC.    All applications will contain a designation of at least two (2) reasonable alternative sites which will be reviewed pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act.

DD.    An application for an off-site facility must include a detailed proposed public education and participation program to be employed during the local land use decision-making process and is subject to review and approval by the Director.

17.96.100 Determination of Completeness and Processing Off-Site and On-Site Hazardous Waste Facility Applications
All applications for off-site hazardous waste facilities shall follow the procedures detailed below in addition to those set forth in California State Health & Safety Code Section 25199 et seq. and Government Code Section 65920 et seq. All applications for on-site hazardous waste facilities shall follow the procedures detailed below in addition to those set forth in Government Code Section 65920 et seq.

A.    The Director has thirty (30) working days to make a determination that an application is complete for filing purposes.

B.    Within ninety (90) days after the application is deemed complete, the Planning Commission will hold a hearing on the application for an on-site hazardous waste facility.

C.    A public hearing on the proposed facility will be set for the Planning Commission when:

1.    The Director has determined that the application complies with all Zoning Ordinance requirements; and

2.    All procedures required by the City with regard to the California Environmental Quality Act have been met.

D.    Not later than one (1) month prior to a public hearing on the proposed facility, the applicant will provide three (3) sets of mailing labels indicating all owners of record as shown on the latest County Equalized Assessment Roll that lie within a two thousand (2,000) foot radius of the boundary or land owned by the applicant, and three (3) sets of mailing labels indicating all residents, tenants, and businesses within a two thousand (2,000) foot radius of the boundary or land owned by the applicant.

17.96.110 Determination of Consistency
At the request of the applicant the City Council will within sixty (60) calendar days after the application has been deemed complete, issue an initial written determination on whether a proposed off-site facility serving more than one producer of hazardous waste is consistent with the City General Plan, applicable zoning ordinances, and adheres to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the State CEQA Guidelines, and the City’s CEQA Guidelines.

A.    The determination will not prohibit the City from making a different determination when the final decision is made if such decision is based on information which was not considered when the initial determination was made.

B.    The application must be consistent with the policies and procedures of this Ordinance, the City’s ongoing hazardous waste management planning efforts and the Los Angeles Country Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

17.96.120 Standards and Locational Criteria
All proposed off-site and on-site hazardous waste facilities shall comply with the following provisions:

A.    Proposed off-site facilities shall comply with each of the siting criteria specified in Appendix 6A, Volume III of the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

B.    At the discretion of the Director, proposed on-site facility applications shall also be made subject to specific siting criteria contained in the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan referenced in PMC 17.96.120(A).

C.    In evaluating applications for both proposed off-site and on-site facilities, the following County criteria referenced in subsection A of this Section shall be given the greatest weight, along with protecting the public health, safety, welfare and the environment: proximity to populations, proximity to active or potentially active faults, groundwater supply wells and well fields, aquifer recharge areas, protection of cultural resources, proximity to habitats of threatened and endangered species, changes in real property values, preservation of air quality and all criteria related to ensuring the safe transportation of hazardous waste.

17.96.130 Safety and Security
A.    The owner or operator shall prevent the unknowing entry, and minimize the possibility for the unauthorized entry, of persons, livestock, or wild animals onto any portion of the facility. At a minimum, signs with the legend “DANGER! HAZARDOUS WASTE AREA – UNAUTHORIZED PERSONNEL KEEP OUT,” will be posted at each entrance to the facility, and at a minimum, shall be posted on the outside of the required perimeter fence. Minimum spacing requirements for such signage shall be determined at the time of facility application review. The legend shall be written in English and Spanish, and shall be legible from a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet.

B.    The operator will provide a 24-hour surveillance system which continuously monitors and controls entry onto the facility.

C.    Perimeter fencing will be constructed.

17.96.140 Monitoring
A.    For the purpose of ensuring compliance with all standards, conditions, and other requirements of an approved facility permit which the City is authorized to enforce, City officials or their designated representatives may at any time enter the premises for which a hazardous waste facility permit has been granted.

B.    The owner or operator of a facility will report quarterly to the Director the amount, type, and disposition of all wastes handled or processed by the facility. Included in the report shall be copies of all manifests produced within each quarter identifying the hazardous waste producers using the facility, and the types of hazardous wastes delivered to the facility, and include a map showing the exact location (coordinates and elevation) of quantities and types of wastes treated or stored at the facility.

C.    The owner or operator of a facility shall immediately send copies of all complaints related to facility operations and copies of all inspection reports and documentation of any other regulatory action including correspondence made by other local, state, or federal agencies to the Director within three (3) working days of receipt of such complaint, report, or other documentation.

17.96.150 General Conditions
A.    The City may impose, as necessary, conditions and standards other than those presented in this Chapter, in order to achieve the purposes of this Ordinance and to protect the health, safety, or general welfare of the community and the environment.

B.    Any modifications of the types and quantities of hazardous wastes to be managed at the proposed facility or significant modifications to the processes employed at the facility which were not considered in the original facility approval by the City, shall be presented to the Director in writing before such modifications commence at the facility. Proposed modifications may, at the discretion of the Director, result in modification or revision of the facility use permit, or may require a new facility use permit.

C.    Every facility shall have an emergency response contingency plan prepared pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 25503.5, and approved by the Los Angeles County Fire Department. A copy of the contingency plan shall be maintained at the facility and sent to the local police department, fire department, hospitals, and the Los Angeles County Department of Environmental Health. Proof of such distribution shall be provided to the Department prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.

D.    The applicant shall, prior to any City public hearing on a facility application, submit to the Department a written closure plan prepared pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 25246, and approved by the Department of Health Services. All revisions to such closure plan shall also be submitted to the Department within three (3) working days of the approval of said revisions.

E.    Prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy, the applicant shall provide proof to the satisfaction of the Department that it has met all of the financial responsibility requirements imposed by the Department of Health Services and any other federal or state agency.

F.    The applicant agrees to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the City, the Planning Commission, the City Council, the LAC, and all officers, employees and agents of the City against and from all claims, actions, or liabilities relating to the land use decision or arising out of its implementation at the facility location.

17.96.160 Findings
A.    The following findings will be made in writing prior to the approval of a proposed facility:

1.    The proposed facility is consistent with the City’s General Plan and Zoning Ordinance, and with the Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan.

2.    The proposed facility will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of the community or to the environment. The Commission shall deny the requested conditional use permit where the findings indicate, and the City Council determines, that the applicant has failed to show that the requested use will not jeopardize, adversely affect, endanger or otherwise constitute menace to the public health, safety or general welfare or be materially detrimental to the property of other persons located in the vicinity of such use, and reasonable restrictions or conditions to permit the establishment of the proposed use will not prevent detriment or menace as indicated.

3.    The conditions recommended by the LAC, including those not agreed to by the applicant, were considered by the Planning Commission and City Council.

4.    The past and present activities of the applicant have not resulted in any serious regulatory violations or contamination problems.

5.    The proposed facility is or will be served by roads and all other necessary public and private service facilities and utilities. The circulation features serving the proposed facility are adequate in width and location, and are improved and located in such a manner as to provide for the safe transport of hazardous wastes to the proposed facility.

6.    The proposed facility has met or exceeded each requirement of this Ordinance.

7.    Health risk and environmental risk assessments have been conducted for the proposed off-site facility or proposed on-site facility as required by the Department based on well-defined and credible assumptions detailing the results of a “worst-case” scenario as well as all other possible or probable accidents or spills at the proposed facility, which address both the potential threat to public health, safety and the environment posed by the proposed facility.

8.    The nature, condition and development of adjacent uses, buildings and structures shall be considered, and no proposed facility shall be permitted where such use will adversely affect or be materially detrimental to said adjacent uses, buildings or structures.

9.    The site for a proposed facility shall be adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this Ordinance, or as required by the City Council as a condition in order to integrate said use with the uses in the neighborhood.

10.    All potentially significant environmental impacts identified in the Environmental Impact Report or Negative Declaration have been fully analyzed, and appropriate mitigation measures have been developed and applied where necessary, and incorporated into a mitigation monitoring program, pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended.

17.96.170 Duration of Land Use Decision
A.    The duration of the land use decision will be determined at the time of approval and will not exceed ten (10) years. The applicant will commence substantial construction of the facility within two (2) years of the land use decision and such construction shall be pursued diligently to completion.

B.    Failure to comply with the conditions contained in the conditional use permit, to implement the required CEQA mitigation strategies or provisions of this Ordinance, or to abide by the provisions of the facility agreement will be considered grounds for permit review and revocation at the discretion of the City Council. Permit revocation will follow the procedures set out in the City Zoning Ordinance.

Chapter 17.97
RECYCLING FACILITIES
17.97.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide standards that will ensure adequate areas for collecting and loading recyclable materials that are compatible with surrounding land uses, in order to encourage diversion of solid waste by facilitating source reduction, recycling, and composting activities.

17.97.020 General Development Standards
All recycling facilities, as defined in PMC 17.16.180, are subject to the following general requirements:

A.    The City may specify what types of materials could be stored or processed and in what quantities;

B.    Material shall be stored inside containers or inside the mobile vehicles. No outside storage shall be allowed.

C.    Recycling areas or the bins or containers placed therein must provide protection against adverse environmental conditions, such as rain or wind, which might rended the collected materials unmarketable;

D.    The design and construction of recycling areas shall not jeopardize security of any recyclable materials placed therein;

E.    The recycling facility shall be constructed and maintained of durable waterproof and rustproof material;

F.    Collection containers, site fencing, and signage shall be of such color and design so as to be compatible with the surrounding uses and neighborhood;

G.    Driveways, and/or travel aisles shall provide unobstructed access for collection vehicles and personnel in conformance with building code requirements for garbage collection access and clearance.

H.    A sign clearly identifying all recycling and solid waste collection and loading areas and the materials accepted therein shall be posted adjacent to all points of direct access to the recycling areas;

I.    The facility and/or containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions and hours, and the identity and phone number of the facility operator to call if the machine is inoperative, and shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure of containers;

J.    Facilities shall meet the sign requirements of the zone designation as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance, unless otherwise specified; directional signs may be installed with the approval of the Director of Planning;

K.    The facility shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner free of litter and any other undesirable materials on a regular basis, including mobile facilities;

L.    Developments and transportation corridors adjacent to recycling areas shall be adequately protected from any adverse impacts such as noise, odor, vectors, or glare, through measures including, but not limited to maintaining adequate separation, fencing, and landscaping;

M.    If the facility is located in or near an area designated, or planned for residential use, special requirements for hours of operation, type of machinery used, lighting, and truck routes may be required;

N.    Noise generated by the facilities shall not exceed maximum limits established by the General Plan;

O.    The facility must meet all applicable requirements of the Fire, Health, and Building and Safety Departments;

17.97.030 Permits Required
Recycling facilities are subject to permit review in all residential, commercial and manufacturing zones according to the following:

 

Type of Facility

Zones Permitted

Permit Required

Reverse Vending

Machine(s)

All Commercial and

Manufacturing zones

Minor Modification and up to 5 reverse vending

machines

Small Collection Facilities

All Commercial and

Manufacturing zones

Minor Modification

Large Collection Facilities

C-5, M-1, M-2 (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

Conditional Use Permit

Light Processing Facilities

C-5, M-1, M-2 (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

Conditional Use Permit

Heavy Processing Facilities

M-1, M-2

Conditional Use Permit

17.97.040 Reverse Vending Machines
Reverse vending machine(s), as defined in PMC 17.16.170, shall be subject to compliance with the following standards:

A.    Shall be installed as an accessory use to a commercial or manufacturing use which is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and Municipal Code.

B.    Shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance to the structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

C.    Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use.

D.    Shall occupy no more than fifty (50) square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight (8) feet in height.

E.    Shall have a sign area of maximum four (4) square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions.

F.    Operating hours shall be consistent with the operating hours of the primary use.

G.    Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours include hours between dusk and dawn.

H.    No additional parking spaces shall be required for customers of a reverse vending machine.

17.97.050 Small Collection Facilities
Small collection facilities, as defined in PMC 17.16.180, shall comply with both the general standards provided in Subsection A above and the following standards:

A.    Shall be installed as an accessory use to an existing use which is in full compliance with all applicable provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.

B.    Shall be no larger than 500 square feet.

C.    Shall be subject to structure setbacks, landscaping, and/or screening requirements of the zone in which it is located, except as modified or increased by the Director of Planning.

D.    Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reuseable items.

E.    Shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines.

F.    Containers shall be covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule.

G.    If a mobile unit is used, all recyclable materials shall be stored in the mobile unit vehicle and shall not be left outside of the unit when attendant is not present; Mobile facilities at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day.

H.    Signs may be provided as follows:

1.    Identification signs with a maximum sign area of fifteen (15) percent per side of a structure or sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is less. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the ground to the top of the container.

2.    Signs shall be consistent with the character of their location.

3.    Directional signs, consistent with the Ordinance, may be installed with the approval of the Director of Planning if found necessary to facilitate traffic or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way.

I.    No additional parking space shall be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of the primary use.

J.    Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present.

K.    In no event, shall small collection facilities reduce the parking requirements of the development project.

L.    Small collection facilities shall not be 24 hour operations.

17.97.060 Large Collection Facilities
A large collection facility, as defined in PMC 17.16.180, shall comply with the general and following standards:

A.    The facility shall not abut residential zones.

B.    The facility shall be enclosed within a structure and screened from view from the public right-of-way.

C.    Structure setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those required for the zoning designation in which the facility is located.

D.    Containers shall be covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule.

E.    Space shall be provided on site for a minimum of six (6) vehicles to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials and for adequate stacking distances per the City Traffic/Transportation Engineer.

F.    Four parking spaces shall be provided for employees plus one (1) space for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility.

G.    Adequate refuse containers for the disposal of non-hazardous waste shall be permanently maintained on site.

17.97.070 Light Processing Facilities
Light processing facilities, as defined in PMC 17.16.180, shall comply with the general and following standards:

A.    The facility shall not abut a residentially designated property;

B.    Processing facilities shall operate within a completely enclosed structure.

C.    Power-driven processing shall be permitted provided all noise level requirements are met. Light processing facilities shall be limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials.

D.    A light processing facility shall be no larger than 45,000 square feet; shall have no more than an average of 2 outbound truck shipments of material per day; and shall not shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

E.    Structure setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for the zone designation in which the facility is located.

F.    Loose debris shall be collected on a daily basis and the site shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present.

G.    One parking space shall be required for each 2,500 square feet of area devoted for storage.

17.97.080 Heavy Processing Facilities
Heavy processing facilities shall comply with the general and following standards:

A.    The facility shall not abut a residentially designated property.

B.    Processing facilities shall operate within a completely enclosed structure.

C.    Power-driven processing shall be permitted provided all noise level requirements are met.

D.    Structure setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for the zone designation in which the facility is located.

E.    Loose debris shall be collected on a daily basis and the site shall be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present.

F.    One parking space shall be provided for each 2,500 square feet of area devoted for storage, in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 17.87 PMC.

Chapter 17.98
OTHER USES
17.98.010 Land Reclamation Projects
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the purpose of these regulations to establish specific standards for land reclamation projects where they are permitted by conditional use permit. The intent is to prevent adverse visual, health, safety, and other impacts on the surrounding properties and/or the community.

B.    Development Standards

Land reclamation projects where listed as permitted by Conditional Use Permit, shall be constructed in the following manner:

1.    Prior to commencement of operations the portion of the project to be used immediately for dumping purposes shall be enclosed with a chain link fence having a height of six (6) feet capable of preventing access thereto by unauthorized persons. Access to the dump area shall be protected with gates and be kept closed during non-operating periods. The location of all entrances shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.

2.    An earth dike shall be constructed within the property fence along and parallel with any street or highway. Such dike shall be not less than eight (8) feet in height above the elevation of the centerline of the paralleling street or highway and shall be so treated as to remain dust and weed free.

3.    In lieu of said chain link fence and dike, the Commission may approve the substitution of an eight (8) foot solid fence or decorative wall where, in the opinion of said Commission, such fence or wall will adequately comply with the provisions of this Section.

4.    Salvage operations are not permitted on the premises.

5.    All access roads shall be paved a distance of not less than two hundred (200) feet from the nearest paved dedicated street or highway. Such paving shall be of asphalt or other hard surfacing in conformance with the standards set forth by the Director.

6.    All roads within the dumping area are to be oiled or hard surfaced and maintained so as to prevent the creation of dust.

C.    Review Process

Land Reclamation Projects shall be subject to Conditional Use Permit approval in accordance with Chapter 17.22 PMC.

Chapter 17.99
RENEWABLE ENERGY
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 09-02, adopted by City Council November 4, 2009.)

17.99.010 Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems (CSWES)
A.    Purpose and intent

It is the intent of these regulations to permit Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems (CSWES) as an accessory use in the C-2 (Office Commercial), C-3 (General Commercial), C-4 (Commercial Center), C-5 (Service Commercial), M-1 (Light Industrial), M-2 (General Industrial), M-3 (Airport Industrial), and M-4 (Planned Industrial) zone districts. It is the purpose of these regulations to ensure that alternative energy systems are available in the City of Palmdale, and that they are installed and co-located in a manner that avoids hazards to public health and safety, minimizes adverse aesthetic impacts, and ensures compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood.

B.    Definitions

Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Development Standards

Installation of Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems (CSWES) where permitted as an accessory use subject to administrative review by a Minor Modification application, shall be constructed in the following manner:

1.    Minimum parcel size. Developments of a minimum of 20 acres or more with parking lot light fixtures at a minimum of 25 feet in height.

2.    Setbacks. Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems shall meet the following setbacks:

a.    A distance equal to the tower height from any abutting private properties that are not part of the development.

b.    A distance equal to the tower height from any overhead utility lines, unless written permission is granted by the affected utility.

c.    A distance equal to 150 feet from any property that is residentially used or designated.

3.    Noise. Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems shall meet the following criteria with respect to noise:

a.    A site-specific noise study or the manufacture’s engineered sound studies shall be submitted for review and the decibel level shall comply with the Noise Element of the General Plan.

b.    Decibel levels for each unit shall not exceed 65 decibels (dBA) as measured at the property line except during short-term events such as utility outages and severe windstorms.

4.    Aesthetics. Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems shall meet the following criteria with respect to aesthetics:

a.    All proposed replacement poles for a CSWES system shall be of the same design, shape and color as the remaining light poles throughout the parking lot.

b.    The wind turbine housing and the blades of the CSWES system shall not be brightly colored. The turbine housing should be white, sky colored, or should coordinate with the color palette approved for the project buildings.

c.    The physical size of the turbine shall not extend beyond 36 inches from the center of the pole.

d.    The maximum diameter of the blades shall not exceed 16 feet.

5.    Access.

a.    All ground mounted electrical and control equipment shall be labeled and secured to prevent unauthorized access.

b.    The pole shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder.

6.    Lighting.

a.    A Co-located Small Wind Energy System (CSWES) shall not be illuminated unless such lighting is required by the Federal Aviation Administration. A light temporarily used to inspect a turbine, tower and associated equipment is permissible, providing said light is only used for inspection purposes and not left on for an extended period of time. All sites that are part of a CSWES shall comply with PMC 17.86.030.

b.    The height of the light fixture on the structure itself shall not be altered from its original height as previously permitted or as permitted by the reviewing authority when co-locating a CSWES in a parking lot.

c.    All light fixture poles, including collocated poles, shall be consistent in design and color throughout the development.

d.    A revised photometric plan shall be submitted for review for compliance with PMC 17.86.030(K) when modifications to existing site lighting is proposed.

7.    Height. Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems shall meet the following criteria with respect to height:

a.    The maximum CSWES Height shall be sixty (60) feet at the highest point with one of the blades at its highest vertical point.

b.    The maximum height of the center of the turbine shall not exceed 53 feet.

c.    The maximum diameter of the blades from the lowest point to the highest point shall not exceed 16 feet.

8.    Temporary meteorological (Met) towers shall be permitted under the same standards as those for a CSWES facility. Approval for a temporary met tower shall be valid for a maximum of 30 days.

9.    Signs. All signs, other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s identification, appropriate warning signs shall be prohibited.

10.    Building Permit. Applicable building permits shall be required for a CSWES.

11.    The system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration requirements, including but not limited to Subpart B (commencing with Section 77.11) of Part 77 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations regarding installations close to airports. These regulations apply to any installation within 20,000 feet of an airport and exceeding specific heights based on specific FAA and airport parameters.

12.    If the CSWES use has been determined by the Planning Director or his or her designee to be inoperative or abandoned for a period of six (6) months, the CSWES shall be removed, unless a new application to re-establish the use is filed with the City. The City may remove an abandoned facility, repair any and all damage to the premises caused by such removal, and otherwise restore the premises as in appropriate to be in compliance with applicable code at any time: 1) after ninety (90) days following a notice of abandonment, or 2) following a notice of decision by the Director of Planning, subject to the owner/operator’s right of appeal under the City of Palmdale Municipal Code. The City may, but shall not be required to, store the removed facility, or any part thereof. The owner of the premises upon which the abandoned facility was located, and all prior operators of the facility, shall be jointly liable for the entire cost of such removal, repair, restoration and storage, and shall remit payment to the City promptly after demand therefore is made. The City may, in lieu of storing the removed facility, convert it to the City’s use, sell it, or dispose of it in any manner deemed by the City to be appropriate.

D.    Review Process

Co-located Small Wind Energy Systems (CSWES) shall be permitted as an Accessory Use when permitted in the zoning district subject to Administrative Approval pursuant to PMC 17.26.040, Minor Modification, or as permitted by the reviewing authority when co-locating a CSWES in a parking lot.

A temporary meteorological tower shall be permitted subject to Administrative Approval pursuant to PMC 17.26.040, Minor Modification, for a period not to exceed 30 days as stated in PMC 17.99.010(C)(7).

E.    Submittal Requirements

The applicant shall submit the information required by the appropriate application form, including but not limited to the following information.

Applications for a CSWES shall include the following items:

1.    Site Plan

a.    Property lines and physical dimensions of the subject property;

b.    Location, dimensions, and types of existing major structures on the property;

c.    Location of the proposed CSWES units including, foundations and associated equipment;

d.    Proposed CSWES elevation drawings,

e.    The right-of-way of any public road that is contiguous with the property;

f.    Any overhead utility lines;

g.    A site specific noise study; and

h.    A photometric plan if existing lighting is being modified.

2.    A perspective rendering from any abutting public way if the CSWES is visible from said public way.

3.    Specifications of the CSWES including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, and proposed pole height.

4.    Typical pole foundation specifications or drawings from the wind turbine manufacturer.

17.99.020 Solar Facilities
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 11-03, adopted by City Council December 7, 2011.)

A.    Purpose and Intent

It is the intent of these regulations to permit Small-Scale Solar Energy Systems without Planning Department approval within all zone districts provided a permitted primary use exists and Utility-Scale Solar Facilities as a primary use within the M-1 (Light Industrial), M-2 (General Industrial), M-4 (Planned Industrial), PF (Public Facilities) and QR (Quarry and Reclamation) zone districts. It is the purpose of these regulations to ensure that alternative energy systems are available in the City of Palmdale, and that they are sited and installed in a manner that avoids hazards to the public health and safety while minimizing adverse aesthetic impacts to the maximum extent possible.

B.    Definitions

Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Small-Scale Solar Energy Systems

Small-Scale Solar Energy System shall be permitted as of right within any zone district pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.5.

D.    Utility-Scale Solar Power Generating Facilities

1.    Supplemental Information Required

Permit application for all utility-scale solar power generating facilities shall be accompanied by the following supplemental materials, unless waived by the Director of Planning:

a.    A plan for the on-going security and inspection of the facility as applicable, which may include but not be limited to provisions for fencing, anti-climb devices, and monitoring, to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism.

b.    A plan for permanent dust control of the site post construction.

2.    Development Standards

In addition to compliance with all other applicable statutes, ordinance, regulations and policies, the following regulations shall apply to all utility-scale solar power generating facilities as permitted under this Chapter:

a.    Setbacks

(i)    Setbacks shall be those specified for structures within the respective zone district.

(ii)    Solar support structures shall not be permitted in any front or street side yard.

(iii)    No minimum landscape setback along any public or private street frontage shall be required within any industrial zone located between Avenue L and Avenue M between 30th Street East and 120th Street East, between Avenue M and Avenue P-8, between 90th Street East and 120th Street East or within the QR (Quarry and Reclamation) zone.

(iv)    No transition zone setback pursuant to PMC 17.83.030(A) or transition zone landscaping pursuant to PMC 17.83.030(C) shall be required for within any industrial zone located between Avenue L and Avenue M between 30th Street East and 120th Street East, between Avenue M and Avenue P-8, between 90th Street East and 120th Street East or within the QR (Quarry and Reclamation) zone.

(v)    Where transition zone landscaping is required pursuant to PMC 17.83.030(C), the number and types of trees required may be modified at the discretion of the Director of Planning and the City Engineer where there is the potential for shading of solar panels.

b.    Height

The maximum height of any structure shall be that as specified for principal structure within the respective zone district.

c.    Glare

Solar panels shall be placed such that concentrated solar radiation or glare is not directed onto nearby properties, including U.S. Air Force Plant 42, other airport related, or roadways.

d.    Security Fencing

Utility-scale solar facilities shall be enclosed by an eight foot high fence for security purposes. The reviewing authority may approve: 1) chain link fencing within any industrial zone located between Avenue L and Avenue M between 30th Street East and 120th Street East, between Avenue M and Avenue P-8, between 90th Street East and 120th Street East or within the QR (Quarry and Reclamation) zone or 2) wrought iron fencing within any other zone in which utility-scale solar power generating facilities are permitted. Chain link or wrought iron fencing may be permitted by the reviewing authority based upon a finding that no adverse visual or aesthetic impacts will occur and the material is compatible with the surrounding area. This determination shall be made as part of the development review process. Under no circumstances shall razor, barbed, concertina wire, or electrified fencing be permitted.

e.    Lighting

Security lighting shall be consistent with the requirements of PMC 17.86.070, including shielding from adjacent properties, lighting be directed downward with full cut-off features to reduce light pollution.

f.    Signage

One (1) project identification sign, located at each point of project ingress and egress, not to exceed fifty (50) square feet in area and five (5) feet in height, may be erected on the project site. No other signs shall be installed other than safety and required warning signs.

g.    Conformance with Chapter 12.04 PMC, Underground Utilities.

All utility-scale solar facilities, including any new off-site transmission lines, are subject to the provisions of Chapter 12.04 PMC, pertaining to underground utilities and encroachment into public rights-of-way.

3.    Operational Requirements

a.    Time Limits

The maximum duration of the approval period for a utility-scale solar facility shall be twenty-five (25) years. An extension of the approval of the permit may be granted by the reviewing authority. New conditions of approval may also be applied to an approval for extension, as may be deemed necessary based upon changing conditions or development in the surrounding area.

b.    Discontinued Use

The operator of a lawfully erected facility, and the owner of the property upon which it is located, shall promptly notify the Director of Planning in writing in the event that use of the facility is discontinued for any reason. In the event that the discontinued use is permanent, the owner(s) and/or operator(s) shall promptly remove the facility, and repair any damage to the property caused by such removal, including revegetation and road repair. All such removal and repair shall be completed within ninety (90) days after the use is discontinued, and shall be performed in accordance with all applicable zoning and health and safety code requirements. For purposes of this paragraph, a discontinued use shall be permanent unless the facility is reasonably likely to be operative and used within the immediately following three-month period.

c.    Abandonment

Structures associated with solar power generating facilities that have been determined to be inoperative or abandoned for a period of six (6) months shall be removed, unless a new application to re-establish the use are filed with the City.

d.    Removal by City

The City may remove an abandoned facility, repair any and all damage to the property caused by such removal, and otherwise restore the property as is appropriate to be in compliance with the applicable code at the following times: 1) after thirty (30) days following a notice of abandonment, or 2) following a notice of decision by the Director of Planning, subject to the owner/operator’s right of appeal under the City of Palmdale Municipal Code. The City may, but shall not be required to, store the removed facility (or any part thereof). The owner of the premises upon which the abandoned facility was located, and all prior operators of the facility, shall be jointly liable for the entire cost of such removal, repair, restoration and storage, and shall remit payment to the City promptly after demand therefore is made. The City may, in lieu of storing the removed facility, convert it to the City’s use, sell it, or dispose of it in any manner deemed by the City to be appropriate.

e.    City Lien on Property

When the City removes an abandoned facility pursuant to subsection (D)(3)(d) of this Section, the cost for the removal, repair and restoration of the site, and storage of the materials shall be recouped through the placement of a lien on the real property on which the facility was located, for the full amount of the cost of removal, repair, restoration, and storage. The Director of Planning shall cause the lien to be recorded in the County of Los Angeles Recorder’s Office.

17.99.030 Small Residential Wind Generator Systems (SRWGS)
(Zoning Ordinance Amendment 13-001, adopted by City Council December 4, 2013)

A.    Purpose and intent

It is the intent of these regulations to permit Small Residential Wind Generator Systems (SRWGS) as an accessory use in the A-1 (Light Agriculture), R-1 (Single Family Residential), as well as in any existing single family residential uses not zoned A-1, or R-1. It is the purpose of these regulations to ensure that alternative energy systems are available in the City of Palmdale, and that they are installed in a manner that avoids hazards to public health and safety, minimizes adverse aesthetic impacts, and ensures compatibility with the surrounding neighborhood.

B.    Definitions

Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

C.    Development Standards

Installation of Small Residential Wind Generator Systems (SRWGS) where permitted as an accessory use subject to administrative review by a Minor Site Plan Review application, shall be constructed in the following manner:

1.    Minimum parcel size. Residential developments of a minimum of 7,000 square feet or a legally established residential lot and/or an existing non-conforming residential use.

2.    SRWGS location: No part of the SRWGS shall encroach into the minimum rear or side setbacks.

a.    A self-standing Small Residential Wind Generator Systems shall be located on the rear yard or side yard. Rear and side yard setbacks shall be as indicated in the following table:

Zoning Designation

Minimum

Lot Size

Minimum Rear

Yard Setback

Minimum Side

Yard Setback

A-1

1 Acre

35 Feet*

10 Feet

R-1-1

1 Acre

35 Feet*

10 Feet

R-1-20,000

20,000 SF

25 Feet*

10 Feet

R-1-15,000

15,000 SF

20 Feet*

10 Feet

R-1-13,000

13,000 SF

10 Feet*

10 Feet

R-1-10,000

10,000 SF

10 Feet*

10 Feet

R-1-7,000

7,000

10 Feet*

10 Feet

Note: No part of the SRWGS shall encroach into the minimum rear or side setbacks.

b.    SRWGS may be roof mounted on legally established structures meeting the required setback pursuant to the zoning designation at a maximum height of 42 feet to the highest point of the SRWGS.

3.    Cage width. The maximum cage or diameter of the system shall not exceed 60 inches (5 feet).

4.    SRWGS height, self-standing shall be determined by the zoning designation as illustrated on the following table:

Zoning Designation

Minimum Lot Size

Maximum SRWGS Height

A-1

1 Acre

100 Feet*

R-1-1

1 Acre

100 Feet*

R-1-20,000

20,000 SF

45 Feet*

R-1-15,000

15,000 SF

45 Feet*

R-1-13,000

13,000 SF

45 Feet*

R-1-10,000

10,000 SF

40 Feet*

R-1-7,000

7,000

35 Feet*

*    All proposed SRWGS shall maintain all required clearances from overhead utility lines.

Roof mounted SRWGS shall comply with applicable provisions of the California State Building Code and adopted City of Palmdale Building Codes. Certification of compliance by a State registered professional engineer is required.

5.    Number of SRWGS permitted. The number of SRWGS is limited to one per every legally established single-family residential use in the A-1 (Light Agricultural) and R-1 (Single Family Residential) zone districts, and existing single family residential uses in other zoning districts.

6.    Noise. SRWGS Systems shall meet the following criteria with respect to noise:

a.    A site-specific noise study or the manufacturer’s engineered sound report shall be submitted with the required application for review. The decibel level shall comply with the Noise Element of the General Plan and the SRWGS shall not exceed 50 decibels (dBA) as measured at the property line.

7.    Aesthetics. SRWGS Systems shall meet the following criteria with respect to aesthetics:

a.    The cage and the pole for the SRWGS system shall not be brightly colored. The cage and pole should be sky colored, or should coordinate with the color palette approved for the residence.

b.    The maximum diameter of the cage shall not exceed 60 inches (5 feet).

8.    Access.

a.    The pole shall be designed and installed so as to not provide step bolts or a ladder.

9.    Lighting.

a.    A Small Residential Wind Generator Systems (SRWGS) shall not be illuminated unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration. A light temporarily used to inspect a turbine, tower and associated equipment is permissible, providing said light is only used for inspection purposes and not left on for an extended period of time.

10.    Signs. All signs, other than the manufacturer’s or installer’s identification, appropriate warning signs shall be prohibited.

11.    Building Permit. Applicable building permits shall be required for a SRWGS.

12.    The system shall comply with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration requirements, including but not limited to Subpart B (commencing with Section 77.11) of Part 77 of Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations regarding installations close to airports. These regulations apply to any installation within 20,000 feet of an airport and exceeding specific heights based on specific FAA and airport parameters.

13.    If the SRWGS use has been determined by the Planning Director or his or her designee to be inoperative or abandoned for a period of six (6) months, the SRWGS shall be removed, unless a new application to re-establish the use is filed with the City. The property owner shall remove an abandoned facility, repair any and all damage to the premises caused by such removal, and restore the premises as in appropriate to be in compliance with applicable code at any time: 1) after ninety (90) days following a notice of abandonment, or 2) following a notice of decision by the Director of Planning, subject to the owner/operator’s right of appeal under the City of Palmdale Municipal Code. The owner of the premises upon which the abandoned facility was located shall be liable for the entire cost of such removal, repair, restoration and storage.

D.    Review Process

Small Residential Wind Generator Systems (SRWGS) shall be permitted as an Accessory Use when permitted in the zoning district subject to Administrative Approval through a Minor Site Plan Review application.

E.    Submittal Requirements

The applicant shall submit the information required by the appropriate application form, including but not limited to the following information.

Applications for a SRWGS shall include the following items:

1.    Site Plan

a.    Property lines and physical dimensions of the subject property;

b.    Location, dimensions, and types of existing structures on the property;

c.    Location of the proposed SRWGS including, foundations and associated equipment;

d.    Proposed SRWGS elevation drawings,

e.    A rendering of the proposed SRWGS

f.    Any overhead utility lines, and

g.    A SRWGS site specific noise analysis.

2.    A perspective rendering from any abutting public way if the SRWGS is visible from said public way.

3.    Specifications of the SRWGS including manufacturer and model, rotor diameter, and proposed pole height.

4.    Typical pole foundation specifications or drawings from the wind turbine manufacturer.

Chapter 17.100
HILLSIDE MANAGEMENT
17.100.010 Intent and Purpose
The intent and purpose of this Chapter is to implement the goals and policies of the General Plan and the various elements contained therein as they relate to development and resource management in hillside areas within the City of Palmdale. The provisions contained herein will allow for orderly and sensitive development in hillside areas in conjunction with the preservation of natural open space on steeper terrain. The following specific goals and policies reflect those contained in the General Plan and provide the purpose and intent for this Chapter.

A.    To allow for development patterns in hillside areas that minimize erosion and geologic hazards and that provide for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare.

B.    To provide for density of development that respects and is reflective of the natural terrain.

C.    To encourage grading techniques that blend with the natural terrain, minimize earth moving activity, minimize visual impacts of large cut and fill slopes and provide for the preservation of unique and significant natural landforms.

D.    To encourage retention of natural drainage patterns and the preservation of significant riparian areas, both of which are commonly located in hillside areas.

E.    To reduce water use in slope replanting and retention by encouraging grading design that minimizes manufactured slopes.

F.    To allow density transfers where appropriate to facilitate development in more developable locations while retaining significant natural slopes and areas of environmental sensitivity.

G.    To substantially retain the integrity and natural grade elevations of the significant natural ridgelines and prominent landforms that, in aggregate, form the City’s skyline backdrop. Natural landforms and features forming this backdrop include Ritter Ridge, Portal Ridge, Verde Ridge, the Ana Verde Hills, the Sierra Pelona mountains, and secondary ridges associated with the San Andreas Rift Zone and the lower foothills of the San Gabriel mountains.

17.100.020 Applicability
This Chapter establishes specific submittal requirements, review standards, and processing procedures for projects within hillside areas as defined herein. Development applications proposed on a parcel or parcels containing slope areas that fall within the definition of a hillside area shall comply with all procedures, standards, and findings contained in this Chapter. Because this Chapter contains provisions that address a variety of site and project characteristics, the extent that a specific section will impact a project will vary.

Although directed primarily towards minimizing the impacts of residential development, specific provisions of this Chapter which address grading and slope revegetation will apply to all types of development in hillside areas, including, but not limited to, commercial, industrial, and public, quasi-public, or institutional uses.

17.100.030 Definition of Hillside Area and Slope Steepness
A.    A hillside area is defined as any property in the City of Palmdale that contains slope areas of ten (10) percent or greater.

B.    The steepness of a slope is defined as the ratio of the change in elevation (rise) to the horizontal distance (run) over which that change in elevation occurs. The percent of steepness of any given slope is determined by dividing the rise by the run on the natural slope of land, multiplied by 100.

17.100.040 Exemptions From Hillside Area Definition
Parcels containing only individual minor topographic features or drainage courses that contain slopes greater than ten (10) percent may not be considered a hillside area and will not be required to follow procedures set forth in this Chapter if said feature, or features, fall under one of the following categories:

A.    The feature or features contain a vertical height no greater than fifty (50) feet and a horizontal dimension no greater than two hundred (200) feet in any direction as measured from the 10 percent slope line. In the case of multiple isolated landforms on the same property, said isolated landforms shall be physically separate topographic features that are clearly not a component of a significant ridgeline or any other prominent landform that contains slopes greater than ten (10) percent.

B.    Properties only containing slopes of ten (10) percent or greater associated with minor drainage courses not indicated on the United States Geological Survey (U.S.G.S.) maps as intermittent or perennial streams.

C.    Previously created manufactured slopes.

17.100.050 Definitions
Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.100.060 Exclusions
This Chapter shall not be applicable to the following activities and types of projects:

A.    Construction of a single dwelling unit on a parcel of land legally established prior to adoption of this Chapter regardless of the slope steepness on the property.

B.    Any application for a final, tentative, or parcel map, planned development, site plan review, or conditional use permit which was submitted and deemed complete prior to adoption of this Chapter, or any time extension to a previously approved project, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter unless the Director of Planning, Planning Commission, or City Council finds that changes to the project constitute a major modification to the original project approval. Modifications considered major would include, but not be limited to, the following:

1.    An increase in the number of developable lots.

2.    A reduction of lot sizes below the minimum lot size established for the zone or below a size previously approved by the Planning Commission.

3.    An increase to the vertical height or horizontal width of manufactured slopes that, in the opinion of the Director of Planning, alters the plan to a level that may be inconsistent with the original Planning Commission approval.

4.    An increase to building bulk or site/lot coverage that, in the opinion of the Director of Planning, alters the approved plan to a level that may be inconsistent with the original Planning Commission approval.

5.    A combination of minor alterations that represent substantive, cumulative changes to the project, or other similar modifications to the previously approved project that significantly change the design or character of the project as determined by the Director of Planning.

C.    Modification of or addition to an existing single family dwelling and accessory buildings on an existing parcel created prior to the date of adoption of this Chapter. This exemption shall not include an increase in the number of units/lots or change in use.

D.    Any parcel involving a sanitary landfill operation, landfill related gas recovery and collection systems and ancillary electrical power generating and transfer station facilities as well as equipment storage, administrative facilities and ancillary improvements related to a landfill.

E.    Fire breaks and fire roads required by the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

F.    Recreation trails for pedestrian, equestrian, or multi-use purposes.

G.    The construction of public improvements initiated by a public or quasi-public agency including, but not limited to, drainage channels, retention basins, water tanks and pumping stations, provided that such facilities are landscaped and bermed so as to minimize visual impacts.

H.    Lot line adjustments.

I.    Specific Plans conditionally approved prior to the effective date of adoption of this Chapter.

17.100.070 Required Approval for Projects in Hillside Areas
No tentative map, conditional use permit, site plan review or other discretionary approval shall be granted for a project in a hillside area unless the person or entity authorized to grant approval therefor affirmatively finds, in addition to the required findings for the underlying discretionary approval, that the project satisfies the findings set forth in PMC 17.100.180 and otherwise complies with the provisions of this Chapter.

17.100.080 Processing Procedures and Submittal Requirements for Projects in Hillside Areas
A.    At the time an applicant applies for a tentative map, conditional use permit, site plan review or other discretionary approval of a project in a hillside area, the applicant shall submit the items and information listed in subsection C of this Section to the Planning Department. This list is not exclusive and additional information or studies may be required for review of the project pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and other laws. The Director of Planning, at his or her discretion, may modify or eliminate one or several of the submittal requirements listed in subsection C of this Section upon review of specific projects.

B.    In the event it is uncertain whether or not a parcel or parcels of land falls within a hillside area, as defined in the Chapter, the applicant shall submit a slope map and related topographic information to determine the applicability of this Chapter to the project area. The decision as to the applicability of this Chapter to a parcel or parcels of land shall be made by the Director of Planning.

C.    Application submittals for development projects in hillside areas may include, but are not limited to, the items listed below. Additional information or studies may be required if deemed necessary under California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review procedures.

1.    Slope map and analysis

The topographic exhibits and analysis shall be prepared as set forth below.

a.    Slope map

The slope map shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or land surveyor. Said map shall provide the following information:

(i)    The map shall be based on contour intervals no greater than ten (10) feet except where steep terrain warrants contour intervals greater than ten (10) feet.

(ii)    Slope bands in the ranges of 0-10 percent, 10-25 percent, 25-50 percent, and over 50 percent shall be identified in clearly distinguishable graphic representations (ie, shading, pattern, numerical highlighting within clearly defined slope category boundaries, etc.) on the slope map.

(iii)    Individual contours shall be clearly indicated on the slope map or said map shall be augmented by a clear mylar overlay, of the same scale as the slope map, which clearly indicates all individual contours. The slope and topographic overlay maps shall extend off-site a sufficient distance to incorporate the topography of all abutting properties as it relates to the proposed site.

b.    Slope analysis

(i)    The slope analysis shall specifically identify and calculate the slope percentages for each individual topographic feature. Horizontal runs used to calculate slopes shall be limited to each individual feature.

(ii)    Total land area within each category shall be indicated on a table to be provided on the map face.

2.    Preliminary grading plan

a.    A preliminary grading plan prepared by a registered civil engineer indicating the height and width of all manufactured slopes, proposed drainage patterns, methods of storm water detention/retention, and identification of areas to remain in a natural state shall be clearly shown. Off-site contours for adjacent, unimproved areas within fifty (50) feet of the project’s boundaries shall be provided. When adjacent property is improved, pad elevations, street grades, wall sections, and any approved or existing improvements immediately adjacent to the subject property, shall also be shown.

b.    One (1) colored copy of said preliminary grading plan showing all cut and fill areas.

3.    Cross sections/preliminary cut and fill

No less than two (2) cross sections which completely traverse the property at appropriately spaced intervals in locations where topographic variation is greatest. Said exhibits shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer. The cross sections shall clearly depict the vertical variation between natural and finished grade.

4.    Visual impact analysis

The purpose of these exhibits is to replicate how the project will appear if it were to be constructed as conceptually proposed. The study shall include, but not be limited to, panoramic photographs of the project site with an overlay of scaled rendering(s) of the conceptual project designed to depict project appearance when viewed from the Antelope Valley within the sphere of influence of the City of Palmdale or adjacent valleys, as determined by the Director of Planning. In addition to the Planning Department’s guidelines for the preparation of visual studies, specific requirements for the visual study will be established by the City during preliminary or formal application review.

5.    Building envelopes

Horizontal and vertical building envelopes or plot plans/building elevations may be required for subdivisions where visual impacts are being evaluated.

6.    Pedestrian circulation/trails plan

For projects in which hillside street sections as specified in PMC 17.100.150 are proposed, the necessity for sidewalks or alternative pedestrian circulation systems shall be considered during project review. A pedestrian circulation and trail plan may be required if alternatives to standard sidewalks are proposed.

D.    Standards for exhibits

Completeness and accuracy of the above specified plans, studies and other submittal requirements will be determined by the Director of Planning, City Engineer, or their designees in accordance with Section 65943 of the California Government Code. All studies shall be in conformance with the current City guidelines for each individual study or report.

17.100.090 Slope Density Standards
A.    Slope density table

Except as otherwise provided in other portions of this Chapter, no development project shall be approved unless the density of the proposed project complies with the following slope density ratios, as interpreted and applied by succeeding subsections of this Section:

 

Slope Category

Allowable Density

Equivalent

Number of Units

Per Acre

0-10 percent

Upper Limit of the Applicable General Plan Density Range

Same

10-25 percent

.57 du/ac

1 unit/1-3/4 acres

25-50 percent

.40 du/ac

1 unit/2-1/2 acres

Greater than 50 percent

.025 du/ac

1 unit/40 acres

B.    The overall number of units allowed on a property shall be based on the summation of the total number of units allowed within each slope category. All areas within the project boundary shall be included in one of the established categories.

C.    Should slope density calculations allow more units than the underlying General Plan designation, the General Plan designation shall take precedence and is the basis for determining the permitted number of units on a property. In all other cases, the slope density table shall be utilized for calculating allowable density and represents implementation of General Plan policies pertaining to hillside development.

D.    The slope density standards are intended to establish the maximum number of units permitted on a specific property. How and where those units will be placed on the property shall be based on standards and criteria contained in this Chapter. It is not required that units be allocated within a property based on the location of individual slope categories, although the underlying premise of this Chapter is to encourage development on flatter, more developable areas.

E.    Fractional remainders resulting from area calculations multiplied by slope density ratios for individual slope categories shall be included when determining the total number of units possible in a particular category. Any fractional remainders resulting from the summation of allowable density from all categories shall be rounded down when determining the total number of units allowed on a property.

F.    No industrial development shall be allowed on natural slopes of fifteen (15) percent and greater.

17.100.100 Construction on Slopes Greater than Fifty (50) Percent
No construction or grading shall be permitted in areas containing slopes of fifty (50) percent or greater except under the following circumstances:

A.    Development is proposed on isolated peninsula shaped fingers of fifty (50) percent slope within an otherwise developable area of lesser slopes; or

B.    The grading involves the filling of small ravines or drainage courses not shown on the U.S.G.S maps as intermittent or perennial streams which contain ancillary slopes of fifty (50) percent or greater if said ravine or drainage course is not deemed a significant biological area, (as determined by the biological study for the project) and if measures to convey surface water, are proposed to the satisfaction of the City Engineer; or

C.    The grading involves the construction of roads if the fifty (50) percent slope area is an isolated landform as defined in PMC 17.100.040, or if no other reasonable alternatives are available and all hillside street design criteria are met as specified in PMC 17.100.150.

17.100.110 Density Transfers
Density transfers, wherein permissible densities on steeper portions of a property are transferred to portions of the property that require less grading and are less steeply sloped, less ecologically sensitive, and less visually prominent, may be permitted if the proposed transfer complies with the provisions of this Section and Chapter. The purpose of this Section is to establish criteria that address the positive benefits and potential negative impacts created by density transfers. Primary consideration shall be given to established neighborhoods that may be negatively impacted if a project proposing density transfer creates an incompatible interface caused by land uses of significantly different densities and physical characteristics typically associated with those densities. Buffering techniques and physical location are critical factors in minimizing potential impacts.

A.    Density transfer procedures

Any proposal to transfer density shall be in full compliance with this Chapter and any other provisions contained in the Zoning Ordinance.

B.    Density transfer review criteria

A transfer of density shall be found suitable for a particular site only if the proposed density transfer complies with the following standards:

1.    Design of the density transfer minimizes impacts on adjacent areas;

2.    The physical location is suitable for a project proposing density transfer. If available, natural physical features shall be utilized to visually and physically separate higher density housing from nearby areas that are developed at lower densities.

3.    On sites where physical separation utilizing natural features is not feasible, buffering techniques shall be utilized to ensure that density transfer does not result in negative impacts upon existing neighborhoods of a lower density or rural development pattern. Appropriate buffering techniques may include, but are not limited to:

a.    Incorporation of larger lot sizes/patterns which are consistent with the immediately adjacent neighborhoods.

b.    Utilization of architectural styling, fence details, landscape and lot patterns, or similar features that are compatible with those found in adjacent areas.

c.    Establishment of buffer areas of appropriate size to ensure that transition of densities is gradual in order to minimize incompatible mixing of development types associated with various intensities of development.

17.100.120 Development Proposed on Significant Ridgelines and Prominent Landforms Forming the City’s Skyline Backdrop
A.    Purpose and intent

This Section is intended to assure that the physical characteristics of the significant natural ridgelines and prominent landforms on the perimeter of the City, as defined in PMC 17.100.050, are retained as a skyline backdrop to the City, and that any development on physical features encompassing these landforms will integrate with, rather than significantly modify existing topography. The goal of this Section is to encourage site planning techniques that ensure integration of development with physical features such as natural bowls, broad plateaus, valleys, and similar natural landforms. Implementation of this Section will ensure that the natural form and elevations of the City’s skyline backdrop will be retained.

B.    Requirements

All applications for development proposed in these areas shall be subject to the standards and procedures set forth below.

1.    Visual impact study

a.    A visual impact study will be required for projects located on the crest or slope face of prominent landforms and ridgelines that are physical components of the topographic features generally described in PMC 17.100.050 and which form an integral part of the City’s natural skyline backdrop. Applicability of this Section may be determined by the Director of Planning during preliminary conceptual review or during application review. In cases of dispute, the Planning Commission shall have final decision making authority on applicability of this Section.

b.    The above criteria for requiring a visual impact study are not all inclusive and do not preclude the requirement of alternative visual studies for unique circumstances as determined necessary by the Director of Planning.

2.    Review standards

The criteria listed below shall be utilized in evaluating projects located on the crest or slope face of significant ridgelines or prominent landforms forming the City’s skyline backdrop.

a.    All development proposed on prominent landforms or significant ridgelines as defined herein shall be designed to substantially retain the natural contour elevations of these features as viewed from vantage points on the valley floor within the Sphere of Influence of the City of Palmdale or from smaller adjacent valleys.

b.    Grading to substantially re-shape prominent landforms and ridgelines that form a component of the City’s skyline backdrop shall be prohibited.

c.    Dwellings constructed near the crest of a ridgeline or prominent landform shall utilize architectural, grading, and landscaping elements that serve to integrate the structure with the landform upon which it is constructed. In determining whether a project complies with this requirement, a project must be found consistent with the following criteria:

(i)    On steep natural grades, foundations and floor plans should be designed with multi-levels to change elevations with natural contours.

(ii)    Roof planes should be angled in the direction of the natural slope. The main building mass, including gabled sections of roof structures, should face away from lower lying areas.

(iii)    Roof lines should undulate to replicate the natural contours of the land.

(iv)    Building colors should emphasize blending with the surrounding natural terrain.

(v)    Utilize daylight grading techniques where appropriate to reduce disruption of natural topography and vegetation.

(vi)    Structural setbacks from the edge of natural slopes should be utilized to reduce visual prominence of structures.

(vii)    Berming and tree massing near the landform crest should be utilized to blend in with the natural landforms and to screen view of the structure from lower lying areas.

17.100.130 Grading Standards
A.    Purpose and intent

The standards contained in this Section are established to ensure that grading techniques are utilized which reduce erosion potential, minimize visual impacts, promote use of development patterns and street designs that follow natural contours, and minimize length and width of manufactured slopes.

B.    Grading standards

Except as otherwise permitted pursuant to PMC 17.100.140, no project in a hillside area shall be permitted unless the project, or the project as modified with conditions, complies with the following standards.

1.    The maximum height for manufactured slopes shall be thirty (30) feet except as specified in this PMC 17.100.140.

2.    Manufactured fill slopes adjacent to primary and secondary arterials shall be no steeper than 3:1 within landscape assessment areas and public right-of-ways, and shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height unless the slope is lower in elevation than the roadway.

3.    Where a proposed subdivision containing average net lot sizes exceeding twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, lot grading should be limited to building pad and related functional yard area. Flat pad grading of the entire lot is prohibited. The grading plan submitted for project review shall clearly delineate graded and natural portions of proposed lots.

4.    Grading on the perimeter of the site shall not be designed with perimeter downslopes to property lines unless a homeowners association, slope maintenance district, or similar entity is established for maintenance of said downslopes. Exemptions to this requirement may be made for downslopes to property lines that are 4:1 or less. For interior slopes between lots, manufactured building pads shall be designed with up-slopes to property lines.

5.    Subdivision development plans shall indicate a minimum twenty (20) foot setback from the rear dwelling wall to the top or toe of a manufactured slope or retaining wall. The only exception to this standard would be in the case of a terraced rear yard where multiple levels of functional yard space are provided.

6.    Manufactured slopes greater than eight (8) feet in height shall be rounded at the top and at the toe of slope to simulate natural topography. The radius of the rounded slope shall be calculated by dividing the overall height of the slope by three (H/3).

7.    Manufactured slopes in excess of two hundred (200) feet in length and greater than eight (8) feet in height shall be designed with horizontal curvature that simulates the horizontal surface variations of natural contours.

8.    Dwellings proposed on ungraded lots with natural grades of ten (10) percent and greater should follow natural contours, utilizing such techniques as stepped foundations and split level floor plans.

9.    For projects on property defined in PMC 17.100.030 as a hillside area, and where it can be clearly established that reduced setbacks will enhance preservation of natural terrain and reduced grading, front setbacks may be reduced to ten (10) feet as applied to the main portion of the dwelling. The garage setbacks shall remain at twenty (20) feet except for a side loaded garage where a minimum driveway depth of twenty (20) feet from right-of-way edge shall be provided.

10.    Cross lot drainage may be utilized to reduce grading if an overall design and method of maintenance is established to the satisfaction of the City Engineer and Director of Planning. Terrace drains shall be subject to maintenance by private homeowners associations or individual property owners.

11.    Any continuous manufactured slope within a subdivision with a slope steepness of 3:1 or steeper, a vertical height of thirty (30) feet or greater where so allowed under PMC 17.100.140, and which abuts five (5) or more lots, shall require the creation of a Homeowners Association or other maintenance entity with provision for the collection of fees or assessments designated specifically to pay costs associated with the maintenance of these slopes, as well as to create easements or homeowners association lots for maintenance of all slopes falling under this category. The slope maintenance entity, rather than individual property owners, will be responsible for maintenance of said slopes. The tentative tract map shall be designed in a manner that provides access to said slopes by accessible easements and which avoids the necessity of gaining access to the slopes through individual lots. No fences shall be permitted between lots within the slope easement areas. Slope easement areas may be included as lot area for purposes of calculating lot size. Habitable structures shall not be permitted within common slope easement areas.

17.100.140 Landform Grading
A.    Purpose and intent

Landform grading, as defined in PMC 17.100.050, provides an alternative grading technique that may be utilized where unique topographic conditions exist that warrant a non-traditional and creative approach to grading a site.

B.    Authorization for landform grading

The height and slope steepness limitations and other applicable standards for manufactured slopes established under PMC 17.100.130 may be modified under an approved landform grading plan, if the proposed project is found to incorporate the following design elements:

1.    Variation to slope gradients utilizing compound slopes and state of the art grading techniques with maximum slope steepness to be determined by the City Engineer as specified in the Uniform Building Code. An example of this technique would be slope transitions varying from 4:1 to 1:1 punctuated by slopes of varying steepness.

2.    Variation to pad sizes and shapes that correspond to variable topography.

3.    The artful utilization of contour and daylight grading to achieve a subtle transition between natural landforms and man-made slopes.

4.    Use of drainage and landscape elements such as clustering of trees and shrubs typical of concentrations found in nature, incorporation of rock elements into man-made culverts and downdrains, and angling and naturalized coloration of concrete drainage elements to reduce visibility.

5.    The preservation of natural open spaces as part of the overall grading concept.

C.    Determination of compliance with landform grading

Conformance with landform grading provisions shall be determined during project review. It will be the responsibility of the applicant to provide the City with exhibits necessary to establish compliance with mandated design characteristics of landform grading. No modification to the grading standards may be granted unless this determination is made.

17.100.150 Hillside Street Standards
A.    Except as otherwise provided in subsection B of this Section, streets within any project proposed in a hillside area as defined in this Chapter shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards listed below:

1.    Proposed streets in hillside areas shall be aligned parallel to the natural contours of the land where feasible.

2.    Bridges and oversized culverts, if recommended as a biological mitigation measure, may be required when streets cross drainage ways and ravines that serve as important wildlife corridors.

3.    Streets oriented along the top of a significant ridgeline shall be strongly discouraged.

4.    Standard street sections may be modified in hillside areas where streets are proposed on natural grades of fifteen (15) percent or greater, if approved by the City Engineer and Traffic/Transportation Engineer. Said modifications may include the following:

a.    Secondary arterials in hillside areas: Right-of-way width may be reduced to forty-four (44) feet and curb to curb width reduced to thirty-six (36) feet.

b.    Local streets in hillside areas: Right-of-way width may be reduced to forty (40) feet and curb to curb width reduced to thirty-two (32) feet. A six (6) foot wide public utilities easement must be provided outside of the right-of-way.

c.    Cul-de-sacs in hillside areas: Right-of-way width may be reduced to thirty-four (34) feet and curb to curb width to twenty-eight (28) feet. The cul-de-sac radius for hillside streets may be reduced to thirty-two (32) feet.

d.    Any street with a curb to curb width of less than thirty-six (36) feet may have parking prohibited on one side. Any cul-de-sac with a radius of less than forty (40) feet may result in restricted on-street parking as determined by the City Traffic Engineer.

5.    Split level, one-way streets may be permissible in areas of steep terrain when deemed acceptable by the City during project review.

6.    Street lighting shall be designed to minimize visual impacts and retain rural character while conforming to acceptable safety standards.

7.    Street grades shall not exceed the following except as may be modified by the Planning Commission pursuant to PMC 16.12.030(H).

a.    Primary Arterials: eight (8) percent

b.    Secondary Arterials: ten (10) percent

c.    Local Streets: fifteen (15) percent, except for limited distance that may exceed fifteen (15) percent if approved by the City Engineer and the Los Angeles County Fire Department.

B.    Modifications to these standards may be made by the Planning Commission or City Council if it can be found that such modifications further the purpose and intent of this ordinance by reducing grading and overall visual impacts while retaining acceptable traffic safety and street design characteristics as determined by the City Engineer.

17.100.160 Landscape and Erosion Control Standards
A.    The grading plan shall preserve natural terrain and vegetation to the maximum extent feasible by utilizing creative design concepts as permitted by standards established in this Chapter. However, it is recognized that grading in some areas may involve considerable surface disruption and removal of natural vegetation. Where this occurs, and manufactured slopes are created, the following standards and submittal requirements shall apply:

1.    With formal application: Conceptual landscape plans indicating both temporary and permanent slope plantings shall be submitted to the Planning Department. Included on said plans shall be a conceptual plant pallet and description of the irrigation system to be utilized.

2.    Prior to grading permit issuance: A manufactured slope re-vegetation report analyzing existing soil conditions, proposed soil amendments, and plant suitability for review and approval by the City Landscape Architect.

17.100.170 Slope Maintenance
A.    Developer maintained slope areas

The developer shall be responsible for slope re-vegetation including compliance with all provisions of Article 70 (Excavation and Grading) of the Uniform Building Code (UBC), as adopted by the City of Palmdale, prior to the transfer of perpetual maintenance responsibilities of said slopes to individual property owners, a homeowner’s association, or other slope maintenance entity. A performance bond for an amount to be established by the Public Works Department shall be posted with the City in order to ensure that the ultimate establishment of all re-vegetation is completed.

B.    Commonly maintained slopes

Projects containing slopes requiring homeowners association maintenance will be subject to comprehensive Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CC&R’s) which include slope maintenance provisions. Said CC&R’s shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning and City Attorney prior to recordation of a final map for the project.

C.    Erosion control standards

Erosion control measures meeting the current specifications of the City Engineering Design Standards and Uniform Building Code that are in effect on the date when the formal application for the project is submitted shall be provided.

17.100.180 Hillside Development Findings
No project in a hillside development area shall be approved by the Planning Commission or City Council unless it is found to conform to all of the following findings based on criteria and standards set forth in this Chapter:

A.    The density, grading, and design standards contained in this Chapter have been complied with in the overall design of the project.

B.    The project design and site layout retains and utilizes natural contours of the site to the maximum extent feasible.

C.    The project design incorporates drought tolerant landscape materials, water conserving irrigation techniques and erosion control measures in a manner that eliminates both short and long term erosion hazards while providing for aesthetic and effective re-vegetation of these slope areas.

D.    Development is sited in a manner that substantially retains the visual qualities and natural elevations of the significant ridgelines and prominent landforms forming the City’s skyline backdrop, as defined in this Chapter, and preserves those portions of the ridgelines visible from the Antelope Valley floor, or adjacent valleys, as a scenic skyline backdrop to the City.

E.    The impacts on adjacent neighborhoods of an established character are minimized when density transfer is proposed by employing design elements and locational characteristics consistent with criteria contained in PMC 17.100.110.

17.100.190 Variances to the Hillside Management Ordinance
No variance from the provisions of this Chapter shall be allowed unless it is approved pursuant to provisions of Chapter 17.23 PMC.

Chapter 17.101
TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT
17.101.010 Applicability of Requirements
A.    This Chapter shall not apply to:

1.    Projects for which a certificate of occupancy/final inspection has been issued prior to the effective date of this Section.

2.    Projects for which a building permit has been issued and which were approved prior to the effective date of this Section without a condition that they comply with the requirements of the CMP and any local implementing ordinance.

3.    Projects which are specifically exempt from these requirements by the provisions of an approved vesting tentative map, specific plan or development agreement.

B.    The gross square footage of all additions made to an existing building after the effective date of this Section shall be aggregated for purposes of determining whether the thresholds contained in PMC 17.101.020 have been met; however, existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements.

17.101.020 Definitions
Refer to Chapter 17.16 PMC. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995. Zoning Ordinance Amendment 19-001, adopted by City Council April 2, 2019.)

17.101.030 Development Standards
A.    Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provision for, at a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures. All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of this Chapter either directly or by delegating such responsibility as may be appropriate to a tenant or to an agent.

B.    All development shall provide the following to the satisfaction of the City:

1.    Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development. Developments with fewer than four (4) dwellings are exempt from this provision.

2.    If determined necessary by the City, bus stop improvements must be provided. The City will consult with the Transit Operator in determining appropriate improvements.

C.    Non-residential development of 25,000 square feet or more shall comply with PMC 17.116.020(2) and shall provide a bulletin board, display case, or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it, to the satisfaction of the City. In the event that such structure is placed outdoors, the design and location shall be subject to review and approval by the Director of Planning. Information in or on such structure shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

1.    Current maps, routes and schedules for public transportation serving the site.

2.    Telephone numbers for transportation information, including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators.

3.    Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations.

 

4.    Bicycle route and facility information, including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information.

5.    A listing of facilities available at the site for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians.

6.    For non-residential developments of 50,000 square feet or more, a statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the procedures for obtaining such spaces.

D.    Non-residential development of 50,000 square feet or more shall comply with PMC 17.101.020(B) and (C) and shall comply with all of the following measures to the satisfaction of the City:

1.    Not less than ten (10) percent of the employee parking area shall be identified as a preferential carpool/vanpool parking area on the site plan submitted with an application for a building permit. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles, without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the procedures for obtaining such spaces shall be included on the required transportation information board. To the extent possible, spaces will be signed or striped as demand warrants, even if demand exceeds the ten (10) percent of the employee parking area designated on the site plan. At least one space for projects of 50,000 square feet to 100,000 square feet, and two spaces for projects over 100,000 square feet, shall be signed or striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.

a.    Employee parking shall be calculated as follows: (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 95-1 adopted by City Council June 14, 1995.)

 

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking Devoted to Employees

Commercial

30%

Office/Professional

85%

Industrial/Manufacturing

90%

2.    Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven (7) feet two (2) inches, with appropriate adjustments for slope changes, shall be provided for those accessways and spaces to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas. No more than ten (10) percent of the employee parking area shall be required to provide access to vanpool vehicles.

Chapter 17.102
SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION
17.102.010 Incorporation of SMARA and State Regulations
The provisions of the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975 (P.R.C. Sec. 2710 et seq.), P.R.C. Section 2207, and Title 14, Division 8, Section 3500 et seq. of the California Code of Regulations implementing the Act, hereinafter referred to as the State Regulations, as either may be amended from time to time, are made a part of this Chapter by reference with the same force and effect as if the provisions therein were specifically and fully set out herein, excepting that when the provisions of this Chapter are more restrictive than conflicting State provisions, this Chapter shall prevail.

17.102.020 Definitions
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases are defined as follows. Any word, phrase or term which is not defined in this Chapter but which is defined in Chapter 17.16 PMC shall mean the same as the definition contained in Chapter 17.16 PMC.

Exploration or Prospecting shall mean the search for minerals by geological, geophysical, geochemical or other techniques, including, but not limited to, sampling, assaying, drilling, or any surface or underground works needed to determine the type, extent, or quantity of minerals present.

Haul Road shall mean a road along which material is transported from the area of excavation to the processing plant or stock pile area of the surface mining operation.

Idle shall mean to curtail for a period of one year or more surface mining operations by more than 90 percent of the operation’s previous maximum annual mineral production, with the intent to resume those surface mining operations at a future date. (SMARA, Sec. 2727.1)

Mined Lands shall include the surface, subsurface, and groundwater of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations are located.

Minerals shall mean any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances including, but not limited to, coal, peat, bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas, and petroleum. For the purpose of this Chapter, minerals shall also include but not be limited to sand, gravel, cinders, diatomaceous earth, shale, limestone, flagstone, decorative stone, and rip-rap.

Mining Waste shall include the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment, machines, tools, or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations.

Operator shall mean any person who is engaged in surface mining operations or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his sole compensation.

Overburden shall mean soil, rock, or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal, by surface mining operations.

Permit shall mean any formal authorization from, or approved by, the City, the absence of which would preclude surface mining operations.

Person shall mean any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization, or partnership, or any city, county, district, or the state or any department or agency thereof.

Reclamation shall mean the process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion, and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization, or other measures.

State Board shall mean the State Mining and Geology Board, in the Department of Conservation, State of California.

State Geologist shall mean the individual holding office as structured in Section 677 of Article 3, Division 2 of Division 1 of the Public Resources Code.

Surface Mining Operations shall mean all or any part of the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall include, but are not limited to:

1.    In-place distillation, retorting or leaching.

2.    The production and disposal of mining waste.

3.    Prospecting and exploratory activities.

4.    Borrow pitting

5.    Streambed skimming

6.    Segregation and stockpiling of mined materials (and recovery of the same)

17.102.030 Applicability of Requirements
A.    Requirements for conditional use permits

Unless exempted by provisions of this Chapter, an approved conditional use permit as provided in Chapter 17.22 PMC shall be required for all surface mining operations in all zoning districts in which surface mining is allowed; and shall be required for the expansion or substantial change of operation of any surface mine for which such expansion or changes have not been thereby approved, including any operation which meets the definition of a “non-conforming use” pursuant to Chapter 17.29 PMC.

B.    Requirements for reclamation plans.

A Reclamation Plan shall be required for all surface mining operations in all zoning districts in which surface mining is allowed, as well as for those portions of existing surface mining operations conducted after January 1, 1976, unless a Reclamation Plan was approved by the City prior to that date and the person submitting that plan has accepted responsibility for carrying out the plan. Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as requiring the filing of a Reclamation Plan for, or the reclamation of, mined lands on which surface mining operations were conducted legally and in compliance with all applicable City regulations prior to January 1, 1976.

C.    Exemptions

A Reclamation Plan shall not be required for any of the following activities:

1.    Excavations or grading conducted for farming or onsite construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster. (SMARA, Sec. 2714(a)).

2.    Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes and the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than 1,000 cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less. (SMARA, Sec. 2714(b)).

3.    Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if such operations are conducted solely for that purpose. (SMARA, Sec. 2714(c)).

4.    Emergency excavations or grading conducted by the Department of Water Resources (DWR) or the Reclamation Board for flood control purposes.

5.    Such other surface mining operations which the State Mining and Geology Board determines to be of an infrequent nature and which involve only minor surface disturbances. (SMARA, Section 2714(d)).

17.102.040 Contents of Applications for Conditional Use Permits for Surface Mining Operations and Reclamation Plans
A.    In addition to the conditional use permit (CUP) application required in Chapter 17.22 PMC, all applications for a CUP for surface mining operations shall contain the surface mining and reclamation application supplement required by the Planning Department. As many copies of the CUP and surface mining and reclamation application supplement as may be required shall be submitted to the Planning Department.

B.    As many copies of a reclamation plan application as may be required shall be submitted in conjunction with all applications for CUPs for surface mining operations. For surface mining operations that are exempt from a CUP pursuant to this Chapter, the reclamation plan application shall include information concerning the mining operation that is required for processing the reclamation plan.

C.    Applications shall include the necessary environmental review information prescribed by the Planning Department.

17.102.050 Processing
A.    The Planning Department will review the application package for completeness and shall, within 30 days after receipt, either accept the application as complete for the purpose of initiating permit processing or return the application as incomplete with an explanation of where the application is deficient. Resubmittal of the revised application shall start a new review timeframe.

B.    Within thirty (30) days of acceptance of an application for a CUP for surface mining operations and/or a Reclamation Plan as complete, the Planning Department shall notify the Director of the Department of Conservation of the filing of the application(s) (SMARA, Sec. 2774(e)). Whenever mining operations are proposed in the 100-year flood plain of any stream, as shown in Zone A of the Flood Insurance Rate Maps issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, and within one mile, upstream or downstream, of any state highway bridge, the Planning Department shall also notify the State Department of Transportation that an application has been received (SMARA, Sec. 2770.5).

C.    The Planning Department shall process the application(s) through environmental review pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the City’s Local CEQA Guidelines.

D.    Subsequent to the appropriate environmental review, the Planning Department shall prepare a staff report with recommendations for consideration by the Planning Commission, which incorporates input from any other affected department or agency.

E.    The Planning Commission shall hold at least one noticed public hearing on the conditional use permit and/or reclamation plan.

F.    Prior to final approval of a reclamation plan, financial assurance (as provided in this Chapter), or any amendments to a reclamation plan, the Planning Commission shall certify to the Director of the Department of Conservation that the reclamation plan complies with the applicable requirements of the state regulations and submit the plan, assurances, or amendment to said Director for review (SMARA, Sec. 2774(c)). The Planning Commission may conceptually approve the reclamation plan before submittal to the Director of the Department of Conservation.

G.    If a conditional use permit is being processed concurrently with the reclamation plan, the Planning Commission may also conceptually approve the CUP at this time. However, the Planning Commission may defer action on the CUP until taking final action on the reclamation plan. If necessary to comply with permit processing deadlines, the Planning Commission may conditionally approve the CUP with the condition that the Planning Department shall not release the mining operation for occupancy until financial assurances have been reviewed by the Director of the Department of Conservation and final action has been taken on the reclamation plan.

H.    The Director of the Department of Conservation shall have forty-five (45) days to prepare written comments on the reclamation plan (SMARA, Sec. 2774(d)). The Planning Commission shall evaluate written comments received from the State during the 45-day comment period. Staff shall prepare a written response describing the disposition of the major issues raised by the State for the Planning Commission’s approval. In particular, when the City’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised in the State’s comments, the written response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted (SMARA, Sec. 2774(d)). Copies of any written comments received and responses prepared by the Planning Commission shall be promptly forwarded to the operator.

I.    The Planning Commission shall then take final action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny the conditional use permit and/or reclamation plan. The Planning Commission’s action shall be final, subject to appeal as provided in PMC 17.20.110.

J.    The Planning Department shall forward a copy of each approved conditional use permit for mining operations and/or approved reclamation plan to the Director of the Department of Conservation.

K.    Annual Reports – Surface mining operators shall forward an annual status report to the Director of the Department of Conservation and the City Planning Department on a date established by the Director of the Department of Conservation upon forms furnished by the State Mining and Geology Board (P.R.C. Sec. 2207 (a)-(g)).

L.    A copy of the final approved reclamation plan shall be kept on-site at all times.

17.102.060 Performance Standards for Reclamation Plans
A.    All new or revised reclamation plans shall conform to minimum statewide performance standards required pursuant to California Code of Regulations 3700 et. seq. (Reclamation Standards) and SMARA Sec. 2773, as adopted by the State Mining and Geology Board, including but not limited to wildlife habitat, backfilling, regrading, slope stability, recontouring, erosion control, revegetation, drainage, agricultural land reclamation, equipment removal, stream protection, topsoil salvage, tailing and mine waste management and maintenance.

B.    The City of Palmdale may impose additional performance standards developed either in review of individual projects, as warranted, or through the formulation and adoption of City-wide performance standards on any new reclamation plan or modification to a previously approved reclamation plan.

17.102.070 Phasing of Reclamation
A.    Phasing of Reclamation – Reclamation activities shall be phased with respect to the phasing of the mining operation and shall be initiated at the earliest possible time on those portions of the mined lands that will not be subject to further disturbance (SMARA, Sec. 2772(f)); (see also, Sec. 77.07.022. Interim Management Plans).

B.    Interim reclamation may also be required for mined lands that have been disturbed and will be disturbed again in future operations if it is determined to be necessary to ensure the success of final reclamation or for health and safety purposes. Reclamation may be done on an annual basis, or in stages compatible with continuing operations, or on completion of all excavation, removal, or fill as approved by the City. Each phase of reclamation shall be specifically described in the reclamation plan and shall include: the approximate length of time for completion of each phase; all reclamation activities required; criteria for measuring completion of specific reclamation activities; and estimated costs as provided in Sec. 77.07.020 (Financial Assurances For Reclamation Plans). The City shall approve the reclamation schedule.

17.102.080 Findings for Approval
In addition to the findings for approval conditional use permits contained in Chapter 17.22 PMC, approval for surface mining operations shall include a finding that the project complies with the provisions of State law and regulation.

A.    For reclamation plans, the following findings shall be made by the reviewing authority prior to approval:

1.    The reclamation plan complies with Sections 2772, 2773, and 2773.1 of SMARA and any other applicable provisions;

2.    The reclamation plan complies with applicable requirements of Title 14, Division 8, Section 3500 et seq. of the California Code of Regulations.

3.    The reclamation plan and potential use of reclaimed land pursuant to the Plan are consistent with this Chapter and the City’s General Plan.

4.    Through implementation of the reclamation plan, all significant adverse impacts on lands to be reclaimed as a result of the surface mining operations are mitigated to the maximum extent feasible.

5.    The land and/or resources to be reclaimed will be restored to a condition that is compatible with the surrounding environment.

6.    That the Reclamation Plan and potential use of reclaimed land pursuant to the Plan are consistent with any applicable air quality and/or water quality resource plan and/or that suitable off-site development will compensate for related disturbances to resource values existing after reclamation is completed.

7.    The reclamation plan will restore the mined lands to a usable condition which is adaptable for alternative land uses consistent with the General Plan and any other applicable plan or element.

8.    A written response to the Director of the Department of Conservation has been prepared, describing the disposition of major issues raised by the Director. Where the City’s position is at variance with the recommendations and objections raised by the Director, said response shall address, in detail, why specific comments and suggestions were not accepted. (SMARA, Sec. 2772(d)).

17.102.090 Financial Assurances for Reclamation Plans
A.    In order to ensure that reclamation will proceed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan, the City shall require as a condition of approval one or more forms of security which will be released upon satisfactory performance. The applicant shall post security in the form of a corporate surety bond, trust fund, irrevocable letter of credit from an accredited financial institution, a certificate of time deposit as part of an approved trust fund, or other method acceptable to the City and the Department of Conservation as specified in statewide regulations adopted by the Mining and Geology Board. Financial assurances shall be made payable to the City of Palmdale and the Department of Conservation (SMARA, Sec. 2773.1(a)(4)).

B.    Financial assurances shall be required to ensure compliance with elements of the reclamation plan including but not limited to revegetation and landscaping requirements; restoration of wildlife habitat; protection of archaeological sites; restoration of water bodies and water quality; slope stability and erosion and drainage control, disposal of hazardous materials; and other mitigation measures. Financial assurances for such elements of the reclamation plan shall be monitored by the Planning Department.

C.    Financial assurances shall not be released until written notification has been made by the Planning Director to the mining operator and the Director of the Department of Conservation that reclamation has been completed in accordance with the approved reclamation plan (SMARA, Sec. 2773.1(c).

D.    The amount of financial assurances shall be based upon the estimated costs of reclamation for each year or phase stipulated in the Reclamation Plan, including any irrigation and maintenance of reclaimed areas as may be required. Cost estimates shall be prepared by a licensed engineer and/or other qualified professionals retained by the operator; such estimates shall be approved by the Planning Director. Financial assurances may be based upon estimates including but not necessarily limited to the volume of earth moved (cubic yards) for each year or phase of reclamation. Financial assurances to ensure compliance with revegetation, restoration of wildlife habitat, and any other applicable element of the reclamation plan shall be based upon cost estimates that include but may not be limited to labor, equipment, materials, mobilization of equipment, administration, and reasonable profit by a commercial operator other than the permittee.

E.    In projecting the costs of financial assurances, it shall be assumed without prejudice or insinuation that the surface mining operation could be abandoned by an operator and, consequently, the City or State may need to contract with a third-party commercial company for mobilization and reclamation of the site.

F.    Where reclamation is accomplished in annual increments, the amount of financial assurances required for any one year shall be adjusted annually and shall be adequate to cover the full estimated costs for reclamation of any land projected to be in a disturbed condition from mining operations by the end of the following year. The estimated costs shall be the amount required to complete the reclamation on all areas that will not be subject to further disturbance, and to provide interim reclamation, as necessary, for any partially excavated areas in accordance with the reclamation plan. Financial assurances for each year shall be released upon successful completion of reclamation (including any maintenance required) of all areas that will not be subject to further disturbance and upon the operator filing additional financial assurances for the succeeding year. Financial assurances for all subsequent years of the operation shall be handled in the same manner.

G.    Financial assurances for reclamation that is accomplished in multiple-year phases shall be handled in the same manner as described for annual reclamation.

H.    If a change of ownership occurs, the existing financial assurance remains in force until a replacement financial assurance is approved by the lead agency.

17.102.100 Inspections
A.    The Planning Department shall arrange for inspection of a surface mining operation within six (6) months of receipt of the annual report required in Sec. 77.07.016(h), to determine whether the surface mining operation is in compliance with the reclamation plan and the state regulations (SMARA, Sec. 2774(b)).

B.    In no event shall less than one inspection be conducted in any calendar year. Said inspections may be made by a state-registered geologist, state-registered civil engineer, state-licensed landscape architect, state-registered forester, or other qualified specialist who has not been employed by the mining operation in any capacity during the previous twelve (12) months, as selected by the Planning Department. All inspections shall be conducted using a form provided by the State Mining and Geology Board. The Planning Department shall notify the Director of the Department of Conservation within thirty (30) days of completion of the inspection that the inspection has been conducted and shall forward a copy of said inspection notice and any supporting documentation to the mining operator. The operator shall be solely responsible for the reasonable cost of such inspection.

17.102.110 Interim Management Plans
(See also, PMC 17.102.070, Phasing of Reclamation)

A.    Within ninety (90) days of a surface mining operation becoming idle, as defined in this Chapter, the operator shall submit to the Planning Department an interim management plan (SMARA, Sec. 2770(h)). The interim management plan shall fully comply with the requirements of SMARA, Sec. 2770(h) and shall provide measures the operator will implement to maintain the site in compliance with SMARA, including, but not limited to, all conditions of the conditional use permit and/or Reclamation Plan approval. The interim management plan shall be processed as a minor amendment to the reclamation plan and shall not be considered a project for the purposes of environmental review (SMARA, Sec. 2770(h)).

B.    The Director of the Department of Conservation shall have forty-five (45) days to prepare written comments on the interim management plan, if she/he so chooses.

C.    Financial assurances for idle operations shall be continued as addressed in the reclamation plan or as otherwise approved through the idle mine’s interim management plan.

D.    Within sixty (60) days of receipt of the interim management plan, or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the Planning Department and the operator, the Planning Director shall review and approve or deny the plan in accordance with this Chapter. The operator shall have thirty (30) days or a longer period mutually agreed upon by the operator and the Planning Director to submit a revised plan. The Planning Director shall approve or deny the revised interim management plan within sixty (60) days of receipt. If the Planning Director denies the revised interim management plan, the operator may appeal that action to the Planning Commission.

E.    The interim management plan may remain in effect for a period not to exceed five (5) years, at which time the Planning Commission may renew the plan for another period not to exceed five (5) years or require the surface mining operator to commence reclamation in accordance with its approved reclamation plan.

17.102.120 Time Limit for Commencement of a Conditional Use Permit for Surface Mining Operations
The time limit for commencing a surface mining operation that is permitted pursuant to this Section shall be as specified in the conditions of approval for the approved conditional use permit.

17.102.130 Modifications to Reclamation Plans
A.    Requests for modifications of approved reclamation plans shall be processed in the same manner as original applications for reclamation plan reviews unless they are determined to be minor modifications. Applications for minor modifications may be submitted in connection with the following, as long as it is not incompatible with existing conditions and/or plans.

B.    To allow the minor recontouring of final topography, providing slope stability is maintained and substantiated; effecting no more than 10% of the site.

C.    To allow minor modification or addition of site access.

D.    To allow a minor substitution in the Reclamation Plan, provided it does not substantially alter the intended end use described in the approved Reclamation Plan.

E.    To allow minor technological and/or administrative changes in methods used to achieve reclamation.

F.    To allow measures to be taken which will ensure and/or maintain public safety (e.g. fences, gates, signs, or hazard removal) provided it does not substantially alter the intended end use described in the approved Reclamation Plan.

G.    To allow minor modifications to a previously approved phasing plan.

H.    To allow interim management plans.

17.102.140 Violations and Penalties
If the Planning Department, based upon an annual inspection or otherwise confirmed by an inspection of the mining operation, determines that a surface mining operation is not in compliance with this Chapter, the applicable permit and/or the Reclamation Plan, the City may follow the administrative procedures set forth in SMARA, Sections 2774.1 and 2774.2 concerning violations and penalties, including penalties assessed for late reporting pursuant to P.R.C. Section 2207; however, such remedy is in addition to all of the provisions and remedies of this Code, State law, and any law cognizable at common law or in equity, and nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted or construed to supersede or limit any and all other remedies, whether administrative, civil or criminal. (Zoning Ordinance Amendment 97-2, adopted by City Council June 11, 1997.)

17.102.150 Fees
The City shall establish such fees as it deems necessary to cover the reasonable costs incurred in implementing this Chapter and the State Regulations, including but not limited to processing of applications, annual reports, inspections, monitoring, enforcement and compliance.

Title 18
AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS AND FACILITIES
Chapters:

18.05    Helicopters

Chapter 18.05
HELICOPTERS
Sections:

18.05.010    Definitions.

18.05.020    Helicopter takeoff and landing restrictions.

18.05.030    Government helicopters exempted.

18.05.010 Definitions.
(A) “Helicopter” means a rotocraft which principally depends for its support and motion in the air upon the lift generated by one or more power-driven rotors that rotate on a substantially vertical axis.

(B) “Permitted heliport” means an area of land, water, or structure permitted by the California Department of Transportation to be used for the landing and takeoff of helicopters. (Ord. 1488 § 2, 2016)

18.05.020 Helicopter takeoff and landing restrictions.
Except in case of emergency, no person shall take off or land a helicopter within the City of Palmdale except from, or upon, a landing field at a designated airport or permitted heliport. (Ord. 1488 § 2, 2016)

18.05.030 Government helicopters exempted.
This chapter shall not apply to any helicopter operated by a Federal, State, or local agency engaged in public safety services. (Ord. 1488 § 2, 2016)