PARADISE MUNICIPAL CODE 1983 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances
of Paradise, California 
____________ 
Date of Publication: 2002 
____________ 
 
PREFACE 
The Paradise Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1983, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Municipal Code Corporation, its successor in interest. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Claude Biddle, city attorney. 
The Code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.050 is Section .050, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification. 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance No. 578, passed May 22, 2019. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters :  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections : 
 
1.01.010 - Adopted. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the Paradise Municipal Code, as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary Codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary Codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the Paradise Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 106 § 1, 1983)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This Code shall be known as the Paradise Municipal Code and it shall be sufficient to refer to the Code as the Paradise Municipal Code in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Paradise Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Paradise Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the Code. 
(Ord. 106, § 2, 1983)  
1.01.030 - Codification authority. 
This Code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the Town of Paradise, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 106 § 3, 1983)  
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of Code. 
The last ordinance included in this Code was Ordinance No. 94, passed April 19, 1983. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 94, but prior to the adoption of this Code, are adopted and made a part of this Code: 
A.  Ordinance No. 95. An ordinance extending interim zoning for property annexed to the Town of Paradise, adopted April 13, 1983. 
B.  Ordinance No. 96. An ordinance adopting the official town seal for the Town of Paradise, adopted May 3, 1983. 
C.  Ordinance No. 97. An ordinance amending in part Ordinance No. 34 adding Appendix E of the Uniform Fire Code, 1979 Edition, adopted May 3, 1983. 
D.  Ordinance No. 98. An ordinance establishing truck routes within the Town of Paradise, adopted May 17, 1983. 
E.  Ordinance No. 99. An ordinance of the Town of Paradise relating to the control of noise and vibration, adopted June 7, 1983. 
F.  Ordinance No. 100. An ordinance regulating the establishment of adult entertainment business within the Town of Paradise, adopted May 3, 1983. 
G.  Ordinance No. 101. An ordinance regulating the construction and placement of second dwelling units on certain property within the Town of Paradise, adopted June 21, 1983. 
H.  Ordinance No. 102. An ordinance amending Ordinance No. 58 of the Town of Paradise, creating and establishing the office of town manager, defining the duties and powers thereof and providing compensation therefor, adopted June 21, 1983. 
I.  Ordinance No. 103. Town of Paradise sewage disposal ordinance, adopted June 21, 1983. 
J.  Ordinance No. 104. An ordinance zoning a portion of the Town of Paradise an R-1 district, pursuant to Chapter 24-29 of the Butte County Code, as adopted by Town of Paradise, adopted June 21, 1983. 
K.  Ordinance No. 105. An ordinance amending Section 24-141 of the zoning ordinance regarding permitted uses in the R-3 zone, adopted July 19, 1983. 
(Ord. 106, § 4, 1983)  
1.01.050 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this Code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the Code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this Code. 
(Ord. 106, § 8, 1983)  
1.01.060 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this Code as the Paradise Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the Town of Paradise, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 106, § 6, 1983)  
1.01.070 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this Code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this Code. 
(Ord. 106, § 7, 1983)  
1.01.080 - Effect of Code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this Code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the Town of Paradise shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at the effective date, due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance, and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 106 § 9, 1983)  
1.01.090 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this Code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Code. The council declares that it would have passed this Code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this Code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 106 §11, 1983)  
1.01.100 - Effective date. 
This Code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this Code as the Paradise Municipal Code becomes effective. (Ord. 106 § 10, 1983)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections : 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in the ordinances of the Town of Paradise, California, shall be construed as defined in this section unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City" and "town" each mean the Town of Paradise, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the Town of Paradise, California, and such territory outside of the town over which the town has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Council" means the town council of the Town of Paradise. "All its members" or "all councilmen" means the total number of councilmen holding office. 
C.  "County" means the county of Butte. 
D.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the Town of Paradise, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
E.  "May" is permissive. 
F.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
G.  "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
H.  "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
I.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
J.  "Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employees of any of them. 
K.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
L.  "Preceding" and "following" means next before and next after, respectively. 
M.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
N.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
O.  "State" means the State of California. 
P.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this town which have been or may be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
Q.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
R.  "Written" includes printed or otherwise reproduced. 
S.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 72 § 1, 1982)  
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the town. 
(Ord. 72 § 2, 1982)  
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 72 § 3, 1982)  
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in the ordinances of the town, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 72 § 4, 1982)  
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 72 § 5, 1982)  
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
Whenever in the ordinances of the town, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 72 § 6, 1982)  
1.04.070 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 72 § 7, 1982)  
1.04.080 - Construction. 
The provisions of the ordinances of the town, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 72 § 8, 1982)  
1.04.090 - Repeal shall not revive any ordinances. 
The repeal of an ordinance shall not repeal the repealing clause of an ordinance or revive any ordinance which has been repealed thereby. 
(Ord. 72 § 9, 1982)  
Chapter 1.08 - ENFORCEMENT OF VIOLATIONS 
Sections : 
 
1.08.010 - General penalty. 
A.  Whenever in the ordinances of the town or this Code any action is prohibited, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or the action is required, or the failure to do the action is declared to be unlawful; and where no specific penalty is specifically provided for violation of the statutes of said ordinances of the town or this Code, then the person or party committing such violation shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code § 36900. 
B.  Any additional violation committed within one year of the first violation may be prosecuted by the town attorney as a misdemeanor with a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars and/or six months in the county jail; and provided, however, the town attorney shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. 
C.  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
D.  The aforementioned penalties shall not be deemed to exclude any other remedy for violation of any ordinances of the town or this Code. 
(Ord. 76 § 1, 1982: Ord. 47 § 1 (A), 1981; Ord. No. 401, § 1, 8-26-2003)  
1.08.020 - Infraction proceedings. 
No person shall be arrested for a violation of any provision of any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation adopted by the town, the violation of which is an infraction, except as provided in this section. Proceedings for the violation of any such provision which constitutes an infraction may be commenced by the following procedure: 
A.  The officer of the town in charge of the enforcement of such provisions may prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of the person against whom the offense is charged, the offense charged, and the time and place when such person shall appear in court. Such notice, except as otherwise provided in this section, shall substantially conform to the provisions of the Penal Code of the state respecting notices to appear insofar as the same are applicable to infractions. The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least ten days after the notice is personally served upon the person charged with the offense. The place specified in the notice to appear shall be before the judge of the justice court of the Paradise judicial district. The enforcing officer shall cause to be personally served one copy of the notice to appear on the person charged with the offense. The duplicate copy of the notice to appear shall, as soon as practicable after service of the same, be filed with the clerk of the justice court, containing an affidavit of personal service. 
B.  Should the person charged fail to appear at the time specified in the notice to appear, such failure, if wilful, shall constitute a misdemeanor, regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he has to appear. The person charged may thereafter be arrested, not only upon such misdemeanor, but upon the charges upon which he failed to appear, as though the same were misdemeanors, and in regard to such arrest, such person shall be subject to all procedures for arrest contained in this chapter which are applicable to misdemeanors. (Ord. 76 § 2, 1982: Ord. 47 § 2 (A), 1981)  
1.08.030 - Misdemeanor proceedings. 
Sections 1.08.040 through 1.08.100, inclusive, shall apply to all provisions of the ordinances, resolutions and rules and regulations of the town and boards and commissions thereof, regularly adopted by the town, including those sections, ordinances, resolutions and rules and regulations enacted after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, violations of which are misdemeanors, and also to an offense declared by state law to be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 47 § 3 (part), 1981)  
1.08.040 - Notice to appear. 
If any person is arrested for violation of any section of any resolution, ordinance, rule or regulation adopted by the town, or an offense declared by state law to be a misdemeanor, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate, as more fully set forth in the Penal Code of the state, the arresting officer shall prepare, in duplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time and place when such person shall appear in court. Such notices, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, shall substantially conform to, and the arresting officer shall act in accordance with, the provisions of Chapters 5b, 5c and 5d of Part 2, Title 3 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 47 § 3 (A), 1981)  
1.08.050 - Time to appear. 
The time specified in the notice to appear, unless waived by the person, must be at least ten days after the arrest. (Ord. 47 § 3 (B), 1981)  
1.08.060 - Place to appear. 
The place specified in the notice to appear shall be either: 
A.  Before a judge of the justice court in the judicial district in which the town is located in which the offense charged is alleged to have been committed, who has jurisdiction of the offense, and who is nearest and most accessible with reference to the place where the arrest is made; or 
B.  Upon demand of the person arrested, before a judge having jurisdiction in the judicial district in which the offense is alleged to have been committed; or 
C.  Before an officer authorized by the town or the judge of the judicial district in which the town is located to receive a deposit of bail. (Ord. 47 § 3 (C), 1981)  
1.08.070 - Delivery of notice—Promise to appear. 
The officer shall deliver one copy of the notice to appear to the arrested person. An arrested person, in order to secure release, must give his written promise so to appear in court by signing the duplicate notice, which shall be retained by the officer. Thereupon, the arresting officer shall forthwith release the person arrested from custody. (Ord. 47 § 3 (D), 1981)  
1.08.080 - Prosecution initiation—Bail. 
The officer shall, as soon as practicable, file the duplicate notice and underlying police reports in support of the charge or charges with the prosecuting attorney. Within twenty-five days from the time of arrest the prosecutor, within his or her discretion, may initiate prosecution by filing the notice or a formal complaint with the magistrate specified therein. If the prosecution is not to be initiated, the prosecutor shall send notice to the person arrested at the address on the notice to appear. Thereupon the magistrate may fix the amount of bail which, in his judgment, in accordance with the provisions of Section 1275 of the Penal Code, will be reasonable and sufficient for the appearance of the defendant and shall indorse upon the notice a statement signed by him in the form set forth in Section 815a of the Penal Code. The defendant may, prior to the date upon which he promised to appear in court, deposit with the magistrate the amount of bail thus set. Thereafter, at the time when the case is called for arraignment before the magistrate, if the defendant shall not appear, either in person or by counsel, the magistrate may declare the bail forfeited, and may in his discretion order that no further proceedings shall be had in such case. (Ord. 76 § 3, 1982: Ord. 47 §3 (E), 1981)  
1.08.090 - Taking in lieu of citation. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to require any arresting officer to issue a citation instead of taking a person before a magistrate as is otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 47 § 3 (F), 1981)  
1.08.100 - Nonappearance—Arrest warrant. 
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place therein specified and has not posted bail as provided in the Penal Code of the state, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest (A) within twenty days after his failure to appear as promised, or (B) if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail, other than a magistrate, and fails to do so on or before the date upon which he promised to appear, then within twenty days after delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to the magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. (Ord. 47 § 3 (G), 1981)  
1.08.110 - Notice to correct—Issuance. 
A.  If after investigation or other enforcement action by a duly authorized town ordinance enforcement officer it appears that a violation has occurred involving a "mechanical" requirement of a town ordinance(s), and all the conditions set forth in subsection B of this section are met and the investigating officer decides to take enforcement action, he may prepare, in triplicate, and the violator shall sign, a written notice containing his or her promise to correct the alleged violation and deliver proof of correction of the violation to the issuing agency. 
B.  The use of the notice to correct violation as provided in this section is authorized when all of the following conditions exist: 
1.  The violation does not evidence fraud or persistent neglect; 
2.  The violation has not presented and does not present an immediate safety hazard; 
3.  The alleged violator agrees to, and is able to, promptly correct the violation. 
C.  If any of the conditions set forth in subsection B of this section are not met, the investigating officer may cause the issuance of a notice to appear in accordance with Section 1.08.020. 
D.  The notice to correct violation shall be in a form approved by the town council, and in addition to the identifying information, shall contain an estimate of the reasonable time required for correction and proof of correction of the particular defect, not to exceed thirty days. (Ord. 47 § 4 (A), 1981)  
1.08.120 - Notice to correct—Delivery. 
An exact, legible copy of the notice to correct shall be delivered to the alleged violator at the time he or she signs such notice. (Ord. 47 § 4 (B), 1981)  
1.08.130 - Notice to correct—Proof of correction. 
Any person wilfully violating a written promise to correct or wilfully failing to deliver proof of correction is guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine up to two hundred fifty dollars. Proof of correction may consist of a certification by an authorized representative of the issuing agency that the alleged violation has been corrected. (Ord. 47 § 4 (C), 1981)  
1.08.140 - Notice to correct—Failure to correct. 
Whenever proof of correction of violation is not received by the issuing agency in accordance with Section 1.08.130, the issuing agency may proceed according to the provisions of Section 1.08.110 on the underlying violation(s) as well as on the Section 1.08.130 violation. 
(Ord. 47, § 4(D), 1981)  
1.08.150 - Enforcement officer. 
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the town council authorizes the town Code enforcement officer to enforce its ordinances by arresting persons for violating such ordinances. 
(Ord. 283, § 1, 1996)  
1.08.160 - Enforcement. 
Pursuant to Penal Code section 836.5, the Town Council authorizes the fire marshal to enforce its fire Codes and ordinances by arresting persons for violating such Codes and ordinances. 
(Ord. 439, § 1, 7-26-2005)  
Chapter 1.09 - ADMINISTRATIVE CIVIL PENALTIES 
Sections : 
 
1.09.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for an administrative civil penalty procedure for the protection, health, safety, and general public welfare of the residents of the town of Paradise and to preserve the livability, appearance, property values, and social and economic stability of the town of Paradise by providing an alternative method of Code enforcement to affect abatement of violations of the Codes and ordinances identified in the Paradise Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.020 - Scope. 
This chapter relates to the administrative assessment of civil penalties for violations of the Paradise Municipal Code. Civil penalties established in this chapter are in addition to any other administrative or legal remedy, or enforcement fees which may be pursued by the town of Paradise to address violations of the Codes and ordinances identified in the Paradise Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.030 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following specified meanings: 
(a)  Responsible Department. The "responsible department" shall be the town manager, or other person(s) so designated by the town manager as responsible for enforcement of the provisions of the codes and ordinances identified in the Paradise Municipal Code. 
(b)  Person. The term "person" shall be a natural person, firm, partnership, corporation, business, trust, organization, or any other entity. 
(c)  "Enforcement officer" shall mean any person authorized to enforce provisions of the Paradise Municipal Code. 
(d)  "Administrative hearing officer" shall mean any person appointed by a majority of the town council to preside over the administrative hearings provided for in this chapter. 
(e)  "Town" shall mean the town of Paradise. 
(f)  "Contestant" shall mean any person or entity that is liable for administrative penalties in accordance with the applicable sections of this code, and who contests or disputes liability for civil penalties. 
(g)  "This code" shall mean the Paradise Municipal Code. 
(h)  "Responsible party" shall mean the person who is in immediate control of the premises or activity which constitutes a violation of this code, or the actor of conduct prohibited or declared unlawful by this code. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.040 - Use of administrative citations. 
(a)  Any person violating any provision of this code may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Each and every day a violation of any provision of this code exists shall constitute a separate and distinct offense for which an administrative citation may be issued by an enforcement officer. 
(c)  The responsible person(s) creating, committing, condoning, or maintaining a violation of any provision of the Codes and ordinances identified in the Paradise Municipal Code shall be subject to civil penalties as established in this chapter. 
(d)  Separate civil penalties may be assessed for separate major violations or separate dates of occurrence. 
(e)  Full or partial reimbursement or recovery of civil penalties and administrative expenses shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations wholly and permanently nor shall it preclude the assessment of additional civil penalties or other abatement actions by the town of Paradise. 
(f)  Civil penalties and related administrative expenses, including attorneys' fees, shall accrue to the account of the town of Paradise and may be recovered by all appropriate legal means, including but not limited to priority lien and special assessment of the general tax levy, or by civil and small claims action brought by the town of Paradise, or both. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.050 - Procedures of issuance of administrative citations. 
(a)  After a three (3) day written warning for a continuous zoning or building violation, the enforcement officer may issue an administrative citation to the violator or property owner for any violation of this code, in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form prescribed by the town manager. 
(b)  The enforcement officer shall identify the responsible party. Once the person responsible for the violation is identified, the enforcement officer may obtain the signature of that person on the administrative citation for the purpose of establishing personal service of the citation. The failure to obtain the signature of the responsible party on the administrative citation shall in no way affect the validity of the citation and proceedings taken thereunder. 
(c)  If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible party, or the responsible party refuses or otherwise fails to sign the administrative citation, the administrative citation shall be served on the responsible party as follows: 
(1)  Personal delivery of the administrative citation without the violator's signature. 
(2)  A copy of the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible party by first class U.S. mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the responsible party at his or her last known mailing address, together with a copy of a declaration of service signed under penalty of perjury by the person mailing such documents. 
(3)  The declaration of service shall show the date and manner of service by mail and shall recite the name and address of the person to whom it is addressed. 
(4)  When so mailed as set forth above, the administrative citation shall be deemed received on the date it is deposited in the U.S. mail. The failure of any responsible party to receive an administrative citation that is mailed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not affect the validity of any proceeding taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 560, § 1, 4-12-2016; Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.060 - Contents of administrative citation. 
The administrative citation shall have at its top, printed in bold capital letters, the words "TOWN OF PARADISE NOTICE OF VIOLATION", the second line shall state "ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION" and the body of the citation shall include the following: 
(a)  The date and approximate time of the violation(s), the name and address of the violator, the code section(s) violated and description, and the location of the violation; 
(b)  The amount of civil penalty imposed for the violation(s) and the additional penalties for late payment; 
(c)  An explanation of the applicable time limits, the penalty payment procedure, the place of payment, and the consequences of failure to pay an administrative penalty; 
(d)  The rights of appeal; 
(e)  The signature of the violator; 
(f)  The signature of the enforcement officer, and the date the citation was issued. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.070 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
(a)  Any person who has been issued an administrative citation shall be entitled to appeal it by filing a notice of appeal with the responsible department as indicated on the administrative citation. The appeal shall be in writing, signed by the person making the appeal and shall specify the basis for the appeal. The notice of appeal shall be filed within ten (10) calendar days after issuance of the administrative citation. If the last day to file an appeal falls on a weekend or any day town hall is closed, then the deadline shall be extended until close of business on the next regular business day. 
(b)  Upon receipt of a written notice of appeal, or as soon as practical thereafter, the responsible department shall review the administrative citation and, if it is found to be complete and in conformance with the requirements of this chapter, shall fix a date, time and place for hearing the administrative appeal before an administrative hearing officer. Written notice of the time and place for hearing the administrative appeal shall be served on the party protesting the administrative citation and by any other person who received notice of the citation, by any one of the following means: 
(1)  Personal service; 
(2)  First class mail; or 
(3)  Posting the notice of hearing conspicuously on or in front of the real property upon which the violation is located. 
(c)  Service of the notice of administrative hearing by first class postage pre-paid shall be deemed complete on the date of mailing. The failure of any person with an interest in the proceedings to receive a properly addressed notice of the administrative hearing shall not affect the validity of any proceedings under this chapter. 
(d)  Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a waiver of that person's rights to administrative determination of the merits of the administrative citation and the amount of the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.080 - Administrative hearing officer. 
(a)  The town council shall appoint an administrative hearing officer. 
(b)  The administrative hearing officer shall exercise all the powers and duties to conduct and decide hearings pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.090 - Hearings; generally. 
At the time set for hearing, the administrative hearing officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of Town staff, the responsible party, and other persons respecting the violation or the imposition of an administrative penalty. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.100 - Record of oral evidence at hearing. 
(a)  The proceedings at the hearing shall be recorded by a tape recorder. Either party may provide a certified shorthand reporter to prepare a record of the proceedings at the party's own expense. 
(b)  Preparation of a record of the proceeding shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, as presently written or hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.110 - Continuances. 
The administrative hearing officer may grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.120 - Oaths. 
All oral evidence shall be upon oath or affirmation. The administrative hearing officer or a notary public shall administer the oath or affirmation. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.130 - Evidence rules. 
California Government Code Section 11513, subsections (a), (b) and (c), as presently written or hereinafter amended, shall apply to hearings under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.140 - Rights of parties. 
(a)  The parties and anyone who participates in a hearing under this chapter may be represented by an attorney or other person of the party's choice. 
(b)  If a party does not proficiently speak or understand the English language, the party may provide an interpreter, at the party's own cost, to translate for the party. An interpreter shall not have had any involvement in the issues of the case prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.150 - Official notice. 
In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact which may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or which may appear in any of the official records of the town or any of its departments. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.160 - Inspection of premises. 
The administrative hearing officer may inspect the exterior of the premises involved in the hearing prior to, during, or after the hearing, provided that: 
(a)  Consent is granted by a person with the lawful right to grant consent or an inspection warrant is obtained; 
(b)  Reasonable notice of such inspection shall be given to the owner before the inspection is made; 
(c)  The parties are given an opportunity to be present during the inspection; 
(d)  The administrative hearing officer shall state for the record during the hearing, or file a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the hearing record, upon completion of the inspection, the material facts observed and the conclusions drawn therefrom; and 
(e)  Each party then shall have a right to rebut or explain the matters so stated by the administrative hearing officer either for the record during the hearing or by filing a written statement after the hearing for inclusion in the record. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.170 - Decision of the administrative hearing officer. 
(a)  The administrative hearing officer may impose conditions and deadlines for correction of violations or payment of outstanding penalties. 
(b)  The administrative hearing officer shall make findings based on the record of the hearing and shall issue a written decision, signed by him or her, based on the findings. The responsible department shall preserve all exhibits submitted by the parties and shall serve the decision on the contestant by first class mail, postage prepaid, within ten working days after the decision is issued. The decision of the administrative hearing officer affirming or dismissing an administrative citation is final and conclusive. 
(c)  The decision shall inform the contestant that the time for judicial review of the administrative hearing officer's decision is governed by California Government Code Section 53069.4. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.180 - Court review. 
(a)  After receipt of the administrative hearing officer's decision, the contestant may file an appeal with the Superior Court for de novo review. The request for review shall be submitted on a form prescribed by the court and must be filed within twenty (20) days after the date of service of the final decision of the administrative hearing officer. The appeal shall state the reasons the contestant appeals to the administrative hearing officer's findings or decision. 
(b)  The Superior Court shall conduct a de novo hearing except the contents of the responsible department's file shall be received into evidence. 
(c)  A copy of the notice of code violation(s) and imposition of penalty shall be entered into evidence as prima facie evidence of the facts stated therein. 
(d)  The Superior Court shall establish a fee for filing of the appeal. If the court finds in favor of the contestant, the amount of the fee and any deposit of penalty shall be reimbursed to the contestant by the town. 
(e)  If the penalty has not been deposited, and the decision of the court is against the contestant, the town may proceed to collect the civil penalty in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.190 - Assessment of civil penalties. 
(a)  Civil penalties shall be assessed pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900, as presently written or hereafter amended. 
(b)  Civil penalties, excluding accruing interest, shall not exceed the amounts set forth in the California Government Code. 
(c)  The assessment of civil penalties may begin to accrue on the date of initial occurrence of the violation, as identified by the town of Paradise. 
(d)  Payment of the penalty shall not excuse a failure to correct the violation nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the town. 
(e)  The failure of any person to pay a penalty assessed by administrative citation within the time specified on the citation shall result in the assessment of a late fee. The amount of the late fee shall be one hundred percent of the total amount of the administrative penalty owed. 
(f)  A civil penalty assessed by administrative citation constitutes a debt to the town. In the event any person fails to pay a civil penalty within the time specified, the town may take such action as is appropriate to collect the debt, including, but not limited to an action in small claims court, an assessment lien, or any other legal remedy. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.200 - Administrative expenses. 
Administrative costs, charges, and fees shall be as established by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.210 - Procedures for collection of administrative penalty. 
(a)  The administrative penalty shall be due and payable within thirty days (30) after issuance of the administrative hearing officer's decision. If the penalty is not timely paid, the penalty may be specially assessed against any real property involved. If the assessment and thereafter said assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary real property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary real property taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of real property taxes are applicable to the special assessment. 
(b)  The town may also cause a notice of lien to be recorded. The notice shall, at a minimum, identify the record owner or possessor of the real property, set forth the last known address of the record owner or possessor, the date on which the penalty was imposed, a description of the real property subject to the lien, and the amount of the penalty. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
1.09.220 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or other part of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The town council hereby declares that it would have enacted this article and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, and word thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, phrases or words or other parts be declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid. 
(Ord. No. 449, § 1, 5-9-2006)  
Chapter 1.12 - TOWN SEAL 
Sections : 
 
1.12.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt the official town seal. 
(Ord. 96, § 1, 1983)  
1.12.020 - Description. 
The common seal of the town shall be of the size and form and bearing the inscription and figures thereon as follows: 
A circle of not less than one and three-fourths inches in diameter with the following inscription thereon near the edge of the stamping and embossing part thereof: "TOWN OF PARADISE, CALIFORNIA" in the upper edge and "INCORPORATED NOVEMBER 27, 1979" between two acorns at the bottom; within which and occupying the center of the circle is a pyramid encompassed by a halo, the left side of which depicts trees, the right, snowcapped and forested mountains, below which waving lines represent water, under which is written "In Harmony with Nature" similar to the following:  
Town Seal 
(Ord. 96, § 2, 1983)  
1.12.030 - Validation of previous acts. 
All acts heretofore performed requiring the use of the town seal, and all papers sealed with the town seal since its first adoption, are declared to be due and legal acts and papers of the town, and all acts heretofore performed and all proceedings and all papers impressed with the town seal since that date are validated and declared legal. 
(Ord. 96, § 3, 1983)  
1.12.040 - Use. 
The use of the town seal shall be as prescribed by town policies and practices. Every person who maliciously or for commercial purposes or contrary to the policies and practices of the town uses or allows to be used any reproduction or facsimile of the town seal in any manner whatsoever is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 152, § 1, 1986)  
Chapter 1.13 - TOWN FLAG 
Sections : 
 
1.13.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt the official town flag. 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 8-14-2007)  
1.13.020 - Description. 
The town flag shown below is hereby adopted: 
 
Town Flag 
Specific Flag colors are as follows: 
Blue—Royal Blue—Pantone Color #286 
Green—Emerald Green—Pantone Color #349 
Red—Old Glory Red—Pantone Color #201 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 8-14-2007)  
1.13.030 - Use. 
The town flag image shall be displayed or flown as shown in section 1.13.020. 
(Ord. No. 468, § 1, 8-14-2007)  
Chapter 1.14 - RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION 
Sections : 
 
1.14.010 - Right of entry procedures. 
A.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any ordinance, resolution, or Code, or whenever there is reasonable cause to believe that there exists a violation of any provision of such ordinance, resolution or Code, any authorized official of the town may, upon presentation of proper credentials, enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to perform any duty imposed upon such official by any provision of such ordinance, resolution or Code. The official shall give notice as follows: 
1.  The authorized official shall contact the owner or occupant of the premises, present proper identifying credentials, then request entry within a reasonable time. 
2.  If the authorized official locates the owner or occupant but the owner or occupant is outside of the town, the authorized official may notify such person by telephone or by letter, and in doing so, shall transmit proper identifying credentials and may request entry. 
3.  In the event that entry within a reasonable time is refused by the occupant, the owner, or such other person having charge or control of the building or premises, or in the event of the inability of the authorized official, after making a reasonable effort to locate the owner, or other person having charge of control of the building or premises so as to request entry, then the authorized official shall be empowered to seek and is entitled to obtain an appropriate inspection warrant or such other available remedy provided by law to secure entry to such building or premises. 
B.  "Entry within a reasonable time" is deemed to be entry within a reasonable time under the circumstances existing at the time of request, not exceeding twenty-four hours from the time of the request. 
C.  "Authorized official," as used in this section, refers to any official of the town, their deputies, assistants and authorized employees who are charged with the enforcement of a particular provision of any ordinance, resolution, or technical Codes adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. 169, § 1, 1987)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL  
Chapter 2.04 - TOWN MANAGER 
 
2.04.010 - Established—Appointment. 
The office of the town manager is created and established. The town manager shall be appointed by the town council wholly on the basis of his administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the town council. (Ord. 58 §2, 1982)  
2.04.020 - Residency. 
Residence in the town at the time of appointment of a town manager is not required as a condition of the appointment, but within ninety days after reporting for work, the town manager must become a resident of the town. (Ord. 58 §3, 1982)  
2.04.030 - Councilmember eligibility. 
No member of the town council is eligible for appointment as town manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember has ceased to be a member of the town council. (Ord. 58 §4, 1982)  
2.04.040 - Bond. 
The town manager and acting town manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the town council in such sum as may be determined by the town council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the town manager and acting town manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the town. (Ord. 58 §5, 1982)  
2.04.050 - Assistant, acting town manager. 
The appointment of an assistant town manager shall be only with the prior approval of the town council. Any such assistant town manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the town manager. In the event there is no assistant town manager, the town manager, with the approval of the town council and by filing a written notice with the town clerk, shall designate a qualified town employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of town manager during his temporary absence or disability. In the event the town manager's absence or disability extends beyond a one-month period, the town council may, after the one-month period, appoint an acting town manager. (Ord. 58 §6, 1982)  
2.04.060 - Compensation. 
A.  The town manager shall receive such compensation as the town council shall from time to time determine. In addition, the town manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and reasonable expenses incurred by him in the performance of his required duties. 
B.  On termination of employment of the town manager by reason of involuntary removal from service other than for wilful misconduct in office, the town manager shall receive cash severance pay in an amount equal to that as agreed to between the town and the manager per the manager's employment agreement. (Ord. 224 §1, 1993; Ord. 58 §7, 1982)  
2.04.070 - Powers and duties. 
The town manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the town under the direction and control of the town council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the town which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth in Sections 2.04.080 through 2.04.210. (Ord. 81 § 1 (part), 1983: Ord. 58 § 8 (part), 1982)  
2.04.080 - Law enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the town and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the town council are faithfully observed. (Ord. 81 §1 (A), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (A), 1982)  
2.04.090 - Direction of employees. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments in accordance with policies established by the town council. It shall also be the duty of the town manager to give orders and direction to subordinate officers and employees of the town only through their department heads. (Ord. 81 §1 (B), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (B), 1982)  
2.04.100 - Power of appointment and removal. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager to, and he shall, appoint and remove, with the approval of the town council, the department heads of the town except the town attorney and town clerk. The town manager shall remove, or cause to be removed, any department head as directed by the town council. The town manager shall either approve appointment and removal of all other employees by department heads or authorize department heads to appoint and remove in certain classes of positions, subject to all applicable personnel rules and regulations which may be adopted by the council. (Ord. 117 §1, 1984: Ord. 102 §1, 1983: Ord. 81 §1 (C), 1983: Ord. 73 §2, 1982; Ord. 58 §8 (C), 1982)  
2.04.110 - Administrative reorganization. 
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the town manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of officers, positions or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the town's business. Any such reorganization resulting in changes in the function or basic structure of such offices, positions or units shall require the prior approval of the town council. (Ord. 81 §1 (D), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (D), 1982)  
2.04.120 - Recommendation of ordinances. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager and he shall recommend to the town council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary. (Ord. 81 §1 (E), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (E), 1982)  
2.04.130 - Attendance of council meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager to attend all meetings of the town council unless he is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the town council. The town council, in its discretion, may excuse the town manager from attendance at any council meeting or portion thereof. (Ord. 81 §1 (F), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (F), 1982)  
2.04.140 - Financial reporting. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager to keep the town council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the town. (Ord. 81 §1 (G), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (G), 1982)  
2.04.150 - Budget preparation. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the town council for its approval. (Ord. 81 §1 (H), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (H), 1982)  
2.04.160 - Procurement. 
The town manager, or his authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies, in compliance with a procurement policy approved by the town council, for all the departments or divisions of the town. (Ord. 81 §1 (I), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (I), 1982)  
2.04.170 - Investigations—Complaints. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager to make investigations into the affairs of the town and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the town. Further, it shall be the duty of the town manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the town government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the town. A summary of all complaints and actions taken shall be furnished to the town council. (Ord. 81 §1 (J), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (J), 1982)  
2.04.180 - Public property supervision. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager and he shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks and all other public property which is under the control and jurisdiction of the town council. (Ord. 81 §1 (K), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (K), 1982)  
2.04.190 - Additional duties. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the town council. (Ord. 81 §1 (L), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (L), 1982)  
2.04.200 - Emergency authority. 
A.  Emergency Defined. For the purposes of this chapter, "emergency" means the existence of conditions of disaster or extreme peril to the safety of persons and/or property within the territorial limits of the town caused by conditions, including but not limited to, flood, fire, snow, storm, air pollution, epidemic, riot, drought, sudden and severe energy shortage or earthquake. 
B.  Managing Authority in an Emergency. In the event of an emergency requiring the expenditure of town funds before a special town council meeting could be convened to authorize that expenditure, the town manager shall have the authority to authorize the expenditure of town funds and to otherwise obligate the town as he, in his sole discretion, determines to be necessary or appropriate to combat the effects of emergency, up to a maximum of five thousand dollars per emergency. (Ord. 81 §1 (M), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (M), 1982)  
2.04.210 - Political participation. 
The town manager shall not participate directly, indirectly or through an intermediary in any political activity that is related to the town unless in support of a political position taken by the town council. (Ord. 81 §1 (N), 1983: Ord. 58 §8 (N), 1982)  
2.04.220 - Council-manager relations. 
The town council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the town only through the town manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the town council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the town manager. The town manager shall take his orders and instructions from the town council only when sitting in a duly convened meeting of the town council or in writing when approved by a majority of the members of the town council during a duly convened meeting, and no individual councilman shall give any orders or instructions to the town manager. (Ord. 58 §9 (A), 1982)  
2.04.230 - Relations with commissions and boards. 
The town manager may attend any and all meetings of the planning commission and any other commissions, boards or committees created by the town council, upon his own volition or upon direction of the town council. At such meetings which the town manager attends, he shall be heard by such commissions, boards or committees as to all matters upon which he wishes to address the members thereof, and he shall inform the members as to the status of any matter being considered by the town council, and he shall cooperate to the fullest extent with the members of all commissions, boards or committees appointed by the town council. The town manager shall not give orders or direction to any such commissions, boards or committees. (Ord. 58 §9 (B), 1982)  
2.04.240 - Removal. 
A.  Required Vote—Notice. The removal of the town manager, with or without cause, shall be effected only by a majority vote of the whole town council as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of subsections B, C and D of this section. In case of his intended removal by the town council, the town manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him, at least thirty days before the effective date of his removal. In the event of removal of the town manager for misconduct he shall be terminated immediately without the right to compensation accruing after the date of termination. 
B.  Hearing. Within seven days after the delivery to the town manager of a notice of intended removal, he may by written notification to the town clerk request a hearing before the town council. Thereafter the town council shall fix a time for a hearing, in closed session, prior to the effective date contained in the notice of intended removal, at which the town manager shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. 
C.  Suspension Pending Hearing. After furnishing the town manager with written notice of intended removal, or concurrent therewith, the town council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by action of the council passed subsequent to any requested hearing provided pursuant to subsection B of this section. 
D.  Discretion of Council. In removing the town manager, the town council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of such hearing being to allow the town manager to present to the town council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action. (Ord. 58 §10, 1982)  
2.04.250 - Employment agreements. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the town council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the town manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 58 §11, 1982)  
Chapter 2.06 - TOWN ATTORNEY 
 
2.06.010 - Establishment and appointment. 
The office of the town attorney is created and established. The town attorney shall be appointed by the town council wholly on the basis of ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the town council. (Ord. 118 (part), 1984)  
2.06.020 - Qualifications. 
The town attorney shall be an attorney-at-law, duly admitted to practice by the Supreme Court of the state, and licensed by the state to practice therein, and shall have been engaged in the practice of law in the state for a period of not less than five years immediately prior to appointment. (Ord. 118 (part), 1984)  
2.06.030 - Duties. 
The town attorney shall have those powers, duties and limitations granted by California Government Code Sections 41801 through 41803.7 and amendments, and specifically the following powers and duties: 
A.  Represent and advise the town council, town officers, boards and commissions in all matters of law pertaining to their offices; 
B.  Represent and appear for the town in any or all actions or proceedings in which the town is concerned or is a party, and represent and appear for any town officer, employee, board or commission, or former town officer, employee, board or commission, in any or all actions and proceedings in which any such officer, employee, board or commission is concerned or is a party arising out of any act or omission committed in the course and scope of the employment or performance of the official duties of such officer, employee, board or commission; 
C.  Upon request of the town council attend any meetings of the town council, and give advice or render an opinion in writing whenever requested to do so by the town council, by any of the boards, commissions or officers of the town; provided, that any such request for a written opinion shall first be submitted in writing to the town manager for his review and information; 
D.  Approve the form of all contracts made by and all bonds given to the town, endorsing such contracts or bonds with such approval; 
E.  Prepare or approve any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions for the town and amendments thereto; 
F.  Prosecute all violations of this code; the town council may assign the duties of prosecution of state misdemeanors to either the district attorney or the town attorney, with the consent of the district attorney, by resolution. (Ord. 118 (part), 1984)  
2.06.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 516, § 1, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed § 2.06.040, which pertained to town attorney full-time hours and derived from Ord. 118 (part), 1984.  
2.06.050 - Removal. 
A.  Required Vote—Notice. The removal of the town attorney, with or without cause, shall be as then constituted, convened in a regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of subsections B, C and D of this section. In case of his intended removal by the town council, the town attorney shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council's intention to remove him, at least thirty days before the effective date of his removal. In the event of removal of the town attorney for misconduct, he shall be terminated immediately without the right to compensation accruing after the date of termination. 
B.  Hearing. Within seven days after the delivery to the town attorney of a notice of intended removal, he may, by written notification to the town clerk, request a hearing before the town council. Thereafter, the town council shall fix a time for a hearing, in either an open or a closed session, prior to the effective date contained in the notice of intended removal, at which the town attorney shall appear and be heard, with or without counsel. 
C.  Suspension Pending Hearing. After furnishing the town attorney with written notice of intended removal, or concurrent therewith, the town council may suspend him from duty, but his compensation shall continue until his removal by action of the council passed subsequent to any requested hearing provided pursuant to subsection B of this section. 
D.  Discretion of the Council. In removing the town attorney, the town council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of such hearing being to allow the town attorney to present to the town council his grounds of opposition to his removal prior to its action. (Ord. 118 (part), 1984)  
2.06.060 - Employment agreements. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the town council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the town attorney. 
(Ord. No. 516, § 2, 6-7-2011; Ord. 118(part), 1984)  
2.06.070 - Compensation. 
Town attorney compensation shall be determined by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 516, § 3, 6-7-2011; Ord. 118(part), 1984)  
Chapter 2.08 - TOWN COUNCIL 
 
2.08.010 - Regular meetings. 
The town council shall hold one regular meeting at 5555 Skyway, Paradise, California, on the second Tuesday of every month beginning at 6:00 p.m. When the day for any regular meeting of the council falls on a legal holiday, the meeting shall not be held on such holiday, but shall be held at the same hour and place on the next succeeding day thereafter which is not a holiday. Regular meetings shall be held and notice given according with Government Code Section 54954. 
(Ord. No. 525, § 1, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 513, § 1, 2-8-2011; Ord. No. 494, § 1, 7-28-2009; Ord. 330, §1, 1999: Ord. 299, §1, 1998: Ord. 269m §1, 1996: Ord. 122m §1, 1984: Ord. 106m §5, 1983: Ord. 86m §1, 1983: Ord. 65m §1, 1982: Ord. 63m §1, 1982: Ord. 32m §1, 1980: Ord. 3m §1 (a), 1979)  
2.08.020 - Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be called by the mayor, or a majority of the councilmembers by personally delivering, or by mail, or by telephone if written notice is waived, notice to each councilmember and each person who is required to be given notice of the meeting. The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted, and be in accordance with Section 54956 of the Government Code. No other business shall be considered at such meeting. 
(Ord. 269, §2, 1996: Ord. 3, §1 (b), 1979)  
2.08.030 - Study meetings. 
The town council may, from time to time, meet in study meetings or sessions, open to the public, at the time and place designated by the mayor or a majority of the councilmembers. Study meetings shall be held and notice given in accordance with Government Code Section 54956 in the same manner as the holding of a special meeting, including the public's right to participate in the subject matter of the meeting. 
(Ord. 269, §3, 1996: Ord. 3, §1 (c), 1979)  
2.08.040 - Purpose. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 36516 of the Government Code authorizing the town council to provide by ordinance that each member of the town council may receive a prescribed salary, the amount of which is based upon the population of the city as determined by estimates made by the State Department of Finance. 
(Ord. 157(part), 1986)  
2.08.041 - Salaries. 
A.  The salary established by this section is enacted under Section 36516 Government Code, which authorizes the town council to provide by ordinance that each member of the council may receive salary based upon the population of the town as determined by estimates made by the state Department of Finance. 
B.  The latest estimate of population of the town of Paradise made by the state Department of Finance is twenty-six thousand, three hundred fifty (26,300). 
C.  Each member of the town council may receive the sum of three hundred dollars as provided in Section 36516 of the Government Code. The salary is payable at the same time and in the same manner as the salary is paid to the officers and employees of the town. 
D.  The salary prescribed by this section is exclusive of any other amount payable to a member of the town council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of official duties. 
E.  The town council finds and determines that the members of the council are the equivalent of thirty-two (32) hour per week, part-time employees. 
F.  Town council members shall be eligible for enrollment in the town's health benefits package based upon the same terms as provided to town management employees. 
G.  Subsections C and F shall become operative upon the date when a member of the town council becomes eligible for the salary and benefits prescribed by virtue of beginning a new term of office. Until such operative date, the town council and the mayor shall continue to receive the salary and compensation in accordance with Ordinance No. 183. 
H.  The three hundred dollar ($300.00) salary as set forth in subsection C for council members electing to enroll in the town's health benefits package as set forth in subsection G shall be applied toward the town's contribution cap portion of the health benefits premium for thirty-two (32) hour per week, part-time employees. In addition, council members shall be required to pay any amount exceeding the maximum amount paid by the town for its thirty-two (32) hour per week, part-time employees. 
I.  Town Council members shall each receive a monthly travel allowance of ninety dollars ($90.00) to reimburse them for routine town related travel costs within Butte County. 
J.  The salary set forth in subsection C. shall be implemented as of July 1, 2006 and shall be payable thereafter each month to town council members. 
(Ord. 157(part), 1986: Ord. 183, §1, 1988: Ord. 366, §1, 2001: Ord. No. 454, § 1, 9-26-06)  
Chapter 2.10 - TOWN CLERK 
 
2.10.010 - Establishment and appointment. 
The office of the town clerk is created and established. The town clerk shall be appointed by the town manager wholly on the basis of ability and qualifications. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 1, 7-12-2016; Ord. 243, §2(part), 1995)  
2.10.020 - Definition. 
Town clerk shall serve as historian, records manager, legislative administrator and elections official. 
(Ord. 243, §2(part), 1995)  
2.10.030 - Qualifications. 
The town clerk shall have five years experience in executive clerical and office work, a minimum of two years of supervisory experience, with municipal government experience or legal experience preferable. The town clerk shall have knowledge of applicable federal, state and municipal laws and procedures. 
(Ord. 243, §2(part), 1995)  
2.10.040 - Duties. 
Under the direction of the town manager, the town clerk shall have those powers, duties and limitations granted by California Government Code Sections 36501 and 40801 et seq., and amendments, and specifically the following powers and duties: 
A.  Plan, direct, supervise and coordinate all activities of the town clerk's office; 
B.  Facilitate the job of the town council including, but not limited to, processing and safekeeping of legislative actions and approved documents by the town council such as contracts, resolutions, ordinances, etc.; 
C.  Plan, direct and conduct municipal elections; serve as filing officer for town council candidates and political action committees and for disclosure statements as required by the Fair Political Practices Commission; and receive petitions and administer recall, initiative or referendum proceedings; 
D.  Prepare and maintain town clerk department and town council department budgets; 
F.  Maintain and administer ordinance codification for the Paradise Municipal Code; 
G.  Serve as agent for service of process for litigation matters and oversee statute requirements and notices regarding claims against the town; 
H.  Oversee the preparation, distribution and legal requirements of the town council meeting agendas and official minutes of the proceedings and actions of the town council. 
(Ord. No. 561, § 2, 7-12-2016; Ord. 243, §2(part), 1995)  
2.10.050 - Attendance at council meetings. 
It shall be the duty of the town clerk or his/her designee to attend all meetings of the town council and keep the official record of the proceedings and actions of the town council. 
(Ord. 243, §2(part), 1995)  
2.10.060 - Full-time. 
The town clerk shall be required to devote himself/herself to his duties with the town full-time and shall not be eligible for overtime compensation. 
(Ord. 243, §2(part), 1995)  
2.10.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 561, § 3, adopted July 12, 2016, repealed § 2.10.070, which pertained to removal and derived from Ord. 243, § 2(part), 1995.  
2.10.080 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 561, § 4, adopted July 12, 2016, repealed § 2.10.080, which pertained to employment agreement and derived from Ord. 243, § 2(part), 1995.  
2.10.090 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 561, § 5, adopted July 12, 2016, repealed § 2.10.090, which pertained to compensation and derived from Ord. 243, § 2(part), 1995.  
Chapter 2.12 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT  
Article I - GENERALLY 
 
2.12.010 - Established. 
There is established a community development department of the town. The community development department shall be organized into divisions as set forth in this chapter. Other divisions may be organized, maintained and operated by the community development director under the general administrative direction and subject to the approval of the town manager to carry out additional functions assigned the department. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.012 - Functions. 
The functions of the community development department include: 
A.  To provide for the orderly development of the town through the administration of portion of Title 8, Health and Safety, portion of Title 10, Vehicles and Traffic, Title 12, Streets and Public Places; Title 13, Public Services; Title 15, Buildings and Construction; Title 16, Subdivisions; and Title 17, Zoning, of the municipal code; 
B.  To approve the design and administer public works projects; 
C.  To meet program requirements of transportation funds and gas tax moneys; 
D.  To provide leadership in environmental matters such as the California Environmental Quality Act, solid waste disposal reduction, hazardous waste disposal, water quality matters and energy conservation; 
E.  To administer the strong motion instrumentation program; 
F.  To review and approve encroachments on town streets. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.014 - Community development director. 
A.  The community development department shall be managed by the director who shall be appointed by the town manager with the approval of the town council, and shall be subject to the town manager's general administrative direction. The director shall be responsible for the direction and control of all functions assigned to the department. In the absence or disability of the director, the town manager shall designate a person to perform the duties and exercise the powers of the director. 
B.  The director is responsible: 
1.  To plan, organize, direct and coordinate all activities of the community development department; 
2.  To act as technical advisor to the town council, the planning commission and the town manager on community development matters; 
3.  To participate in the preparation of the capital improvement program and budget; 
4.  To perform such additional duties as may be required by state law or as assigned by the town manager and/or adopted by the town council. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
Article II - PLANNING AGENCY 
 
2.12.020 - Established—Planning agency. 
There is established a planning agency consisting of a planning commission and a planning division of the community development department. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
Article III - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.12.030 - Established—Composition—Terms. 
A planning commission is created for the town. The planning commission shall consist of five members who reside within the boundaries of the town. They shall be appointed by the town council for a term of four years with staggered dates of expiration of terms. (Ord. 342 §1, 2000: Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.031 - Functions. 
The functions of the planning commission include: 
A.  To prepare and recommend for adoption by the town council a comprehensive long-term general plan for the physical development of the town and of any land outside its boundaries which in the planning commission's judgment bears relation to its planning; 
B.  To prepare specific plans based on the general plan and drafts of such regulations, programs and legislation as may in its judgment be required for the systematic implementation of the general plan, and to recommend such plans and measures to the council for adoption; 
C.  To act as the advisory agency for the town in connection with the administration of the State Subdivision Map Act and the town's Subdivision Ordinance regulations; 
D.  To perform the duties of a planning commission as prescribed by law, including those duties prescribed by Articles 7, 8, 9 and 10 of Chapter 3, Title 7 and Article 3, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the California Government Code existing as of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter or thereafter amended; 
E.  To prepare and recommend for adoption by the town council a Zoning Ordinance and to perform such other duties in reference to planning and zoning and land use matters as may be required by the town council. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.033 - Officers—Meetings—Rules. 
A.  The planning commission shall elect a chairman and vice-chairman from its membership annually. In the absence or disability of either the chairman or vice-chairman, the planning commission may designate a temporary chairman. 
B.  The planning commission shall hold at least one regular meeting each month and such other meetings as may be necessary. The planning commission shall adopt rules for the transaction of its business and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.035 - Removal. 
A member of the planning commission may be removed by a majority vote of all the members of the town council. A member who fails, without permission, to attend three successive meetings of the planning commission is subject to removal. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.037 - Vacancies. 
A vacancy on the planning commission occurring by death, resignation, removal or any other cause before the expiration of the term of the member shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term by the town council. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.039 - Expenses. 
Planning commission members shall be entitled to reimbursement for such expenses as the town council may approve. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
Article IV - PLANNING DIVISION 
 
2.12.040 - Established. 
The planning division of the community development department of the town of Paradise is created. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.042 - Functions. 
The functions of the planning division shall include: 
A.  To provide staff assistance to the planning commission and serve as its secretary or designate a staff member to serve as secretary to the planning commission; 
B.  To act as technical advisor to the town council, the planning commission, the town manager and the director, community development, on land use and planning matters; 
C.  To perform as the advisory agency for the town of Paradise in connection with the administration of the State Subdivision Map Act and the town's Subdivision Ordinance regulations; 
D.  To manage environmental matters, including compliance with the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act and the town's environmental review procedures and guidelines adopted by the town council; 
E.  To perform and administer all decisionmaking and land use regulations authority functions as assigned per the provisions of Titles 8, 12, 16 and 17 of the municipal code; 
F.  To perform such additional duties as may be required by state law or as assigned by the community development director, the town manager and/or adopted by the town council. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.044 - Planning director. 
The planning division shall be managed by the planning director who shall be appointed by the community development director with the approval of the town manager, and shall be subject to both the town manager's and director, community development general administrative direction. In the absence or disability of the planning director, the community development director shall designate a person to perform the duties and exercise the functions of the planning director. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
Article V - BUILDING DIVISION 
 
2.12.050 - Established. 
The building division of the community development department of the town is created. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.052 - Functions. 
The functions of the building division shall include: 
A.  To administer Title 15, Buildings and Construction; 
B.  To act as technical advisor to the town council, town manager and community development director on matters relating to building codes, and Title 24, California Administrative Code; 
C.  To provide training on building codes and regulations to the construction community. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.054 - Building official. 
The building division shall be managed by the building official, who shall be appointed by the community development director. The building official shall act as the building official as specified in adopted building codes of Title 15 of the municipal code and shall be subject to both the community development director and town manager's general administrative direction. In the absence or disability of the building official, the community development director shall designate a person to perform the duties and exercise the functions of the building official. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
Article VI - ENGINEERING DIVISION 
 
2.12.060 - Established. 
The engineering division of the community development department of the town is created. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.062 - Functions. 
The functions of the engineering division shall include: 
A.  To administer those duties in Title 16, Subdivisions, of the municipal code requiring review by a qualified civil engineer or land surveyor; 
B.  To accept, on behalf of the town, offers of dedication of street rights-of-way or drainage easements that are conditions of development projects; 
C.  To prepare or approve construction plans for town projects; 
D.  To review and approve development plans submitted as conditions of zoning requirements; 
E.  To administer encroachments on the public right-of-way; 
F.  To act and perform as traffic engineer for the town. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
2.12.064 - Town engineer. 
The engineering division shall be managed by the town engineer who shall be appointed by the community development director. The town engineer shall be subject to both the community development director and town manager's general administrative direction. In the absence or disability of the town engineer the community development director shall designate a person to perform the duties and exercise the functions of the town engineer. (Ord. 218 §3 (part), 1992)  
Article VII - PUBLIC WORKS 
(Reserved)  
Chapter 2.16 - FINANCE DEPARTMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 307. 
 
2.16.010 - Established—Functions. 
The finance department of the town is established. The functions of the finance department shall include: 
A.  To prepare and submit to the town clerk, the town manager and the council a monthly written report and accounting of all receipts and disbursements; to prepare and submit at a regular council meeting a quarterly report of all revenues and expenditures; to coordinate the independent annual audit at the end of each fiscal year; and to assist the town manager in the preparation of the proposed budget before the beginning of each fiscal year; 
B.  To receive or collect all moneys or revenues due the town; to maintain and safely keep all public funds and securities belonging to or under the control of the town, depositing funds in accordance with town investment policies and applicable law; 
C.  To maintain a general accounting system for the town government, supervising and controlling disbursements and expenditures, including payroll, through a system of budget control to assure that moneys are available and appropriated; 
D.  To procure materials, supplies and general services for the town and to prepare and maintain a current inventory of general assets belonging to the town; 
E.  To provide general office services to other departments of the town as may be determined appropriate; 
F.  To estimate, plan and program the town's financial activities and to advise the town manager, council and other officers; 
G.  To perform such other duties as the town manager may direct. 
(Ord. 358 § 2(part), 2001)  
2.16.020 - Finance director. 
The finance department shall be managed by the finance director who shall be appointed by the town manager with the approval of the town council and shall be subject to the town manager's general managerial and administrative direction. In addition, the finance director shall serve as the town treasurer. 
(Ord No. 485 § 1, 2008: Ord. 358 § 2(part), 2001)  
2.16.025 - Finance director duties. 
The finance director shall be responsible for the management and administration of the finance department and shall perform all duties as required by the town manager and Section 2.16.010. In addition, the finance director shall perform the duties of the town treasurer under chapter 2.18. 
(Ord No. 485 § 2, 2008: Ord. 358 § 2(part), 2001) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 485, § 2, adopted August 12, 2008, contained a scrivener's error amending § 2.26.025. At the editor's discretion, these provisions have been set out herein as amending § 2.16.025.  
2.16.030 - Finance and investment committee. 
The finance and investment committee of the town is created and established. The committee shall consist of the mayor, vice-mayor, town manager, assistant town manager, finance director and town treasurer and meet on a regular quarterly basis. 
(Ord. 358 § 2(part), 2001)  
2.16.035 - Finance and investment committee—Duties. 
The finance and investment committee shall provide oversight of the town's financial, public financing and investment activities and ensure that all such activities are in accordance with all applicable state and local laws, regulations and policies. 
(Ord. 358 § 2(part), 2001)  
Chapter 2.18 - TOWN TREASURER/INVESTMENT COMMITTEE 
 
2.18.010 - Town treasurer. 
The office of town treasurer is created and established. The office of town treasurer shall be combined with the finance director. 
(Ord No. 485 § 3, 2008; Ord. 307 § 4(part), 1998)  
2.18.020 - Town treasurer—Duties. 
The town treasurer shall perform those functions as required by Chapter 3.12 of the Paradise Municipal Code, any applicable state and local laws and regulations, and any other duties as required by the town council. 
(Ord. 307 § 4(part), 1998)  
Chapter 2.20 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.20.010 - Established. 
There is established the fire department of the town. 
(Ord. 31 § 1, 1980)  
2.20.020 - Functions. 
The functions of the fire department shall include: 
A.  To protect life and property by preventing and eliminating fire hazards and by controlling and extinguishing fires; 
B.  To enforce laws and ordinances relating to the preventing and extinguishing of fires and handling of potentially dangerous combustibles and explosives; 
C.  To investigate and report to the police department in all cases where there is reason to believe that any fire is the result of a crime or that a crime is committed in connection therewith; 
D.  To maintain in efficient operable condition those firefighting and fire prevention systems and facilities assigned to the fire department; 
E.  Subject to the prior approval of the town manager, to recruit and train such call firemen or other volunteer and auxiliary personnel as may reasonably be required to augment regular fire department manpower; and 
F.  To perform such other duties as the town manager may direct. 
(Ord. 31 § 2, 1980)  
2.20.030 - Chief. 
The fire department shall be headed by a fire chief who shall be responsible for the direction and control of all functions assigned to that department. The fire department shall be organized, maintained and operated by the fire chief under the general administrative direction and subject to the approval of the town manager. 
(Ord. 31 § 3, 1980)  
Chapter 2.24 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
2.24.010 - Established. 
There is established the police department of the town. (Ord. 27 §1, 1980)  
2.24.020 - Functions. 
The functions of the police department shall include: 
A.  To prevent crime and maintain law and order in the town by enforcing the laws of the United States, the state and town, except when the enforcement is vested by law in another office or officer; 
B.  To maintain in efficient operable condition those crime prevention and law enforcement systems and facilities assigned to the police department; 
C.  Subject to the prior approval of the town manager, to recruit and train such reserve police officers or such other volunteer police personnel as may reasonably be required to augment the regular police department manpower; 
D.  To serve subpoenas duly and properly issued in the name of the town and attested by the town clerk compelling attendance of witnesses before the council or any commission, board or officer of the town; and 
E.  To perform such other duties as the town manager may direct. (Ord. 27 §2, 1980)  
2.24.030 - Chief. 
The police department shall be headed by a police chief who shall be responsible for the direction and control of all functions assigned to that department. The police department shall be organized, maintained and operated by the police chief under the general administrative direction and subject to the approval of the town manager. (Ord. 27 §3, 1980)  
Chapter 2.28 - RECRUITMENT AND TRAINING OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS AND PUBLIC SAFETY DISPATCHERS 
 
2.28.010 - Desire to qualify for aid. 
The town declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Section 13522, Chapter 1, of Title 4, Part 4, of the Penal Code. (Ord. 190 §2 (part), 1989)  
2.28.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
Pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 13510(a) and 13510(c), the Paradise police department will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training (POST). (Ord. 190 §2 (part), 1989)  
2.28.030 - Compliance inspections. 
Pursuant to Penal Code Section 13512, the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training and its representatives may make such inquiries as deemed appropriate to ascertain that the Paradise police department's personnel adhere to standards for selection and training established by the commission. (Ord. 190 §2 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 2.32 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
 
2.32.010 - Established—Purpose. 
A personnel system for the town is established in order to provide for an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters and to place town employment on a merit basis so that the best qualified persons available shall be brought into the service of the town. (Ord. 13 §1, 1980)  
2.32.020 - Personnel policy declared. 
The personnel policy of the town is declared to be as follows: 
A.  Employment in the town government shall be based on merit and fitness. 
B.  Just and equitable incentives and conditions of employment shall be established and maintained to promote efficiency and economy in the operation of the town government. 
C.  Positions having similar duties and responsibilities shall be classified and compensated on a uniform basis. 
D.  Appointments, promotions and other actions requiring the application of the merit principle should be based on systematic tests or other appropriate evaluations. 
E.  High morale shall be maintained by fair administration of this chapter and by every consideration of the rights and interests of employees consistent with the best interests of the public and the town. 
F.  Employment shall be subject to the good behavior and satisfactory performance of work by the employee, and to the necessity for the performance of work and the availability of funds by the town. (Ord. 13 §2, 1980)  
2.32.030 - Personnel officer. 
The town manager shall be the personnel officer. He may delegate certain responsibilities of the personnel director to a designated assistant. The personnel director shall administer all provisions of this chapter and of the rules pertaining to town employment not specifically reserved to the council. (Ord. 13 §3, 1980)  
2.32.040 - Division into exempt and classified services. 
The officers and employees of the town, as well as others rendering services thereto, are divided into either the exempt service or the classified service. (Ord. 13 §4, 1980)  
2.32.050 - Exempt service composition. 
The exempt service shall include the following: 
A.  Management employees: 
1.  Officers of the town, the town manager and his immediate staff, 
2.  Each department head, 
3.  Such assistants to department heads as the town manager may designate; 
B.  Volunteers and persons appointed to serve without pay; 
C.  Consultants, counsel rendering professional services and independent contractors; 
D.  Any position which is not specifically included within the classification plan and pay plan for the classified service as adopted from time to time by council resolution. (Ord. 13 §5, 1980)  
2.32.060 - Classified service composition. 
The classified service shall include all positions of the town as are specifically set forth in the classification plan established by the town manager and in the pay plan adopted by council resolution. (Ord. 13 §6, 1980)  
2.32.070 - Personnel rules. 
Personnel rules, as well as any revision or amendment thereof, shall be adopted by council resolution, covering but not necessarily limited to, the following subjects: 
A.  Preparation, installation, maintenance, amendment and revision of a classification plan covering all positions in the classified service, including job descriptions, minimum standards and qualifications; 
B.  Preparation, installation, maintenance, amendment and revision of a pay plan directly correlated with the classification plan; 
C.  Manner of giving notice of all job openings and acceptance of applications therefor; 
D.  Employment procedures and employment lists resulting therefrom; 
E.  Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists and the making of temporary and emergency appointments; 
F.  Evaluation of employees during the probationary period; 
G.  Transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees in the classified service; 
H.  Separation of employees from the classified service through layoff, suspension or dismissal; 
I.  Determination of hour of work, overtime, sick leave, vacation, holidays, leave of absence, training and other working conditions; 
J.  Provision for orderly and equitable presentation by an employee to his appointing authority relating to grievances; 
K.  Procedures governing employer-employee relations; 
L.  Procedures regarding affirmative action; and 
M.  Establishment, maintenance and use of a personnel records system. (Ord. 13 §7, 1980)  
2.32.080 - Appointments. 
Appointments to vacant positions shall be made in accordance with Chapter 2.04, describing the powers and duties of the town manager, this chapter and the personnel rules. (Ord. 13 §8, 1980)  
2.32.090 - Reduction in force. 
Whenever in the judgment of the council it becomes necessary for reasons of economy or because the need for a position no longer exists, the town manager may lay off, demote or transfer an employee holding such position or employment without the right of appeal. (Ord. 13 §9, 1980)  
2.32.100 - Discrimination prohibited. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by the general laws of the state, no person shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political or religious affiliation, race, sex, age or ethnic derivation. 
B.  No rule shall be adopted prohibiting the employment of any person otherwise qualified, solely because of age, excepting only the employment of policemen or firemen. (Ord. 13 §10, 1980)  
2.32.110 - Absence for compensable injury or disease. 
Any period of time during which an employee is required to be absent from his position by reason of an injury or disease for which he is entitled to receive worker's compensation benefits shall not be deemed to be a break in his continuous service for the purpose of his right to any salary adjustments, sick leave, vacation or seniority rights which might otherwise apply. (Ord. 13 §11, 1980)  
Chapter 2.34 - PUBLIC EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM 
 
2.34.010 - Contract authorized. 
A contract between the town council and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System is authorized, a copy of the proposed contract being attached to Ordinance 136, marked "Exhibit A," and is incorporated and is made a part of this section as if set forth in full, said contract having been modified by Ordinance 175 which is incorporated and made a part of this section as if set forth in full. (Ord. 191 §1, 1989: Ord. 187 §1, 1989: Ord. 175 §1, 1988: Ord. 136 §1, 1985)  
2.34.020 - Execution of contract. 
The mayor of the town council is authorized, empowered and directed to execute the contract for and on behalf of the agency. (Ord. 191 §2, 1989: Ord. 187 §2, 1989: Ord. 175 §2, 1988: Ord. 136 §1, 1985)  
Chapter 2.40 - EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION 
 
2.40.010 - Purposes. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this town in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this town with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.020 - Definition. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this town caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this town, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.030 - Disaster council—Membership. 
The disaster council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be the chairman; 
B.  The town manager, who shall be the vice-chairman; 
C.  The assistant director of emergency services; 
D.  Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this town, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the town council. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.040 - Disaster council—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the town council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements, and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman or, in his absence from the town or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.050 - Director and assistant director of emergency services. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The town manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services, who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.060 - Powers and duties of the director and assistant director of emergency services. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the town council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the town council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the town council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the town council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this town for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this town; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent this town in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in this chapter, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the governor or the director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the town council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the town for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer them for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any town officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this town is located, or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any town department or agency, and 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as town manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this chapter adopted by the town council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the town council and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. The order of succession shall be approved by the town council. 
C.  The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this town; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this town, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.40.060A6c of this chapter, be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this town during the emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the town. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.080 - Emergency plan. 
The disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the town emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the town, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. The plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the town council. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the town. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.100 - Punishment of violations. 
It is a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this town, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
2.40.110 - Severability. 
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are severable. (Ord. 113 (part), 1983)  
Chapter 2.44 - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
 
2.44.010 - Consolidation. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Section 36503.5 of the Government Code of the State of California, the town's general municipal election shall be held on the same day as the statewide general election, as set forth in Section 2550 of the Elections Code of the State of California, the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year. (Ord. 131 §1, 1985)  
2.44.020 - Extension of terms of office. 
Any town councilmember whose term of office would have, prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, expired on the Tuesday succeeding the second Tuesday in April of an even-numbered year, shall, instead, continue in their offices until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the date of the general municipal election fixed pursuant to Section 2.44.010 and until their successors are elected and qualified. (Ord. 131 §2, 1985)  
2.44.030 - Notice to registered voters. 
Within thirty days after the ordinance codified in this chapter becomes operative, the town clerk shall cause a notice to be mailed to all registered voters in the town informing the voters of the change in the election date and that as a result of the change in the election date, elected city office-holders' terms of office will be changed. (Ord. 131 §3, 1985)  
2.44.040 - County approval necessary. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall become operative upon approval by the board of supervisors of the County of Butte. (Ord. 131 §4, 1985)  
Chapter 2.45 - PURCHASING SYSTEM 
 
2.45.010 - Purpose and policy. 
A.  The town council declares that it shall be the public policy of the town to make all purchases of supplies and services in a manner that is fair, efficient, and economical. The town purchasing system is intended to: 
1.  Provide for public confidence; 
2.  Guarantee fair and equitable treatment for all involved; 
3.  Employ effective broad based free and open competition; 
4.  Guarantee maximum value for town expenditures; 
5.  Be performed in a thoroughly professional manner, with honesty and integrity, and in compliance with applicable laws and regulations; 
6.  Provide safeguards for maintaining a quality procurement system. 
B.  This chapter shall apply to contracts for the procurement of town supplies and services. It shall apply to every expenditure of public funds irrespective of the source of funds. When the procurement involves the expenditure of federal funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with all applicable federal laws and regulations and with the terms/conditions of any grant, gift or bequest consistent with law. (Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.020 - Definitions. 
A.  The following definitions shall apply to this chapter: 
"Activity or using agency" means any department, agency or other unit of town government which derives its support wholly or in part from the town. 
"Brand name or equal specification" means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalog numbers to describe the standard of quality, performance, and other salient characteristics needed to meet town requirements, and which provides for the submission of equivalent products. 
"Brand name specification" means a specification limited to one or more items by manufacturers' names or catalog numbers. 
"Business" means any corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, joint stock company, joint venture, limited liability company or partnership, or any other private legal entity. 
"Change order" means a written order signed and issued by the purchasing officer or his/her designee, directing the contractor to make changes to the contract. 
"Contract modification" means any written alteration in specifications, delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price, quantity, or other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties to the contract. 
"Confidential information" means any information which is available to an employee because of the employee's status as an employee of the town and is not a matter of public knowledge or available to the public on request under the California Public Records Act. 
"Contract" means a written agreement for the procurement of supplies or services. 
"Contractor" means any person having a contract with the town or a using agency thereof. 
"Cost analysis" means the evaluation of cost data for the purpose of arriving at costs actually incurred or estimates of costs to be incurred, prices to be paid, and costs to be reimbursed. A cost analysis or a price analysis, as appropriate, shall be conducted prior to award of formal bids not awarded under competitive sealed bidding. 
"Cost data" means factual information concerning the cost of labor, material, overhead and other cost components which are expected to be incurred or which have been incurred by the contractor in performing the contract. 
"Cost-reimbursement contract" means a contract under which a contractor is reimbursed for costs which are allowed and allocable in accordance with the contract terms and the provisions of this chapter, and a set fee or profit, if any. 
"Department director" means the positions of community development director, public works director/town engineer, chief of police, chief of fire department, town clerk and others so designated by the town council. 
"Direct or indirect participation" means involvement through decision, approval, disapproval, recommendation, preparation of any part of a purchase request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard, rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity. 
"Emergency" means any event or combination of circumstances resulting in operational stoppage or causing potentially significant delays in town services, including, but not limited to, natural or man made disasters. 
"Gratuity" means a payment, loan, subscription, advance, deposit of money, service, or anything of more than nominal value, present or promised, unless consideration of substantially equal or greater value is received. 
"Immediate family" means a spouse, children, parents, brothers and sisters. 
"Invitation for bids" means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting sealed bids. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, limited liability company or partnership, union, committee, club, other organization, or group of individuals. 
"Price analysis" means the evaluation of price data, without analysis of the separate cost components and profit as in cost analysis, which may assist in arriving at prices to be paid and costs to be reimbursed. 
"Pricing data" means factual information concerning prices of items substantially similar to those being procured. Prices in this definition refer to offered or proposed selling prices, historical selling prices and current selling prices. The definition refers to data relevant to both prime and subcontract prices. 
"Procurement" means the buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, or otherwise acquiring of any supplies or services. It also includes all functions that pertain to obtaining any supply, service, or construction, including description of requirements, selection and solicitation of sources, preparation and award of contract, and all phases of contract administration. 
"Purchasing limits" means those amounts established by the town council, for specific contracts. 
"Public agency" means a public entity subject to, or created by the town. 
"Request for proposals" means all documents, whether attached or incorporated by reference, utilized for soliciting proposals. 
"Responsible bidder or offer" means a person who has the capability, in all respects, to perform fully the contract requirements, and the tenacity, perseverance, experience, integrity, reliability, capacity, facilities, equipment, and credit which assure good faith performance. 
"Responsive bidder" means a person who has submitted a bid which conforms in all material respects to the requirements set forth in the invitation for bids. 
"Services" means the furnishing of labor, time, or effort by a contractor, not involving the delivery of a specific and tangible product other than reports or studies. 
"Specification" means any description of the physical or functional characteristics or of the nature of a supply, service, or construction item drafted so as to promote overall economy and to encourage maximum practical competition. It may include a description of any requirement for inspecting, testing, or preparing a supply or service. 
"Supplies" means all property, including, but not limited to, equipment, materials, printing, insurance, and leases of real property, excluding land or permanent interest in land. 
"Using agency" means any town department, commission, board, or public agency requiring supplies or services pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.030 - Purchasing officer—Designated. 
The town manager, or his or her designee, shall be the purchasing officer. The purchasing officer shall direct and supervise the town purchasing program. The purchasing officer shall endeavor to obtain as full and open a competition as possible on all purchases of services and supplies. The purchasing officer shall establish reasonable methods and procedures for the efficient and economical functioning of the purchasing program. (Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.040 - Purchasing officer—Powers and duties. 
A.  The purchasing officer shall have the authority to: 
1.  Purchase supplies, materials, equipment and services required by any using agency in accordance with the purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter. 
2.  Enter into any contract permitted by law, including, but not limited to, equipment service contracts, lease-purchase agreements and rental agreements, subject to town council authorization, any restrictions set forth in this chapter or specifically provided by law; 
3.  Maintain, when feasible, full and open competition among bidders on all purchases; 
4.  Prepare, recommend and implement rules governing the purchase of supplies, equipment and services for the town and recommend revisions and amendments where applicable; 
5.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations; 
6.  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which become unsuitable for town use; 
7.  Delegate purchasing authority to department directors in conformity with Section 2.45.050 and general conformity with this chapter. 
(Ord. 341, § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.050 - Decentralized purchasing procedures. 
With town council approval, the town manager may authorize any department director to independently purchase or contract for supplies, equipment, or services. All such purchases shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter. Such authorization to purchase independently may be rescinded at any time. Ultimate authority and responsibility for compliance with this chapter shall rest with the purchasing officer. (Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.060 - Requisition, bid, and alternative purchasing forms. 
All town departments shall submit requests to the purchasing officer by standard requisition, bid forms or by other alternative means as may be established by purchasing officer for acquiring supplies, materials, equipment and services as required for their operations and purposes within the limits of funds appropriated therefor. The purchasing officer, after reviewing a request may require the department to justify the quality requisitioned. (Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.070 - Bidding—Generally. 
Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid process pursuant to Sections 2.45.080 and 2.45.090 of this chapter except when one of the following conditions applies: 
A.  When an emergency requires that a purchase order be placed immediately with the nearest available source of supply; 
B.  When the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor. A commodity shall be considered obtainable only from one vendor when only one vendor offers it for sale, lease or rental, or when only one vendor is able to do so within the time frame and/or under the terms and conditions which reasonably meet the needs of the town, or when there is a sole distributer or manufacturer of a product or service such that there is no acceptable substitute within a specific geographical area; 
C.  When the professional services are unique and not appropriate for competitive bidding; 
D.  When, through cooperative purchasing with the state, the county, and other public agencies, the advantages of large-scale buying may be obtained; 
E.  When purchasing from or selling to another governmental agency is beneficial to the interests of the town; 
F.  When there is a breakdown in essential machinery, essential services, or when unforeseen circumstances arise, including delays by contractors, delays in transportation, and unanticipated volume of work, which require the immediate attention of a professional or immediate service/repair in order to protect public health, safety and welfare; 
G.  When computer software is required for a specific town service or activity and its selection is evaluated and determined by the purchasing officer based on the software being the most effective solution for the service or activity. 
(Ord. No. 499, § 1, 5-11-2010; Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.080 - Formal contract procedures. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, purchases of supplies, equipment or services with a total projected value of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or more (including tax, shipping, etc.), shall be by formal written bid for a lowest responsible bidder pursuant to the following procedure: 
A.  Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the goods or services to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid packets and specifications may be obtained, and the time and place for opening bids. 
B.  Notices inviting bids shall be published at least ten (10) days before the date of the opening of the bids. Notices shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the town, or if there is none, shall be posted in public places in the town. 
C.  The purchasing officer, or his or her designee, shall also solicit bids from responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on a bidders' list or who have made a written request that their names be added to the bidders' list. 
D.  When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, or his or her designee, bidder's security may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to have the bid security returned provided, however, a successful bidder shall forfeit his, her or its bid security upon refusal or failure to execute an awarded contract within ten (10) days after the notice of award of the contract has been mailed by the town. The town council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. In such event, if the town council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lower bidder's security shall be applied by the town to the contract price differential between the lowest bid and the second lowest bidder. If the town council rejects the remaining bid presented and re-advertises, the amount of the lowest bidder's security may be used to offset the cost of receiving new bids and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. If the town council rejects the remaining bids presented and re-advertises, the amount of the lowest bidder's security may be used to offset the cost of receiving new bids and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
E.  Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer, or his or her designee, and shall be identified as "bid" for the specific supplies or services on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notice. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening. The purchasing officer, or designee, requesting bids shall maintain all formal bid records for a period of three (3) years after the completion of the purchase. These records, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
F.  The town council shall have the right to waive any non-material irregularities or informalities in the bidding or in the procedures as set forth in this chapter. 
G.  In its discretion, the town council may reject any and all bids presented, re-advertise for bids or authorize the purchasing officer to award a contract after negotiating for the most reasonable cost under existing conditions. The right to reject any or all bids is expressly reserved to the town. The decision of the town council shall be final. 
H.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, contracts shall be awarded to the lowest responsible and responsive bidder. Contracts, which exceed the budgeted amount, or which are not budgeted, shall be awarded only by the town council. The town manager shall be authorized to enter into a written agreement after the town council awards the contract. 
I.  If two (2) or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, the town council may, in its discretion, accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tied bidders. 
J.  Performance Bonds. The town council shall have the authority to require a low bidder to provide a performance bond before entering into a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the town. 
K.  Cost or Pricing Data. The low bidder shall submit cost or pricing data when the contract is expected to exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the award of a contract is not required when: 
1.  The contract price is based on adequate price competition; 
2.  The contract price is based on established catalog prices or market prices; 
3.  The contract price is set by law or regulation; or 
4.  It is determined in writing by the purchasing officer that the requirements above may be waived. Such determination shall include the reasons for such waiver. 
After award of a contract, contractor shall submit cost or pricing data prior to the pricing of any change order or contract modification, including adjustments to contracts awarded by competitive sealed bidding, if the initial pricing of the contract required it, and the change order or modification involves aggregate increases or aggregate decreases in total costs expected to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The submission of cost or pricing data relating to the pricing of a change order or contract modification shall not be required when: 
1.  Unrelated and separately priced adjustments for which cost or pricing data would not be required are consolidated for administrative convenience; or 
2.  It is determined in writing by the purchasing officer that the requirements above may be waived. Such determination shall include the reasons for such waiver. 
A contractor, actual or prospective, required to submit cost or pricing data in accordance with this section, shall certify that, to the best of his, her or its knowledge and belief, the cost or pricing data submitted was accurate, complete, and current as of a mutually specified date prior to the award of the contract or the pricing of the change order or contract modification. 
Any contract award, change order, or contract modification, under which the submission and certification of cost or pricing data are required, shall contain a provision stating that the price to the town, including profit or fee, shall be adjusted to exclude any significant sums by which the town finds that such price was increased because the contractor-furnished costs or pricing data were inaccurate, incomplete, or not current. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 1, 4-9-2019; Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.090 - Informal bidding procedures. 
Purchases of supplies, equipment, and services with total projected values more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) may be made by the purchasing officer, or his or her designee, by the informal bid process pursuant to the procedure prescribed in this section and without observing the procedure described in Section 2.45.080 of this chapter. 
A.  Informal bid purchases shall, whenever possible, be based on at least three (3) bids. Upon examination of all bids, a contract shall be awarded to the low bidder. 
B.  The purchasing officer, or designee, may solicit informal bids by written requests to prospective vendors, via fax machine, by telephone, computer or by any other means deemed effective. 
C.  The purchasing officer, or designee, shall maintain all informal bid orders and bids for a period of three (3) years after the completion of the purchase. These records, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
D.  The purchasing officer, or designee, shall have the right to waive any nonmaterial irregularity or informality in such bids. 
E.  At the discretion of the purchasing officer, any/all purchases may be required to follow formal contact procedures of Section 2.45.080. 
(Ord. No. 576, § 2, 4-9-2019; Ord. 341, § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.100 - Bidding for public works projects. 
Public works projects as defined by the California Public Contract Code shall be bid, advertised and awarded in accordance with applicable sections of the California Public Works Contract Code. 
(Ord. No. 341, § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.110 - Inspection and testing. 
The purchasing officer or designee may cause an inspection of the supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order. The purchasing officer, or designee, shall have the authority to require chemical or physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with the specifications. 
(Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.120 - Award to other than lowest responsible and responsive bidder. 
Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, supplies, equipment and/or services may be purchased from other than the lowest responsible and responsive bidder in any case in which the town council shall find that, in light of all circumstances applicable to the particular purchase, including, but not limited to, location of the vendor and the amount of staff time required for the administration of the contract and/or cost/impact of changing vendors, the town will acquire the supplies, equipment or service at lower net cost by effecting its purchase from a party other than the lowest responsible bidder. (Ord. 341 § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.130 - Disposition of surplus supplies and equipment. 
All town departments shall submit to the purchasing officer, at such times and in such forms as the purchasing officer shall prescribe, reports showing all supplies and equipment which are not longer used or which have become obsolete or worn out. The purchasing officer shall have the authority to exchange for or trade in on new supplies and equipment all supplies and equipment which have become unsuitable for town use. 
A.  Such items declared to be surplus shall be offered for sale on a competitive bid basis. Bids may be solicited by written request, telephone, fax machine, computer, by public auction, by use of an auction service, by advertisement in any newspaper or magazine or by a combination of such methods. 
B.  When, after a reasonable effort has been made to obtain competitive bids, no offers are received or any item or town-owned personal property declared to be surplus, the purchasing officer is authorized to dispose of such item for the highest scrap value that can be obtained therefor and if a reasonable effort to do so produces no opportunity to sell the same for scrap, the purchasing officer may cause its destruction or any other disposition thereof. 
C.  The Town may sell obsolete or surplus property to any other tax-supported governmental agency at an established "fair market value" without other bids. 
D.  The Town may provide surplus equipment to a governmental agency as permitted by law. 
E.  With the approval of the town council, the town may donate surplus personal property to any non-profit agency or entity which is exempt from federal income tax. (Ord. 341, § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.140 - Operational authority of purchasing officer. 
A.  The purchasing officer shall have the power to settle any protest regarding the solicitation or award of a Town contract, or any claim arising out of the performance of a Town contract, prior to an appeal to the town council or the commencement of an action in a court of competent jurisdiction; provided, however, the settlement of claim shall not exceed five thousand dollars. 
B.  If, prior to the bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing officer, after consultation with the town attorney, determines that a solicitation is in violation of federal, state, or this Code, the solicitation shall be canceled or revised to comply with applicable law. 
C.  If, after bid opening or the closing date for receipt of proposals, the purchasing officer, after consultation with the town attorney, determines that solicitation or a proposed award of a contract is in violation of federal, state, or this Code, the solicitation or proposed award shall be canceled. (Ord. 341, § 1 (part), 2000)  
2.45.150 - Conflicts. 
A.  All conflict of interest laws of the State of California shall apply to purchases pursuant to this chapter, including, but not limited to the following: 
i)  Purchases made under the State of California HOME Program subject to HOME Final Rule 24 CFR 92.356—Conflict of interest. 
(1)  Applicability. In the procurement of property and services, the conflict of interest provisions in 24 CFR 85.36; 24 CFR 84.42; and 24 CFR 92.356 apply. 
(2)  Conflicts Prohibited. No persons described in paragraph (3) of this section who exercise or have exercised any functions or responsibilities with respect to activities assisted with HOME funds and/or other federal or state funds regulated by the Code of Federal Regulations sections cited above, or who are in a position to participate in a decision making process or gain inside information with regard to these activities, may obtain a financial interest or benefit from a HOME-assisted or other state and/or federal program, or have an interest in any contract, subcontract or agreement with respect thereto, or the proceeds there under, either for themselves or those with whom they have family or business ties, during their tenure or for one year thereafter. 
(3)  Persons Covered. The conflict of interest provisions of paragraph (2) of this section apply to any person who is an employee, agent, consultant, officer, or elected official or appointed official of the Town of Paradise. 
ii)  In accordance with 24 CFR 85.36 persons covered by paragraph i) (3) are subject to the following standards of conduct: 
(1)  An official or employee of the Town shall not engage in conduct that would tend to discredit or dishonor their position with the Town of Paradise. Such appointed officials and employees must avoid conflicts of private interests with public duties and responsibilities and shall not do indirectly what may not be done directly. 
(2)  Disciplinary action generally does not follow an occasional error in judgment which occurs in good faith and is unintentional. However, misconduct, dishonesty, and fraud shall be the basis for severe disciplinary action, including removal for cause. 
(3)  Officials and employees occupying designated positions are required to file an annual statement of economic interests with the Town Clerk, as prescribed by state regulation and Town of Paradise Resolution No. 91-15. 
(4)  Each new employee must be informed of the obligation to submit a statement of economic interest if they fall within the listed designated position categories. 
(5)  Any employee whose job performance is adversely affected by the taking of alcohol, non-prescription drugs, or other substances shall be subject to disciplinary action, in accordance with the Paradise Municipal Code or the Memorandum of Understanding that covers the employee. 
(6)  Each employee is required to be familiar with the Town's standards and statutory provisions relating to ethical behavior and other standards of conduct. Each employee is expected to secure the advice of their supervisor or the Personnel Officer or other appropriate official when in doubt about the meaning or application of any conduct requirement applying to their particular situation. 
(7)  The political activities of Town employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state and federal laws. Appointed officials and employees must avoid and refrain from any political involvement and/or partisan political activities which could impede, impair, or jeopardize the impartial discharge of their duties. 
(8)  Handle all matters of personnel based on merit and objectivity so that fairness and impartiality govern all personnel decisions thereby avoiding any form of discrimination or preferential treatment. 
(Ord. No. 398, § 1, 2003)  
2.45.160 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for not more than six months in the county jail, or both. (Ord. 341, § 1 (part), 2000)  
Chapter 2.46 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.46.010 - Declaration of necessity—Paradise Redevelopment Agency. 
It is hereby found and declared, pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, constituting Part 1 of Division 24 of the California Health and Safety Code, that there is a need for the redevelopment agency created by Section 33100 of the Community Redevelopment Law to function in the town, and such agency is hereby authorized to transact business and exercise its power under the Community Redevelopment Law. Such agency shall be known as the "Paradise Redevelopment Agency" (the "agency"). (Ord. 374, § (part), 2002)  
2.46.020 - Town council to act as agency. 
Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 33200, the town council of the town hereby declares itself to be the agency, with all the rights, powers, duties, privileges and immunities vested by the Community Redevelopment Law. It is hereby found that this action will serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner. (Ord. 374, § (part), 2002)  
2.46.030 - Declaration of need for redevelopment agency. 
Pursuant to Section 2.46.010 of this Code, the council of the Town of Paradise declared the need for redevelopment agency in the Town and established the Paradise Redevelopment Agency. (Ord. 390, § 1, 2003)  
2.46.040 - Appointment of board of directors of redevelopment agency. 
Pursuant to Section 2.46.020 of this Code, the Council of the Town of Paradise declared itself to be the board of directors of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency. (Ord. 390, § 2, 2003)  
2.46.050 - Remuneration for board of directors of redevelopment agency. 
The board of directors of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency shall not be remunerated. (Ord. 390, § 3, 2003)  
2.46.060 - Seal. 
The executive director of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency is hereby authorized to obtain the seal of the agency which shall include the name of the agency and the year of its establishment. (Ord. 390, § 4, 2003)  
2.46.070 - Officers. 
The officers of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency shall be a chairperson, vice-chairperson, executive director, deputy executive director, secretary, treasurer and agency counsel who shall be the Mayor, Vice-Mayor, Town Manager, Assistant Town Manager, Town Clerk, Finance Director, and Town Attorney respectively. (Ord. 390, § 5, 2003)  
2.46.080 - Other agency personnel. 
The executive director of the agency may appoint, designate, or assign a Town employee to serve the agency in various professional capacities for redevelopment related projects and programs. (Ord. 390, § 6, 2003)  
2.46.090 - Duties of officers and other agency personnel. 
The duties of the officers and other personnel of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency shall be as provided by law, as adopted by resolution of the board of directors and as promulgated by the executive director when not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 390, § 7, 2003)  
2.46.100 - Meetings. 
All meetings of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency shall be held at the times and in the manner established for meetings of the Town Council, or at such other times as may be determined by the board of directors of the agency. (Ord. 390, § 8, 2003)  
2.46.110 - Quorum. 
A majority of the board of directors of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 390, § 9, 2003)  
2.46.120 - Minutes of meetings. 
The secretary of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency shall be responsible for minutes of all meetings of the agency. (Ord. 390, § 10, 2003)  
2.46.130 - Agency address. 
The mailing address and office address of the Paradise Redevelopment Agency shall be the mailing address and office address of the Town Clerk of the Town of Paradise. (Ord. 390, § 11, 2003)  
2.46.140 - Personnel rules and policies. 
The Paradise Redevelopment Agency's personnel rules and policies shall be the same as those for the Town of Paradise. (Ord. 390, § 12, 2003)  
2.46.150 - Environmental review guidelines. 
The "Environmental Review Guidelines" of the Town of Paradise, as set out in Town Council Resolution No. 00-14, are adopted as the Paradise Redevelopment Agency's guidelines for evaluating projects and the preparation and review of environmental documents, except that the agency shall be deemed the lead agency under the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and shall certify the final environmental impact report for a proposed redevelopment plan and subsequent environmental documents, if any, for proposed projects for which approval of the agency is required. (Ord. 390, § 13, 2003)  
2.46.160 - Investment of moneys in Local Agency Investment Fund. 
A.  The Paradise Redevelopment Agency is hereby authorized to deposit and withdrawal of agency moneys in the Local Agency Investment Fund in the State Treasury. 
B.  The executive director and the treasurer of the agency, or their designees, are authorized to order the deposit and withdrawal of such money in the Local Agency Investment Fund. (Ord. 390, § 14, 2003)  
2.46.170 - Conflict of interest. 
The Paradise Redevelopment Agency's conflict of interest code shall be the same as the one for the Town of Paradise. (Ord. 390, § 15, 2003)  
2.46.180 - No power of eminent domain. 
The Paradise Redevelopment Agency shall not acquire any real property by eminent domain. (Ord. 390, § 16, 2003)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE  
Chapter 3.04 - ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION DUTIES 
 
3.04.010 - Duties transferred to county. 
From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is transferred to the Butte County board of supervisors, the Butte County tax assessor, the Butte County tax collector and other proper officers of Butte County the performance of the following duties for the town: 
A.  The assessment of all property within the town for tax purposes; 
B.  The equalization and assessment of taxes; 
C.  The collection, payment and enforcement of all secured and unsecured property taxes and municipal improvement assessments, including delinquent taxes; 
D.  The redemption of property from sale or other penalty for nonpayment of taxes or improvement assessments. 
(Ord. 33 §1, 1980)  
3.04.020 - Payment of funds to town. 
The net amounts of collections of current and delinquent taxes and redemptions shall be paid to the town's finance officer periodically or at such times as shall be agreed upon by the town council and the Butte County board of supervisors. 
(Ord. 33 §2, 1980)  
3.04.030 - Agreements authorized. 
The town manager is empowered to enter into such effectuating agreements with appropriate officers of the county as may be necessary to carry out the intent and purpose of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 33 §3, 1980)  
Chapter 3.08 - SIGNATURE AUTHORITY 
 
3.08.010 - Town manager authorized. 
The town manager is authorized to sign the following documents after prior authorization by the town council by resolution or minute order: 
A.  Warrants drawn on the town treasury; 
B.  Written contracts and conveyances made or entered into by the town; and 
C.  Instruments requiring the town seal. 
(Ord. 45 §1, 1981)  
Chapter 3.12 - INVESTMENT OF FUNDS 
 
3.12.010 - Authority of town treasurer and investment committee. 
Pursuant to Sections 53601 et seq. of the Government Code the authority to invest and reinvest money of the town, to sell or exchange securities so purchased, and to deposit such securities for safekeeping is delegated to the town treasurer and investment committee. 
(Ord. 307 §5(part), 1998)  
3.12.020 - Purpose. 
The town council has determined that it is necessary to provide guidelines for the prudent investment of the temporary idle cash of the town and to outline the policies for maximizing the efficiency of the town's cash management system to enhance the financial status of the town, while protecting its pooled cash. 
(Ord. 307 §5(part), 1998)  
3.12.030 - Reports required. 
The town treasurer shall make the following reports to the investment committee and town council: an annual statement of investment policy; a quarterly investment report detailing the performance of the investment portfolio; and any additional reports as required by applicable state or local laws or policies, or as requested by the town council. (Ord. 307 §5(part), 1998)  
3.12.040 - Investment policy. 
The town council shall adopt an investment policy and set forth investment guidelines for the administration of the town's investment of the idle funds as set forth in either state law, resolution or administrative policy. (Ord. 307 §5(part), 1998)  
Chapter 3.16 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
 
3.16.010 - Title of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as, and for all purposes may be referred to as, the "Real Property Transfer Tax Law of the Town of Paradise." (Ord. 6 §1, 1980)  
3.16.020 - Imposed—Rate. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the town shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 6 §2, 1980)  
3.16.030 - Mobile homes. 
A.  The transfer of any mobile home installed on a foundation system pursuant to §18551 of the Health and Safety Code and subject to local property taxation shall be subject to the tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020. 
B.  The purchaser of a new mobile home which is sold and installed for occupancy as a residence in accordance with Section 18613 of the Health and Safety Code, on or after July 1, 1980, shall be subject to the tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020. Mobile homes held in the mobile home dealer's inventory shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 6 §3, 1980)  
3.16.040 - Who shall pay. 
The tax imposed shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 6 §4, 1980)  
3.16.050 - Exemptions. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020 shall not apply to: 
A.  Any instrument in writing given to secure a debt; 
B.  Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed by this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title; 
C.  The making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan or reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended, 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended, 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended, or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
Subdivisions 1 to 4, inclusive, of this subsection shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyance occurs within five years form the date of such confirmation, approval or change; 
D.  The making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
1.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935, 
2.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed, 
3.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order; 
E.  Any realty held by a partnership by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in the preceding paragraph, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination; 
F.  Any deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on the deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes. (Ord. 78 §1, 1982; Ord. 6 §5, 1980)  
3.16.060 - Administration by county. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 6 §6, 1980)  
3.16.070 - Refund claims. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 6 §7, 1980)  
Chapter 3.20 - SALES AND USE TAX 
 
3.20.010 - Title of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance." (Ord. 2 §1, 1979)  
3.20.020 - Rate. 
The rate of sales and use tax imposed by this chapter is one percent. (Ord. 2 §2, 1979)  
3.20.030 - Purpose. 
The town council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
B.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes; 
D.  To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the town sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2 §4, 1979)  
3.20.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to January 1, 1980 this town shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax chapter; provided, that if this town has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to January 1, 1980, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 2 §5, 1979)  
3.20.050 - Sales tax imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the town at the rate stated in Section 3.20.020 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this town on and after January 1, 1980. (Ord. 2 §6, 1979)  
3.20.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 2 §7, 1979)  
3.20.070 - Use tax imposed. 
A excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this town of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after January 1, 1980 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 2 §8, 1979)  
3.20.080 - State provisions—Adopted. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 2 §9, 1979)  
3.20.090 - State provisions—Limitations. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this town shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word "State" is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the town, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption form this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word "State" in the phrase, "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase found in Section 6203. (Ord. 2 §10, 1979)  
3.20.100 - Additional permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit is not required by this chapter. (Ord. 2 §11, 1979)  
3.20.110 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
B.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter. 
C.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
D.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government, is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 112 §1, 1983: Ord. 2 §12, 1979)  
3.20.120 - Amendments to state provisions. 
All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 2 §13, 1979)  
3.20.130 - Enjoining collection. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this town, or against any officer of the state or this town, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 2 §14, 1979)  
3.20.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 2 §15, 1979)  
Chapter 3.22 - TEMPORARY TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— The tax levied by Ord. No. 545, adopted July 8, 2014, shall continue at the rate of one-half of one (0.50) percent from April 1, 2015, until March 31, 2021. The authority to levy the tax imposed by said ordinance shall expire six (6) years from its operative date. 
 
3.22.010 - Title. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the temporary transactions and use tax ordinance. The Town of Paradise hereinafter shall be called "town." This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the town. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.020 - Operative date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To maintain and preserve Town of Paradise public services, including police protection, fire suppression, street maintenance, animal control and other services within the town. 
B.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the town to adopt the tax ordinance codified in this chapter which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the state board of equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the state board of equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes. 
E.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and, at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the town shall contract with the state board of equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided that if the town shall not have contracted with the state board of equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such contract. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.050 - Transactions rate tax. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the Town of Paradise at the rate of one-half of one (0.50) percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory until March 31, 2031. 
(Ord. No. 569, §§ 1, 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 569, adopted May 8, 2018 states that the tax levied by [the ordinance from which this section is derived] shall continue at the rate of one-half of one (0.50) percent until March 31, 2031. The authority to levy the tax imposed by [the ordinance from which this section is derived] shall expire on March 31, 2031.  
3.22.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consumed at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his, her or its agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state of California or has more than one (1) place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the state board of equalization. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the town of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer until March 31, 2031 for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half of one (0.50) percent of the sales price of such property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 569, §§ 2, 3, 5-8-2018; Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014) 
Editor's note— Section 3 of Ord. No. 569, adopted May 8, 2018 states that the tax levied by [the ordinance from which this section is derived] shall continue at the rate of one-half of one (0.50) percent until March 31, 2031. The authority to levy the tax imposed by [the ordinance from which this section is derived] shall expire on March 31, 2031.  
3.22.075 - Citizens oversight committee. 
A.  The town council shall establish and appoint a citizens oversight committee. 
B.  The citizens oversight committee shall consist of a nine (9) member board of residents of the Town of Paradise to represent a cross-section of the community. 
C.  The purpose of the citizens oversight committee shall be to meet with the town manager and the town finance director during the preparation of each fiscal year budget until the ordinance sunsets, to make recommendations to the town council regarding how the proceeds from the implementation of the ordinance will be allocated for the ensuing budget year. The committee shall make recommendations to the council to provide for local public services, including police protection, fire suppression, emergency medical services, road repair, street maintenance, animal control and other services that will improve the quality of life for residents and businesses within the Town of Paradise. The committee shall meet at least quarterly during the fiscal year to ensure that the revenue generated by the ordinance is allocated and disbursed in accordance with the town budget. All quarterly and annual budget reports from the committee shall be published on the Town of Paradise website prior to council adoption of the budget and will be available for public review. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014)  
3.22.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.090 - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this town shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "state" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Board of Control, State Board of Equalization, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California. 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this town or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the state board of equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter. 
3.  In those sections including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or; 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B  . The word "town" shall be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.100 - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.110 - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax in the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the state of California or by any town, town and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Bums Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the town which is shipped to a point outside the town, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his, her or its agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purpose of this subsection, delivery to a point outside the town shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-town address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-town and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections B.3 and 4 of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract of lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this town of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provide d in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. 
3.  If the purchase is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this chapter. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections C.3 and 4 of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subsection C.7, a retailer engaged in business in the town shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the town or participates within the town in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the town or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the town under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the town" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the town. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.120 - Amendments. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not consistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter; provided, however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
3.22.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the town, or against any officer of the state or the town, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 545, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 540, § 1, 5-13-2014)  
Chapter 3.24 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
 
3.24.010 - Title of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the Town of Paradise." (Ord. 14 §1, 1980)  
3.24.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Administrative services director" means the administrative services director of the town. 
B.  "Hotel" means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied, or intended or designed for occupancy, by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes, but is not limited to, any hotel, inn, bed and breakfast, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobile home or house trailer, at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
C.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
D.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purpose of this chapter, and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter, by either the principal or the managing agent, shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
E.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
F.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever; provided, however, that "rent" shall not include lodging furnished in kind to an employee by an employer solely for the convenience of the employer. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy, or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement, for less than thirty-one consecutive calendar days. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. Any person occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed a transient until a period of thirty-one days has expired, except in a hotel qualifying as exempt under the provisions of Section 3.24.040. (Ord. 216 §1, 1992; Ord. 73 §2(part), 1982; Ord. 14 §2, 1980)  
3.24.30 - Imposed—Amount—Payment. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of ten percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the town which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the town. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient's ceasing to occupy the space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the finance director may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the town. (Ord. 73 §2(part), 1982; Ord. 14 §3, 1980; Ord. No. 406, § 1, 11-12-2003)  
3.24.040 - Exemptions. 
No tax shall be imposed upon any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the town to impose the tax provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 14 §4, 1980)  
3.24.050 - Collection by operator. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded, except in the manner provided in this chapter. (Ord. 14 §5, 1980)  
3.24.060 - Registration of hotels—Certificate. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator or any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the administrative services director and obtain from him a "Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate," to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place in the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  The following: 
 This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Administrative Services Director for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax, and remitting said tax to the Administrative Services Director. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, not to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including, but not limited to, those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department, or office of this Town. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Ord. 73 §2 (part), 1982; Ord. 14 §6, 1980)  
3.24.070 - Returns and remittances. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the administrative services director, make a return to the administrative services director, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received, and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the administrative services director. The administrative services director may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to ensure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the town until payment thereof is made to the administrative services director. (Ord. 73 §2 (part), 1982; Ord. 14 §7, 1980)  
3.24.080 - Delinquency. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten-percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the administrative services director determines that nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed, and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this chapter, shall become a part of the tax required in this chapter to be paid. (Ord. 73 §2 (part), 1982; Ord. 14 §8, 1980)  
3.24.090 - Failure to report or remit. 
If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax, and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the administrative services director shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain fact and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. 
A.  As soon as the administrative services director procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the administrative services director shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at this last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the town clerk for a hearing on the amount so assessed. 
B.  If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed in subsection A of this section, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the administrative services director shall become final and conclusive, and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the town council shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed in this chapter to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. 
C.  At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the town council shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed in this chapter of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The findings of the town council shall be final and conclusive, and shall be served upon the operator in the manner prescribed above in this section for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 73 §2 (part), 1982; Ord. 14 §9, 1980)  
3.24.100 - Operator recordkeeping. 
It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the town of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the town of, which records the administrative services director shall have the right to inspect at all times. (Ord. 73 §2 (part), 1982; Ord. 14 §10, 1980)  
3.24.110 - Overpayments—Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the town under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section; provided, a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the administrative services director within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the administrative services director. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes to be collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received, when it is established in a manner prescribed by the administrative services director that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid, or paid more than once, or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the town by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the administrative services director, or when the transient, having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the administrative services director that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 73 §2 (part), 1982; Ord. 14 §11, 1980)  
3.24.120 - Collection actions. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the town. Any person owing money to the town under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the town, in any court of competent jurisdiction within the county, or within the county of residence of such person, at the option of the administrative services director, for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 73 §2 (part), 1982; Ord. 14 §12, 1980)  
3.24.130 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
B.  Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the administrative services director, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as provided in subsection A of this section. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or 
claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as provided in subsection A of this section. 
(Ord. 73 §2 (part), 1982; Ord. 14 §13, 1980)  
Chapter 3.26 - ANIMAL CONTROL PARCEL TAX 
Sections 
 
3.26.010 - Title of Ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as, and for all purposes may be referred to as, the "Animal Control Parcel Tax". 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1, 6-22-2004)  
3.26.020 - Imposed Rate. 
For the privilege of Animal Control Services and Animal Control Shelter in the town, there is imposed, on each and every parcel of record in the jurisdiction of the Town of Paradise, a tax at the rate of one dollar ($1.00) per month per year for an annual tax of twelve dollars ($12.00). Monies generated from this special tax shall be placed in a fund separate from the General Fund and exclusively dedicated for the animal control services and animal shelter expenses and operations. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1, 6-22-2004)  
3.26.030 - Who Shall Pay. 
The tax imposed shall be paid by any person or entity who is the owner of record of any parcel of record within the jurisdiction of the Town of Paradise as shown on the Butte County Assessor's tax rolls. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1, 6-22-2004)  
3.26.040 - Administered by County. 
The Butte County Assessor's office shall administer the provisions of this chapter in conformity with the provisions of the revenue and taxation code and the provisions of any county ordinances adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Ord. No. 423, § 1, 6-22-2004)  
Chapter 3.28 - FUNDS 
 
3.28.010 - Gas tax fund. 
A.  To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code, there is created in the town treasury a special fund to be known as the "Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund." 
B.  All moneys received by the town from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interest therein for, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the town shall be paid into the fund. 
C.  All moneys in the fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by, and subject to the provisions of, Sections 2106 through 2116 of the Streets and Highways Code. 
(Ord. 78 §2, 1982; Ord. 4 §§1—3, 1979)  
Chapter 3.30 - FEE AND SERVICE CHARGE REVENUE/COST COMPARISON SYSTEM 
 
3.30.010 - Findings and intent. 
A.  Pursuant to Article XIII(B) of the California Constitution, it is the intent of the town council to require the ascertainment and recovery of costs reasonably borne from fees, charges and regulatory license fees levied therefor in providing the regulation, products or services. 
B.  The fee and service charge revenue/cost comparison system set forth in this chapter provides a mechanism for ensuring that fees adopted by the town for services rendered do not exceed the reasonable estimated cost of providing the services for which the fees are charged. 
C.  The adoption of this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (Public Resources Code Sections 2100, et seq.), because it approves and sets forth a procedure for determining fees for the purpose of meeting the operating expenses of town departments, as set forth in Public Resources Code Section 21080(b) (8) (1). 
(Ord. 312 §2 (part), 1998)  
3.30.020 - Direction to manager. 
The town manager is directed to provide documents to the town council to implement fee and charge adjustments as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 312 §2 (part), 1998)  
3.30.030 - "Costs reasonably borne" defined. 
"Costs reasonably borne" as used and ordered to be applied in this chapter are to consist of the following: 
A.  All applicable direct costs including, but not limited to salaries, wages, overtime, employee fringe benefits, services and supplies, maintenance and operation expenses, contracted services, special supplies and any other direct expense incurred; 
B.  All applicable indirect costs including, but not restricted to, building maintenance and operations, equipment maintenance and operations, communications expenses, computer costs, printing and reproduction, vehicle expenses, insurance, debt services, and like expenses when distributed on an accounted and documented rational proration system; 
C.  Fixed asset recovery expenses, consisting of depreciation of fixed assets, and additional fixed asset expense recovery charges calculated on the current estimated costs of replacement, divided by the approximate life expectancy of the fixed asset. A further additional charge to make up the difference between book value depreciation not previously recovered and reserved in cash and the full cost of replacement, also shall be calculated and considered a cost so as to recover such unrecovered costs between book value and cost of replacement over the remaining life of the asset; 
D.  General overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the expenses of the town council, town attorney, town manager, town clerk, financial services division, business and housing services division, and town promotion, and all other staff and support service provided to the entire town organization. Overhead shall be prorated between tax-financed services and fee-financed services on the basis of said percentage so that each of taxes and fees and charges shall proportionately defray such overhead costs; 
E.  Departmental overhead, expressed as a percentage, distributing and charging the cost of each department head and his or her supporting expenses as enumerated in subsections A, B, C and F of this section; 
F.  Debt service costs, consisting of repayment of principal, payment of interest, and trustee fees and administrative expenses for all applicable bond, certificate, note or securities issues or loans of whatever nature or kind. Any required coverage factors or required or established reserves beyond basic debt service costs also shall be considered a cost if required by covenant within any securities ordinance, resolution, indenture or general law applicable to the town. 
(Ord. 312 §2 (part), 1998)  
3.30.040 - Schedule of fees and service charges. 
A.  The town manager and each town department head, under the direction of the town manager, shall review annually the fees and service charges, and provide an adjusted fee schedule to the town council for its consideration so as to recover the costs reasonably borne necessary to provide the services. 
B.  The town manager may review the fees and service charges and provided an adjusted fee schedule to the town council for its consideration at any time, if, in the judgment of the town manager and a directly affected and requesting department head, a gross inequity would be perpetrated by not revising the fee schedule. 
(Ord. 312 §2 (part), 1998)  
3.30.050 - Statutory public meeting. 
The town clerk shall cause notice to be provided as set out in Government Code Sections 66016, 66018 or 6062(a) as required, and the town council shall periodically, at least annually, receive at a regularly scheduled meeting oral and written presentations concerning fees and charges proposed to be increased or added. Such notice, oral and written presentation, and public meeting shall be provided prior to the town council taking any action on any new or increased fees or charges. At least one such public hearing shall be held annually, in conjunction with the town annual budget process and hearing. 
(Ord. 312 §2 (part), 1998)  
3.30.060 - Provision of data. 
Pursuant to California Government Code 66016, at least ten days prior to the required public hearing set out herein, the town manager shall make available to the public appropriate data indicating the cost, or estimated cost required to support the fees and charges for which changes are proposed to be made or fees or charges imposed. The town manager also shall provide a summary of the present fee and charge schedules and those proposed at such annual public hearing. A general explanation of such changes also shall be published in accordance with the requirements of Government Code Section 6062(a). 
(Ord. 312 §2 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 3.40 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES 
 
3.40.005 - Legislative findings. 
The town council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The state of California, through the enactment of Government Code Sections 66001 through 66009 has, among other things, determined the nexus that must be established in the enactment of development impact fees. 
B.  The imposition of development impact fees is one of the preferred methods of ensuring that development bears proportionate share of the cost of public facilities and service improvements necessary to accommodate such development in order to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
C.  This chapter recognizes that all new development within the town will result in additional growth and that such growth will place additional burdens on various town facilities, infrastructure and services. This chapter further recognizes the types of land development that will generate impacts necessitating the acquisition of land and construction of public facilities and expansion of services and infrastructure in order to meet and accommodate them. 
D.  All land uses within the town should bear a proportionate financial burden in the construction and improvement of public facilities and services necessary to serve them. 
E.  The cost of providing public facilities and service improvements occasioned by development projects within the town exceeds the revenue generated by fees exacted from the development projects. 
F.  Management Services Institute has developed a study dated January, 1992, entitled "Development Impact Fee and Master Facility Plan for the Town of Paradise," ("MSI study") in which the nexus between new development projects and the need for additional streets, traffic signals, drainage and police and safety improvements and services is set forth. 
G.  The development impact fees established by this chapter are based upon the MSI study as it relates to the financial cost to the town for new public facilities and other capital acquisition costs required, incrementally, as a direct result of new development within the town. 
H.  The fees established by this chapter do not exceed the reasonable cost of providing public facilities required by development projects within the town under the MSI study as modified by the town council. 
I.  The fees established by this chapter relate rationally to the reasonable cost of providing such public facilities required by development projects within the town, which public facilities are consistent with the general plan and the various elements of the general plan of the town. 
J.  The public facilities and anticipated future development herein referenced are based upon an analysis of existing land use and zoning. 
K.  The fees established by this chapter are consistent with the goals and objective of the town's general plan and are designed to mitigate the impacts caused by new development throughout the town. Development impact fees are necessary in order to finance the required public facilities and to pay for new development's fair share of construction costs for the public facilities. 
L.  The imposition of fees to finance public facilities and service improvements is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
"Development permit" means any permit issued by the town authorizing the construction, relocation, and/or establishment of a "development project" as defined in this section. 
"Development project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. Development project shall include a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, remodeling, addition or any work requiring any permit under the ordinances of the town, as the same presently exist or may be amended from time to time hereafter. The term development project shall also include permits for erection of manufactured housing or structures, and structures moved into the town. 
"Fee" means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by the town to an applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of public facilities related to the development project, but does not include fees specified in Section 66477 of the California Government Code, fees for processing applications for governmental regulatory actions or approvals, or fees collected under development agreements adopted pursuant to Article 2.5 (commencing with Section 65864) of Chapter 4, Division 1, Title 7 of the California Government Code. 
"Public facilities" include public improvements, public services and community amenities. (Ord. 300 §§1, 2, 1998; Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.020 - Adoption of MSI study and establishment of development fees and providing for their adoption by resolution. 
A.  The Management Services Institute Study dated January, 1992 ("MSI study") for the town as modified by the council is adopted. 
B.  The following development impact fees are established and imposed on the issuance of all development permits for development within the town to finance the cost of the following categories of public facilities and improvements required by new development. The development impact fees consist of the following fees which are established: 
1.  Streets and Thoroughfares. A development impact fee is established for streets and thoroughfares; 
2.  Traffic Control Facilities. A development impact fee is established for traffic control facilities (signals); 
3.  Law Enforcement Facilities, Equipment and Training. A development impact fee is established for law enforcement facilities, equipment and training; 
4.  Fire Facilities, Equipment and Training. A development impact fee is established for fire facilities, equipment and training; 
5.  Storm Drainage Facilities. A development impact fee is established for storm drainage facilities. 
C.  The town council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fees, describe the benefit and impact area on which the fees are imposed, list the specific public improvements to be financed and describe the estimated cost of these facilities based upon the MSI study as modified. (Ord. 300 §3, 1998; Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.030 - Imposition of development impact fee. 
A.  Any person who, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, seeks to develop land within the town by applying for a development permit, shall be required to pay the appropriate development impact fees established pursuant to this chapter as the same may be applicable, in the manner, amount, and for the purposes therein by reference. 
B.  No permits or extension of permits for the activities referenced in subsection A of this section shall be granted unless and until the appropriate development impact fees required have been paid to the town. (Ord. 300 §4, 1998; Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.040 - Creation of special funds. 
Each fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a special fund created to hold the revenue generated by each such fee. Moneys within each such fund may be expended only by appropriation by the town council for specific projects which are of the same category as that for which the money was collected. In this regard, the following special funds are created and established for the purposes indicated: 
A.  A streets, thoroughfares and interchanges fund is established. The fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated costs of the design, upgrading or improvement of the streets, thoroughfares and interchanges, including any required acquisition of land. 
B.  A traffic control (signals) fund is established. The fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated costs of the design, upgrading or improvement of the traffic facilities, including any required acquisition of land. 
C.  A police and safety facilities and equipment fund is established. The law enforcement facilities and equipment fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated costs of law enforcement facilities, equipment or training, including any required acquisition of land. 
D.  A fire facilities, equipment and training fund is established. The fire facilities, equipment and training fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated costs of fire facilities, equipment or training, including any required acquisition of land. 
E.  A drainage facilities fund is established. The drainage facilities fund is a fund for the deposit of fees collected for, and the payment of, the actual or estimated costs of designing, constructing and improving the drainage facilities within the town, including any required acquisition of land. (Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.050 - Computation of fees. 
All fees due under this chapter shall be determined and calculated by the community development director of the town or his or her duly authorized designee in accordance with the resolution adopting the fees. In the event that an alternative revenue source to mitigate development impact fees is approved and adopted by either the town council or the voters of the town, then the resolution adopting the fees shall be modified or eliminated to reflect the amount of the revenues being received from the alternative revenue source. (Ord. 244 §1, 1995; Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.060 - Payment of fees. 
The fees established pursuant to this chapter shall be paid for the property on which a development project is proposed at the time of the issuance of any required development permit or in accordance with the terms of a mitigation or installment payment agreement approved by the town manager, except as otherwise provided below; provided, however, that fees imposed on residential development shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 66007, as the same presently exists or may hereafter be amended from time to time. (Ord. 300 §5, 1998: Ord. 244 §2, 1995: Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.070 - Adjustments. 
A.  A developer of any project subject to the fees described in this chapter may apply for a reduction, adjustment or waiver of any one (1) or more of the fees, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of their development and either the amount of the fee(s) charged or the type of facilities to be financed. 
B.  The application shall be submitted to and acted upon by the community development director. 
C.  The application shall be made in writing and filed with the office of the town community development department together with a minimum nonrefundable application fee established by resolution of the town council, and shall be filed not later than ten (10) days after imposition and payment of the fees for the development project or at the time of imposition of such fees prior to the issuance of the development permit. 
D.  The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction or adjustment of the fee(s). 
E.  The Community Development Director shall consider and act on the application during a public meeting conducted within a time period not exceeding thirty (30) days after the filing of the fee adjustment application. The meeting shall be noticed by public posting of an agenda and conducted in a manner as prescribed by the Ralph M. Brown Act or other applicable laws of the town for public meetings on development permits. 
F.  If a reduction, adjustment or waiver of the fee(s) is granted, any change in use or scope of the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment or reduction of the fee if such change in use would render the same inappropriate. In addition, the town shall not pay any interest on prior development impact fees paid by an applicant that are later reduced, adjusted or waived by action of the town council. 
G.  Determinations on fee adjustment applications made by the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this section may be appealed to the town council by filing a written request with the town clerk within seven (7) calendar days of fee adjustment application determination, together with a minimum nonrefundable fee amount established by resolution of the town council. 
H.  The town council may, from time to time, and as the need may arise, set forth by resolution specific limitations which will apply to reductions, adjustment or waivers of development impact fees which may be made pursuant to the provisions of this section. In this regard, this chapter shall be considered enabling and directory. 
(Ord. No. 538, § 1, 3-11-2014; Ord. 300 §§ 6, 7, 1998; Ord. 272 §1, 1996: Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.080 - Use of funds. 
A.  Funds collected from development impact fees shall be used for the purpose of paying: 
1.  The actual or estimated costs of constructing and/or improving the public facilities within the town to which the specific fee or fees relate, including any required acquisition of land or right-of-way therefor; 
2.  Reimbursing the town for the development's share of those public facilities already constructed by the town or to reimburse the town for costs advanced, including, without limitation, administrative costs incurred with respect to a specific public facilities project; or 
3.  To reimburse other developers who have constructed public facilities described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.40.020 of this chapter, where those facilities were beyond that needed to mitigate the impact of the developer's project or projects. 
B.  In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of public facilities for which development impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type to which the fees involved relate. 
C.  Funds collected in the Southside Study Area, Westside Area and in each of the drainage basins prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall remain in their current funds and can only be expended for projects within the areas from which they were collected. 
D.  Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in this chapter. 
E.  No funds shall be used for periodic or routine maintenance. 
F.  The town shall be entitled to retain not more than three percent of the funds collected as compensation for the expense of collecting the fee and administering this chapter. 
G.  Each fiscal year, the town manager or his duly authorized designee, shall present to the town council a proposed five-year capital improvement program for the various public facilities referenced in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.40.020 of this chapter assigning moneys (including any accrued interest) from the funds to specific improvement projects and related expenses. Moneys, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal year shall be retained in the same fund until the next fiscal year except as provided by the refund provisions of Section 3.40.090 of this chapter. 
H.  The town shall be entitled to make loans of funds collected from one fund to another; provided, that the loans are properly recorded in the records of the department of administrative services and repaid with interest equal to the interest earned by the town on its funds invested with the local agency investment fund (LAIF) through the state of California. (Ord. 240 §1(part), 1994)  
3.40.090 - Refund of fees paid. 
A.  If a development permit expires without commencement of construction and the development impact fees collected therefor have not been committed to a project, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund, without interest, of the impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance, except that the town shall retain one percent of the fee to offset a portion of the costs of collection and refund. The fee payer must submit an application for such a refund to the town manager. Failure to timely submit, within six months, the required application for refund shall constitute a waiver of any right to refund. 
B.  In the event any fee collected pursuant to this chapter remains unexpended or uncommitted in any fund established pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for a period of five or more years after deposit of the fee, the town shall make findings once each fiscal year to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. 
C.  The unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to subsection B of this section shall be refunded to the then-current record owner or owners of lots or units of the development project or projects on a prorated basis. 
D.  The provisions of California Government Code Section 66001(d), (e) and (f) shall apply fully to any refund of fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted in any such town fund for five or more years after deposit, and the provisions of subsections B and C of this section shall be subordinate to this subsection and shall be applied consistent therewith. (Ord. 300 §§ 8, 9, 1998; Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.100 - Exemptions. 
Each of the following permit applications shall be exempted from payment of some or all of the development impact fees of this chapter: 
A.  Alterations or renovations of an existing building or structure where no additional dwelling units are created; or where the occupancy use is not changed; or where the impacts of the work covered by the permit will not result in additional impacts upon the town's public facilities or public services as determined by the community development director; 
B.  The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed or damaged building or structure with a new building or structure where no additional dwelling units are created; where the occupancy use is not changed; or where the impacts of the work covered by the permit will not result in additional impacts upon the town's public facilities or public services; 
C.  Building permit applications for authorization to construct; open residential decks and deck or patio covers, gazebos, retaining walls and fences, sign structures, detached buildings or structures of less than one hundred twenty square feet in areal size, and all shade or partial shade roof structures that do not include solid roof coverings and that allow through passage of precipitation; 
D.  Exemption from the imposition of development impact fees for development projects subject to issuance of a town development permit to other local governmental entities shall be administered in accordance with formally adopted "memorandums of understanding" executed between the town and the affected local governmental entity (ex. PID, PRPD, PUSD, etc.); 
E.  Any development project proposed to be established within a geographic location identified as a "no fee area" upon the drainage basin maps of the Master Storm Drainage Study and Facilities Plan 1980, Paradise, California, as adopted and subsequently amended by the town council, shall be exempt from the imposition of storm drainage facilities development impact fee only. (Ord. 356 §2, 2001; Ord. 300 §§ 10, 11, 1998; Ord. 272 §2, 1996; Ord. 252 §1, 1995; Ord. 240 §1(part), 1994)  
3.40.110 - Credits. 
A.  If a developer/applicant or his predecessor has previously been charged fees by the town for development impacts under another town ordinance or resolution for the same development covered by this chapter, the developer/applicant will be provided credits for such prior fees. 
B.  New development that, through demolition or conversion, will eliminate existing development is entitled to a fee credit, based on current or last usage of the site, if the existing development is a lawful use under the zoning ordinance, including a legal nonconforming use. 
C.  New development that will replace development that was partially or totally destroyed by fire, flood, earthquake, mudslide, or other casualty or act of God within the preceding five-year period, is entitled to a fee credit if the development that was partially or totally destroyed was a lawful use under the zoning ordinance, including a nonconforming use, at the time thereof. 
D.  Credit for such eliminated development or development that was partially or totally destroyed (as above specified) shall be calculated by the community development director in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.40.020 of this chapter and shall be applied to new development on the same site. (Ord. 244 §3, 1995: Ord. 240 §1 (part), 1994)  
3.40.120 - Developer construction of facilities. 
A.  In-Lieu Fee Credits for Construction of Improvements. 
1.  A developer that has been required by the town to construct any facilities or improvements (or a portion thereof) described in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.40.020 of this chapter as a condition of approval of a development permit may request an in-lieu credit of the specific development impact fee(s) involved for the same development. Upon request, an in-lieu credit of fees may be granted for facilities or improvements that mitigate all or a portion of the need therefore that is attributable to and reasonably related to the given development. 
2.  Only costs proportional to the amount of the improvement or facility that mitigate the need therefor attributable to and reasonably related to the given development shall be eligible for in-lieu credit, and then only against the specific relevant fee(s) involved to which the facility or improvement relates. 
3.  Fees required under this chapter shall be reduced by the actual construction costs of the facilities or improvements that relate to the fees, as demonstrated by the developer/applicant and reviewed and approved by the community development director, all consistent with the provision of subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section. If the costs of the facilities or improvements are greater than required relevant fees, this chapter does not create an obligation on the town to pay the developer/applicant the excess amount. 
4.  An amount of in-lieu credit that is greater than the specific fee(s) required under this chapter may be reserved and credited toward the fee of any subsequent phases of the same development, if determined appropriate by the community development director. 
5.  Credits shall be calculated by the community development director in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 3.40.020 of this chapter. 
B.  Site-Related Improvements. Credit shall not be given for site-related improvements, including, but not limited to, traffic signals, right-of-way dedications, or providing paved access to the property, which are specifically required by the project in order to serve it and do not constitute facilities or improvements specified in the resolution referenced in Section 3.40.30 of this chapter. 
C.  Determination of Credit. The developer/applicant seeking credit and/or reimbursement for construction of improvements or facilities, or dedication of land or rights-of-way, shall submit such documentation, including without limitation, engineering drawings, specifications and construction cost estimates, and utilize such methods as may be appropriate and acceptable to the community development director to support the request for credit or reimbursement. The community development director shall determine credit for construction of improvements or facilities based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if he or she determines that such estimates submitted by the developer/applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. The community development director shall determine whether facilities or improvements are eligible for credit or reimbursement. 
D.  Time for Making Claim for Credit. Any claim for credit shall be by the developer/applicant no later than the application for a building permit. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived. 
E.  Transferability of Credit—Council Approval. Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another without the approval of the town council. 
F.  Appeal of Determinations of Community Development Director. Determinations made by the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this section may be appealed to the town council by filing a written request with the town manager, together with a fee established by resolution of the town council, within ten calendar days of the determination of the community development director. (Ord. 240 §1(part), 1994)  
3.40.130 - Review. 
A.  Except for the first year the ordinance codified in this chapter, no later than six months following the end of each fiscal year, the town manager or his/her designee shall prepare a report for the town council identifying the balance of fees in the various funds established pursuant to Section 3.40.020 of this chapter, the facilities constructed, and the facilities to be constructed. In preparing the report, the town manager shall adjust the estimated costs of the public facilities in accordance with this chapter. 
B.  At a noticed public hearing, the town council shall review the report and the development fees to determine whether the fee amounts continue to be reasonably related to the impact of development and whether the described public facilities are still needed. The town council may revise the development impact fees to include additional projects not previously foreseen as being needed. 
C.  The report prepared by the town manager and its review by the town council, as well as any findings thereon, shall be subject to the provisions of California Government Code Section 66001 (d), to the extent applicable (which shall be controlling in the event of any conflict). (Ord. 240 §1(part), 1994)  
3.40.140 - Controlling state law. 
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, shall at all times be subject and subordinate to the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 66000), Division 1, of Title 7 of the California Government Code, as the same presently exists or may hereafter be amended from time to time, to the extent the same are applicable. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the state law, the latter shall control. (Ord. 240 §1(part), 1994)  
3.40.150 - Superseding provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant hereto, shall supersede any previous ordinance or resolution to the extent the same is in conflict herewith. (Ord. 240 §1(part), 1994)  
Title 5 - BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS  
Chapter 5.01 - GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS 
 
5.01.010 - Short title. 
This title shall be known and may be cited as the "Business Regulation Ordinance of the Town of Paradise." (Ord. 129 §5.01.010, 1985)  
5.01.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this title is to safeguard and protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Town of Paradise by regulating the operation of certain businesses within the town. (Ord. 129 §5.01.020, 1985)  
5.01.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the words and phrases used in this title shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Administrative services director" means the director of administrative services department or his official designee. 
B.  "Business" includes professions, trades and occupations and all and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit. 
C.  "Fixed place of business" means a distinct place upon real property or a specific premises where commercial activity is lawfully conducted and where utility connections and other equipment or facilities associated with the activity are established with a high degree of permanence. 
D.  "License year" means a twelve consecutive month period. 
E.  "Sworn statement" means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury. 
F.  "Transacting" means the carrying on or engaging in, within the town, any business, trade, profession, calling, or occupation and includes within its meaning, all or any part of the operations necessary and incidental to the conduct of any business, including but not limited to any one or combination of the following: the taking of orders, excluding the taking of orders for resale; delivery of products; performance of services; maintenance of business office facilities; or actual conduct of the work. (Ord. 129 §5.01.030, 1985; Ord. No. 434, § 1, 3-8-2005)  
5.01.040 - Effect on other ordinances. 
A.  Persons, companies or corporations required to pay a license fee for transacting and carrying on any business under this title shall not be relieved from the payment of any license fee for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the town, and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. 
B.  The issuance of a license under this title shall not entitle the licensee to engage in any business or do any act which, for any reason, is in violation of any federal, state, or municipal law, rule or regulation. (Ord. 129 §5.01.040, 1985)  
5.01.050 - Constitutional apportionment. 
None of the license fees provided for by this title shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of the equal protection and due process clauses of the Constitutions of the United States and the State of California. 
In any case where a license fee is believed by a licensee or applicant for a license to place an undue burden upon interstate commerce or be violative of such constitutional clauses, he may apply to the administrative services director for an adjustment of the fee. Such application may be made before, at, or within six months after payment of the prescribed license fee. The applicant shall, by sworn statement and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume of business and such other information as the administrative services director may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden or violation. The administrative services director shall then conduct an investigation, and, after having first obtained the written approval of the town attorney, shall fix as the license fee for the applicant, an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory, or if the license fee has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the license fee so fixed. In fixing the license fee to be charged, the administrative services director shall have the power to base the license fee upon any measure which will assure that the license fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the license fee as prescribed by council resolution. (Ord. 129 §5.01.050, 1985)  
5.01.060 - Exemptions. 
A.  Nothing in this title shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California from the payment of such fees as are prescribed in this title. 
B.  Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a sworn statement with the administrative services director stating the facts upon which exemption is claimed, and in the absence of such statement substantiating the claim, such person shall be liable for the payment of the fees imposed by this title. 
C.  The administrative services director shall, upon a proper showing contained in the sworn statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the town of the license fee required by this title. 
D.  The administrative services director, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided in this section. (Ord. 129 §5.01.060, 1985)  
5.01.070 - Application for license. 
A.  Every person required to have a license pursuant to this title shall make an application therefor to the administrative services director upon such application form as may be prescribed. 
B.  Each application for a business license shall be accompanied by an application fee, as set by council resolution, which shall be deposited to the town general fund and shall not be subject to refund. If the application is approved, this fee shall be credited against the full amount due for the business license. 
C.  Every person applying for a license for the conduct of a business requiring a license from the state must present evidence of the issuance of such license to the administrative services director as a condition to issuance of such license. (Ord. 129 §5.01.070, 1985)  
5.01.080 - License fee—How and when payable. 
A.  Unless otherwise specifically provided, all license fees shall be payable annually hereunder and shall be due and payable in advance on the first day of January. 
B.  All annual licenses issued under this chapter shall be effective on a calendar year basis, provided that license fees for new businesses within the town, commencing after its normal licensing month shall be prorated by the month for the balance of the licensing period. (Ord. 129 §5.01.080, 1985)  
5.01.090 - Nontransferability of license. 
A license issued pursuant to this title may not be transferred from one licensee to another, nor from one location to another. (Ord. 129 §5.01.090, 1985)  
5.01.100 - Duplicate license. 
A duplicate license may be issued by the administrative services director to replace any license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying to the administrative services director a duplicate license fee as fixed by council resolution. (Ord. 129 §5.01.100, 1985)  
5.01.110 - Posting and keeping license. 
A.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the town shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the town shall keep the license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on the business for which it is issued. (Ord. 129 §5.01.110, 1985)  
5.01.120 - Charitable and nonprofit organizations—Exemptions. 
A.  Unless otherwise provided in this title, the following activities and organizations are exempt from payment of the license fee: 
1.  The conducting, managing, or carrying on of any business, occupation or activity, from any institution or organization which is conducted, managed, or carried on wholly for the benefit of charitable purposes or from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any individual, firm or corporation. 
2.  The conducting of any entertainment, concert, exhibition, or lecture on scientific, historical, literary, religious, or moral subjects, whenever all the receipts thereof are to be appropriated to any church or school or to any religious or benevolent purpose; 
3.  The conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition, or lecture by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, federal, state, county or municipal organization, or association, whenever the receipts of such are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such organization or association was formed, and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by an individual, firm or corporation. 
B.  In making a determination as to the exemption status of any organization or activity under this chapter, the following criteria are to be considered by the administrative services director: 
1.  Whether the organization or activity has received or has formally applied for, tax exempt status from the State Franchise Tax Board and/or Internal Revenue Service where applicable; 
2.  Whether the proposed activity will not be in conflict with any provisions of this title, state or federal law. 
For purposes of this section "charitable" means and includes the words patriotic, philanthropic, social service, welfare, benevolent, educational, civic, or fraternal, either actual or purported. Activities defined as "religious" or a "religion" does not mean and include the word "charitable" as defined in this section, but shall be given their commonly accepted definitions. (Ord. 129 §5.01.120, 1985)  
5.01.130 - Enforcement. 
It shall be the duty of the town manager or his/her designee and he/she is directed, to enforce each and all provisions of this title. The town manager, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him/her under this title, and acting through deputies and agents duly authorized to assist, shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the town to ascertain whether the provisions of this title have been complied with. (Ord. 129 §5.01.130, 1985; Ord. No. 434, § 2, 3-8-2005)  
5.01.140 - License fee a debt. 
The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this title shall be deemed a debt to the town. An action may be commenced in the name of the town in any court of competent jurisdiction, for the amount of any delinquent license fee and penalties. (Ord. 129 §5.01.140, 1985)  
5.01.150 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed under this title shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the town shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions hereof. (Ord. 129 §5.01.150, 1985)  
5.01.160 - License—Revocation or suspension. 
A.  Any business license issued under this title may be revoked or suspended at any time for any violation of law including a violation of any town ordinance, or violation of any term or condition of any issued license. 
B.  Such license may be revoked permanently without possibility of reissuance upon subsequent application therefor, or the license may be revoked with the right to subsequently reapply for reissuance thereof upon terms and conditions specified therein, or such license may be suspended for a fixed period of time. 
C.  The power to revoke or suspend a permit shall be and is vested in the administrative services director. (Ord. 129 §5.01.160, 1985)  
5.01.170 - Appeal from action of administrative services director. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the administrative services director with respect to the issuance or denial of a business license issued under this title or the suspension or revocation of a business license issued under this title, or any other matter arising under this title may appeal to the town manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the town manager within fifteen days after notice of the administrative services director's decision. The notice of appeal shall state briefly therein the grounds relied upon by the appellant. 
B.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the town manager on appeal may further appeal to the town council by filing a written notice with the town clerk, within ten days after notice of the town manager's decision. 
C.  As soon as possible, but no later than thirty days after the filing of such notice, the town council shall fix a time and place for public hearing on such appeal, which hearing shall be held within thirty days after the date thereof has been so fixed. 
D.  Written notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given to the appellant by the town clerk either (1) by personally delivering to such appellant written notice thereof, or (2) by mailing such notice, by depositing the same in the United States Post Office in the town in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at his last known address. 
E.  The council shall consider at the hearing such appeal and render a decision therein, which shall be final and conclusive upon all parties. (Ord. 129 §5.01.170, 1985)  
5.01.180 - Inspectors. 
All members and officers of the police department are appointed inspectors of licenses and in addition to their several other duties are required to examine all places of business in their respective jurisdiction liable to pay a license and see that such licenses are taken out and the license fee paid and they shall have and exercise the right to make arrests for the violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 129 §5.01.180, 1985)  
Chapter 5.02 - PURPOSE—BUSINESS LICENSES—FEES 
 
5.02.010 - Designated. 
Certain types of businesses are found by the town council to require extraordinary types of investigation prior to issuance of a business license and/or extraordinary regulatory activity and/or to impose extraordinary requests for services upon the town. No person, company or corporation shall transact, own, conduct or operate any of the following types of business within the town without first obtaining a business license from the town and paying the license fee designated by town council resolution for the issuance of a special license for that category of business: 
A.  Fairs, carnivals, circuses, street fairs or attractions or aggregations of attractions largely composed of games or feats of skill, feats of strength and/or motion apparatus as defined in Chapter 5.06; 
B.  Theaters, tent shows and playhouses which do not have regular established place of business in the town as defined in Chapter 5.07; 
C.  Fortunetellers and those engaged in the business of clairvoyance, psychic, astrologist, palmist or others claiming to read or foretell the past, present or future as defined in Chapter 5.08; 
D.  Outdoor festivals as defined in Chapter 5.09; 
E.  Junk dealers, pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers as defined in Chapter 5.10; 
F.  Hawkers and peddlers as defined in Chapter 5.11; 
G.  Bingo games as defined in Chapter 5.12; 
H.  Solicitors as defined in Chapter 5.13; 
I.  Kennels as defined in Chapter 5.15; 
J.  Cardrooms as defined in Chapter 5.16; 
K.  Tattoo artists and tattooing establishments as defined in Chapter 5.17; 
L.  Masseur/masseuse and massage establishments as defined in Chapter 5.18; 
M.  Taxicabs and rent cars as defined in Chapter 5.19; 
N.  Sound trucks and sound amplifying equipment as defined in Chapter 5.20. (Ord. 129 §5.02.010, 1985)  
Chapter 5.05 - RETAIL FIREARMS SALES ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
5.05.010 - License required. 
No person shall engage in the business of selling, leasing, transferring, advertising, offering or exposing for sale, lease or transfer, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person unless he or she has been issued a license pursuant to this chapter. 
As used in this chapter, engaging in the business of selling, leasing or transferring any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person does not include any of the following: 
A.  The sale, lease or transfer of any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person by a person acting pursuant to a court order under the Enforcement of Judgments Law (Title 9 (commencing with Section 680.010) of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure) or by a person who liquidates a personal firearm collection to satisfy a court judgment; 
B.  The sale, lease or transfer of any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person by a person acting pursuant to subdivision (c) of Section 12028 of the California Penal Code; 
C.  The sale, lease or transfer of any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person by a person who obtains title to the firearm by the intestate succession or by bequest, provided the person disposed of the firearm within sixty days of receipt of the firearm; 
D.  The infrequent sale, lease or transfer, offering, exposing for sale, lease or transfer, or advertising for sale, lease or transfer any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver or other firearm capable of being concealed upon the person. 
As used in this chapter "infrequent" means occasional without regularity; and in no event shall "infrequent" mean more than five transactions per calendar year. For these purposes, "transaction" means a single sale, lease or transfer of any number of rifles, shotguns, pistols, revolvers or other firearms capable of being concealed upon the person. (Ord. 204(part), 1991)  
5.05.020 - Application for license. 
Every person engaged in the retail sales of firearms shall obtain a license to operate in the town and pay a license fee in advance as set by council resolution, payable to the administrative services department. Upon application being made, the administrative services department shall immediately refer the applicant and the application to the police department, and the police department shall either approve or disapprove of the granting of the license within thirty days. If the application is approved by the police department, the applicant shall furnish to the police department the name, age, sex, permanent address, prior felony convictions, if any, and other pertinent information required by the police department concerning each and every person who shall be employed by applicant in such business or take part therein, in any manner whatsoever, and the applicant shall keep any and all records of such business as required by the police department and shall submit copies thereof to the police department as may be required. (Ord. 204(part), 1991)  
5.05.030 - Violations a misdemeanor. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 204(part), 1991)  
Chapter 5.06 - FAIRS, CARNIVALS AND CIRCUSES[1] 
Sections : 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 517, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 5.06, § 5.06.010, and enacted a new Ch. 5.06 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.06 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 129 § 5.06, 1985. 
 
5.06.010 - License required—Exception. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to be conducting or carrying on a fair, street fair or attraction or aggregation of attractions, largely composed of games or feats of skill, feats of strength, and motion apparatus, commonly called a carnival or street carnival or any circus within the town limits without first obtaining a business license and/or special event permit from the town and paying a license or permit fee in an amount as set by adopted council resolution. When the net proceeds raised by the fair, street fair, carnival or circus are to be used for charitable, religious, patriotic, education, civic, or other community purposes, the town manager, may authorize town issuance of the business license or permit without the payment of the fee and for a period not to exceed a time period of ten (10) consecutive days or cumulative total of twenty (20) days per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.06.020 - License/permit application: Filing and processing. 
An application for the required business license and/or special event permit shall be filed with the office of the town planning director not less than fifteen (15) days or more than sixty (60) days before the date(s) during which the proposed activity is to be conducted. The application and its subsequent related town issued license and/or permit shall be processed by the office of the town planning director in accordance with applicable processing procedures adopted by the Town of Paradise either by council resolution or by administrative policy order of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.06.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 5.07 - THEATERS, TENT SHOWS AND PLAYHOUSES[2] 
Sections : 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 517, §§ 1, 3, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 5.07, § 5.07.010, and enacted a new Ch. 5.07 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.07 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 129 § 5.07, 1985. 
 
5.07.010 - License required—Exception. 
It is unlawful for any person or business entity who has not a regularly established place of business, to travel from place to place conducting, operating and maintaining a theater, tent show or playhouse within the town limits without first obtaining a town issued business license and paying a license fee in advance and as set by adopted council resolution. When the net proceeds raised by the theater, tent show or playhouse are to be used for charitable, religious, patriotic, educational, civic or other community purposes or if no admission charge is made, the town manager may authorize town issuance of the business license without payment of a fee and for a time period not to exceed ten (10) consecutive days or a cumulative total of twenty (20) days per calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
5.07.020 - License application: Filing and processing. 
An application for the required business license shall be filed with the office of the town planning director not less than fifteen (15) days or more than ninety (90) days before the date(s) during which the proposed activity is to be conducted. The application and its subsequent related business shall be processed by the office of the town planning director in accordance with applicable processing procedures adopted by the Town of Paradise either by council resolution or by administrative policy order of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
5.07.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 5.08 - FORTUNETELLING[3] 
Sections : 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 517, §§ 1, 4, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 5.08, § 5.08.010, and enacted a new Ch. 5.08 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 129 § 5.08, 1985. 
 
5.08.010 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to be engaged in the business of clairvoyance, fortunetelling, psychic, astrologist, palmist and/or claiming to read or foretell the past, present or future within the town limits without first obtaining a town issued business license and paying a license fee in advance and as set by adopted council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
5.08.020 - License application: Filing and processing. 
An application for the required business license shall be filed with the office of the town planning director. The application and its subsequent related business license shall be processed by the office of the town planning director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and with applicable processing procedures adopted by the Town of Paradise either by council resolution or by administrative policy order of the town manager. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
5.08.030 - Chief of police review of license application. 
Upon receipt of an application for business license required by this chapter, the town planning director shall forward a copy of the application to the chief of police who, based solely on a review of criminal records maintained by the town police department or by other law enforcement organizations, shall promptly advise the town planning director whether the applicant has been convicted of a criminal act involving fraud, theft, the intentional infliction of bodily injury or other act involving moral turpitude within the preceding ten-year period. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
5.08.040 - Action on license application by planning director. 
Within twelve (12) calendar days following the filing of the business license application required by this chapter, the town planning director shall act on the application either by approving the application and issuing a business license authorizing the applicant to engage in the business of clairvoyance, fortunetelling, psychic, astrologist, etc., within the town, or by denying the application, all in the manner hereafter provided by this chapter and any town adopted and applicable business license application processing procedures. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
5.08.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 517, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 5.09 - OUTDOOR FESTIVALS[4] 
Sections : 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 518, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 5.09, §§ 5.09.010—5.09.060, and enacted a new Ch. 5.09 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.09 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 129 §§ 5.09.010—5.09.060, 1985. 
 
5.09.010 - Outdoor festivals defined. 
For the purpose of this title, "outdoor festivals" means and includes any outdoor gathering of individuals for the purpose of participation in an organized event celebration composed of activities such as feasting, exhibitions, merrymaking, and/or performances of a musical or theatrical type and which are of a periodic nature and to which the public is admitted with or without the payment of admission charges. An outdoor festival does not include any festivals conducted under the auspices of a school district, recreation/park district, and/or the Town of Paradise. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.09.020 - Application for required license. 
A.  It is unlawful for any individual, partnership or corporation to operate, maintain, conduct, advertise, sell or furnish tickets or other types of written authority for admission to an outdoor festival in the town limits unless a town issued "outdoor festival" business license is first obtained from the town. 
B.  Application for a business license to conduct an outdoor festival shall be filed with the office of the town manager and shall set forth the following information: 
1.  The name, address (mailing and e-mail) and telephone number of the person and/or entity seeking to conduct and be responsible for such outdoor festival; 
2.  The location and site plan of the premises where the proposed outdoor festival is to be performed, including all land areas to be used for parking and other uses incidental to the outdoor activity. The applicant shall provide proof of ownership of the affected premises or the written consent of all premises owners thereof to the proposed use. 
3.  The date(s) and time duration when the outdoor festival is be conducted. 
4.  An estimate of the maximum number of spectators, participants and other persons expected to attend the outdoor festival each day it is conducted. 
5.  A detailed program and plans to provide security protection, water and food supply, sanitation facilities, medical facilities and services, vehicle access and parking, onsite traffic (pedestrian and vehicular) control, and if it is proposed or expected that spectators or participants will remain at night or overnight, the arrangements for illuminating the premises and for camping or similar facilities. The applicant's plans shall provide for numbers of spectators in excess of the estimate, and provisions for cleanup of the premises and removal of rubbish after the event has concluded. 
6.  A detailed explanation of the applicant's plan for policing the activity with particular emphasis on the control and prevention of alcohol and drug consumption. 
7.  Any additional information which the town manager deems to be reasonable necessary. 
C.  An outdoor festival business license application shall be filed with the office of the town manager not less than forty (40) days or more than ninety (90) days before the commencement of the proposed outdoor festival. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.09.030 - Exemptions from application and fee payment. 
A neighborhood or community benefit organization, constituted for charitable or religious purposes, shall be exempt from the requirement of license application and related application fee submittal provided the net proceeds from such outdoor activity do not inure to the benefit of any private person, partnership or corporation. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.09.040 - Administrative review—License action. 
A.  Upon receipt of a license application for a proposed outdoor festival, the town manager shall forward a copy of the application to the police chief, the fire chief, the public works director, and any town department or any other public agency which may be affected by conduct and performance of such outdoor festival. The town manager shall request response comments relating to the effect, if any, of the conduct of such outdoor festival upon noise, traffic control, emergency vehicle movement, public health and safety, and such other matters subject to the jurisdiction and direction of such responding parties. 
B.  Written response comments shall be submitted to the town manager within twelve (12) days before action is required to be taken on the license application. The town manager shall issue the business license as applied for if upon conclusion of his/her investigation it is determined that the conduct and performance of such outdoor festival will not be adversely affecting the public health, safety and welfare. In order to ensure that the public health, safety and welfare will not be jeopardized by conduct of the proposed outdoor festival the town manager is authorized to conditionally issue a outdoor festival business license altering any of the appropriate items set forth in Sections 5.09.020 and/or 5.09.060. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.09.050 - Surety bond. 
The town may require that the license applicant provide a corporate surety bond prepared by a bonding company authorized to do business in the state, indemnifying the town and the owners of property adjoining the outdoor festival site for all costs necessitated by such activity to clean up and/or remove any trash from the premises. Such bond shall be in an appropriate amount determined by the town manager in order to adequately provide for such indemnification. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.09.060 - License conditions/standards. 
Each outdoor festival business license shall state the following conditions/standards: 
A.  Authorized outdoor activity location, date(s), and time durations. 
B.  Minimum and maximum authorized outdoor festival attendance occupancy. 
C.  Any other license conditions or standards deemed necessary by the town manager in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.09.070 - Compliance with and possession of license. 
A.  A licensee under this chapter shall comply with all town issued license conditions/standards and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
B.  The outdoor festival chairman or other person responsible for the licensed outdoor festival shall possess the town issued license upon his/her person during the conduct of the outdoor festival. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.09.080 - Revocation of license. 
After providing the licensee with at least twenty-four (24) hours prior notification and an opportunity to address all allegations, the town manager is vested with the administrative authority to revoke any license for an outdoor festival issued pursuant to this title and based upon substantial evidence relating to any of the following causes: 
A.  The licensee fails, neglects or refuses to fulfill any of the conditions/standards imposed upon its related town issued license; 
B.  The licensee permits the outdoor festival to be conducted in a disorderly manner or allows persons to remain on the premises while under the influence of intoxicating liquor or any narcotic or dangerous drug; 
C.  The licensee violates or attempts to violate any law of the state or provision of this title or other title of the town; 
D.  The licensee has previously made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for license, or in any other document required pursuant to this title. 
The chief of police may suspend operation and close any outdoor festival prior to the expiration of the license issued under the provisions of this title, in the event of the occurrence of riot, major disorder or serious breach of the peace when in his/her opinion it becomes necessary to prevent injury to person or persons and/or damage to property. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.09.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 518, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 5.10 - JUNK DEALERS, PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
 
5.10.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  Junk means any used, cast-off, damaged, discarded, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn out, or wrecked object, thing, material or substance, regardless of whether the same is being held for sale or storage. Examples of "junk" include, but are not limited to: any old wire, iron, brass, copper, tin, aluminum, lead, or any other scrap metals or alloys, and any rags, carpet, papers, bags, cardboard, lumber, pallets, barrels, bottles, cans, plastics, or any dismantled or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, used vehicle parts, machinery, appliances and/or parts or portions thereof, and used household furniture or other household personal property or parts or portions thereof. 
B.  "Junk collector" means any person not having a fixed place of business in the town who goes from house to house, or place to place, within the Paradise town limits, gathering up, receiving, collecting, buying, or selling junk, as defined in this section. 
C.  "Junk dealer" means any person with a fixed place of business, in the town limits, who carries on, conducts, maintains or engages in the business of buying, selling, or otherwise dealing in junk as defined in this section. 
D.  "Junkyard" means an area containing more than two hundred square feet used for the storage of junk. 
E.  "Pawnbroker" means a person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroking, or the business of lending money for himself or any other person or firm upon personal property or pledges. 
F.  "Pawnshop" means any room, store, building or other place, in which any person engages in, carries on or conducts the business of a pawnbroker as defined in this section. 
G.  "Secondhand dealer" means and includes any person, partnership, firm, or corporation whose principal business is primarily that of engaging in buying, selling, trading, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. 
1.  "Secondhand dealer" also includes any person who engages in the business of buying or selling secondhand tangible personal property in excess of twenty percent of the gross sales and purchases of goods or merchandise sold or purchased in the regular course of business. 
2.  "Tangible personal property" includes, but is not limited to, all secondhand tangible personal property which bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription or which, at the time it is acquired by the secondhand dealer, bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription. 
3.  "Tangible personal property" also includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  All tangible personal property, new or used, received in pledge as security for a loan by a pawnbroker or a secondhand dealer acting as a pawnbroker; 
b.  All tangible personal property that bears a serial number or personalized initials or inscription which is purchased by a secondhand dealer or a pawnbroker or which, at the time of such purchase, bears evidence of having had a serial number or personalized initials or inscription. 
c.  All personal property commonly sold by secondhand dealers which statistically is found through crime reports to the Attorney General of the state of California to constitute a significant class of stolen good. 
4.  "Tangible personal property" does not include any new goods or merchandise purchased from a bona fide manufacturer, distributor, or wholesaler of such new goods or merchandise by a secondhand dealer. For the purposes of this chapter, however, a secondhand dealer shall retain for one year from the date of purchase, and shall make available for inspection by any law enforcement officer, any receipt, invoice, bill of sale or other evidence of purchase of such new goods or merchandise. 
(Ord. 216 §2, 1992: Ord. 129 §5.10.010, 1985; Ord. No. 401, § 2, 8-26-2003)  
5.10.020 - License required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of junk dealer, junk collector, secondhand dealer, or pawnbroker in the town of Paradise without first having obtained a business license to engage in such activity as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 129 §5.10.020, 1985)  
5.10.030 - Application—Form—Referral to police department and planning department. 
Original applications for special licenses under this chapter shall be submitted on a form prescribed by and filed with the administrative services department. The original application and the applicant shall be referred immediately to the police department and subsequently to the planning director or his designee. 
(Ord. 216 §3, 1992: Ord. 129 §5.10.030, 1985)  
5.10.040 - Photographing and fingerprinting of applicant—Investigation and report by police department. 
The police department shall photograph and fingerprint the applicant and make an investigation concerning the character of the applicant. The police department shall report within fifteen days its findings, to the administrative services department, together with a recommendation as to whether or not the applicant should be granted a license. (Ord. 129 §5.10.040, 1985)  
5.10.050 - Identification card. 
In addition to the requirements of Section 5.10.030, the police department shall prepare an identification card containing the photograph of the applicant, which identification card shall be laminated in plastic. This identification card shall be submitted directly to the administrative services department along with the information provided for in Section 5.10.030. (Ord. 129 §5.10.050, 1985)  
5.10.060 - Issuance. 
The administrative services department shall not issue any special license unless and until they receive the approval of the police department and verify with the planning director or his designee that the proposed business may be conducted at the location stated pursuant to applicable town adopted zoning regulations. Once such approval and verification have been received, the administrative services department shall notify the applicant of the amount of the corporate surety bond or cash deposit which shall be required prior to issuance of the license. The amount of such bond or deposit shall be as specified by resolution of the town council. The purpose of such bond or deposit is to insure that upon termination of the proposed business all junk and secondhand goods shall be removed from the premises. Upon receipt of a corporate surety bond or cash deposit in the required amount and in a form approved by the town attorney and payment of the required license fee, the administrative services department shall issue the special license applied for. The bond shall be deposited by the administrative services department with the town clerk. (Ord. 216 §4, 1992: Ord. 129 §5.10.060, 1985)  
5.10.070 - Inspection regarding cleanup—Action requiring cleanup—Release of bond. 
Upon termination of a license pursuant to the provisions of this title, whether by expiration or revocation, or upon termination of business pursuant to such license, the administrative services department shall notify the town planning director or designee who shall inspect the site to determine whether or not it has been cleaned up by removing all junk and secondhand goods. The planning director or designee shall report his findings to the administrative services department. If cleanup has been accomplished, the administrative services department shall release the cleanup bond or deposit. If cleanup has not been accomplished, the administrative services department shall report the matter to the town prosecutor together with a recommendation whether or not action should be taken on the bond or deposit to effect cleanup. (Ord. 216 §5, 1992: Ord. 129 §5.10.070, 1985)  
5.10.080 - Display—To be kept in holder's possession. 
Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall display the license issued by the administrative services department in a conspicuous place on his business premises. Every junk collector shall have his license in his possession at all times while engaging in his business as a junk collector. (Ord. 129 §5.10.080, 1985)  
5.10.090 - Dealing with persons under the influence of alcohol or drugs and minors prohibited—Exception as to minors with parent's consent. 
It shall be unlawful for any person maintaining or operating a junkyard, secondhand store or pawnshop or junk collecting business, to receive or purchase any property, article or thing, from any person who shall appear to be or who is known to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs or from any minor under the age of eighteen years; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply where the minor dealing with such person presents the written consent of his parent or guardian, duly signed, authorizing the particular transaction had with such person; provided further, that such written consent shall be retained by such person as long as the property procured through the transaction remains in the possession of such person; provided, that such written consent shall be exhibited upon demand to any peace officer requiring the same. (Ord. 129 §5.10.090, 1985)  
5.10.100 - Goods to be left for thirty days after submission of report. 
Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall hold and keep exposed to public view during business hours any junk or antique or secondhand goods, in any manner received, until the expiration of thirty days after the submission of the report required by Section 5.10.140. (Ord. 129 §5.10.100, 1985)  
5.10.120 - Records required—Form and exhibition. 
Every junk dealer, secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall keep in his place of business, and every junk collector shall keep in his possession while engaged in his business as a junk collector, a bound book in which he shall keep a written record of sale or other disposition of junk and antiques or secondhand goods made in the course of his business. Entry of each transaction shall be made at the time of the transaction. This record shall be exhibited upon demand to any peace officer. 
(Ord. 129 §5.10.120, 1985)  
5.10.130 - Contents—Failure to keep. 
The record required shall contain a description of the property purchased or otherwise received and sold or otherwise disposed of, the date of each such transaction, the price paid, the name, address, occupation and driver's license number of the person with whom the transaction is made, a description of such person and his signature. 
(Ord. 129 §5.10.130, 1985)  
5.10.140 - Daily written report to police department. 
Any person required to be licensed under this chapter shall submit, in person or by mail, a written report, daily to the police department which report shall be as required by California Business and Professions Code Section 21628 and shall contain a description of property purchased or otherwise received in his business prior to the time of the report and subsequent to the last prior report submitted, the date of receipt, price paid, the name, address and occupation of the person from whom such property was received and where such property will be located during the thirty days following the making of such report. 
(Ord. 129 §5.10.140, 1985)  
5.10.150 - Charitable organization exempt. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any charitable organization incidentally engaged in the business of junk collector, junk dealer, or secondhand dealer. 
(Ord. 129 §5.10.150, 1985)  
5.10.160 - Engaging in different business. 
If any person shall engage in, conduct, manage or carry on, at the same time, more than one of the businesses defined and referred to in this chapter, such person shall be deemed to be engaging in, conducting, managing and carrying on each such business separately and apart from the other such business, and such person shall comply in all respects with the provisions of this chapter relating to each such business, and it shall be unlawful for any such person to fail, refuse or neglect to do so. 
(Ord. 129 §5.10.160, 1985)  
Chapter 5.11 - VENDING—HAWKING—PEDDLING—SALES 
 
5.11.010 - Vending, hawking and peddling—License required. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to vend, sell, hawk or display for sale any merchandise, produce, goods, commodities or other personal property or services upon outdoor locations within the Town of Paradise without the possession and display of a valid Town of Paradise business license. This section shall not apply to any real property of a legally operated fixed place of business displaying its business inventory or services or any sales activities conducted in association with and on the same site as a public agency or any clubs, lodges, religious assembly or cultural services land uses as defined within Chapter 17.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 1, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 434, § 3, 3-8-2005)  
5.11.020 - Vending, hawking and peddling—License application and fees. 
Any person desiring to obtain a license shall make a written application to the planning director, upon such form as may be determined by the planning director. Such application shall be accompanied by evidence of authorization of the proposed outdoor sales activity from the affected property owner; and payment of such license fee as may be required and determined by the town council and adopted by resolution thereof. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 3, 3-8-2005)  
5.11.030 - Vending, hawking and peddling—License conditions. 
Any such license issued by the planning director shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  Days and hours of operation may be limited as determined by the planning director based on general welfare and safety impacts of the licensee's activities. 
B.  The permitted sales activities shall be limited solely to retail sales of "food concessions" and flowers. 
C.  For the purpose of this section, "food concessions" shall mean fresh, processed, prepared or cooked food from a non-fixed place of business for public consumption. 
D.  The licensee shall comply with all pertinent provisions of this title and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations, including the possession of a valid seller's permit issued by the California State Board of Equalization if legally required. 
E.  Provide to the planning director verification of evidence that the Town of Paradise will be identified as the point-of-sale for all sales conducted within the town. 
F.  Based on substantial evidence, the term of the license shall be limited to such period as the planning director shall fix, provided all licenses shall expire on December 31st of each year. A licensee desiring to continue operations under this chapter for a new or additional term must apply for and obtain a new license in the same manner as a new applicant in the first instance. 
G.  No license shall be transferrable to another person or entity. 
H.  The license shall be limited by such other conditions and requirements as may be deemed by the planning director to be reasonably necessary and in the public interest and welfare, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  Size of the display or sales area and its specific authorized location. 
2.  The number of vendors authorized at a specific location or site. 
3.  The licensee shall prominently display the town approved and issued license in a manner that can be easily viewed by all patrons. 
I.  That any license issued shall be subject to revocation by the planning director, after providing due process to the licensee, in the event of any breach by the licensee of any such condition. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 2, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 434, § 3, 3-8-2005)  
5.11.035 - Paradise Downtown and other areas. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any license issued by the planning director authorizing vending, hawking, peddling, or sales activity upon outdoor locations within the town adopted Paradise Downtown Revitalization Master Plan Area [Downtown] shall be subject to the following conditions: 
A.  All licensed hawking, peddling and vending sales activities upon outdoor locations within the Downtown shall be restricted to four (4) consecutive days or less and must be directly linked to a special community event sponsored by either a nonprofit group/organization and/or a public entity recognized by the Town of Paradise. 
B.  Other than those activities linked to a special community sponsored event, any and all licensed hawking, peddling and vending sales activities upon outdoor locations outside the Downtown shall be subject to all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 551, § 3, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 474, § 1, 12-11-2007; Ord. 438, § 1, 7-12-2005) 
Editor's note— On the effective date of Ord. No. 474, any duly issued license under Ch. 5.11 shall remain in effect until its expiration date.  
5.11.040 - Sales on streets—Generally—License. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful in the town for any person to leave or cause to be left, place or cause to be placed, any personal property upon any sidewalk, gutter, alley, or street of the town whether or not such property constitutes merchandise of any store. The personal property referred to in this section includes, but is not limited to, produce, merchandise, store boxes, store substances or material or any other object or implement of any class, kind or character. The town council may, by resolution, temporarily suspend the operation of this section for a limited period upon an occasion or event sponsored directly, or indirectly, by or for retail merchants having fixed places of business within the town and who desire to participate in such special occasion, program or event. Each application so approved shall be subject to, and limited in extent by the conditions and regulations established by the council in its resolution. Such resolution shall expressly provide the day or days and hours that such suspension shall be in effect. Any such suspension of the provisions of this section and all licenses related thereto shall be solely for the purpose of conducting retail sales. 
(Ord. 129 §5.11.040, 1985; Ord. No. 434, § 3, 3-8-2005)  
5.11.050 - Sales from vehicles. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person in the town to sell or vend any product out of, or upon, a vehicle parked on any private or public street, right-of-way, access easement, or upon any public property. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 3, 3-8-2005)  
5.11.060 - Charitable and nonprofit organizations—Exemptions. 
When a fundraising sale of any merchandise, produce, goods, commodities or other personal property or services is held or sponsored by a charitable or nonprofit organization based within the boundaries of the town, the town manager may grant a license to this organization without payment of a fee. 
(Ord. No. 434, § 3, 3-8-2005)  
Chapter 5.12 - BINGO GAMES 
 
5.12.010 - Bingo defined. 
As used in this chapter, "bingo" means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to numbers or symbols selected at random. 
(Ord. 129 § 5.12.010, 1985)  
5.12.020 - Eligible organizations. 
Organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701l and 23701w of the Revenue and Taxation Code and mobile home park associations and senior citizens' organizations and charitable organizations affiliated with a school district are eligible to apply to the town for a license to conduct bingo games in the town under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 530, § 1, 6-25-2013; Ord. 129 § 5.12.020, 1985)  
5.12.030 - Application—Filing—Term. 
Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such license to conduct bingo games in the town shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the administrative services director on a form to be provided by the director. The issuing authority shall be the director. The license issued shall be for a term of one year from the date of issuance, subject to renewal and an annual fee. (Ord. 129 §5.12.030, 1985)  
5.12.040 - Application—Qualifications. 
No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.12.020 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 129 §5.12.040, 1985)  
5.12.050 - Application—Contents. 
The application for a license shall contain the following: 
A.  The name of the applicant organization and a statement that the applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.12.020; 
B.  The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the organization or by two members if it is a senior citizen organization with no officers; 
C.  The particular property within the town, including the street number, whether owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place; 
D.  That the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter, as they may be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the chief of police upon violation of any of such provisions; 
E.  The application shall be signed by the applicant under penalty of perjury; 
F.  The annual license fee fixed by the town council by resolution shall accompany the application; 
G.  The applicant shall also submit, with its application, a certificate or determination of exemption under Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g and 12701(1) of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or a letter of good standing from the Exemption Division of the Franchise Tax Board in Sacramento, showing exemption under Section 23701d. If the applicant is a mobile home park association or a senior citizen organization, an officer or member shall submit a declaration, signed under penalty of perjury, setting forth facts which show that the applicant is a mobile home park association or a senior citizen organization. (Ord. 129 §5.12.050, 1985)  
5.12.060 - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the administrative services director shall refer the application to interested departments of the town, including, but not limited to, the town manager, town attorney, police department and the fire department, for investigation as to whether or not the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted, as to fire, occupancy and other applicable restrictions. (Ord. 129 §5.12.060, 1985)  
5.12.070 - License issuance and contents. 
Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified, under the law, to conduct bingo games in the town, the administrative services director shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall contain the following information: 
A.  The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued; 
B.  The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted; 
C.  The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted; 
D.  The date of the expiration of such license; 
E.  Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 129 §5.12.070, 1985)  
5.12.080 - Summary suspension and revocation. 
A.  Whenever it appears to the chief of police that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police has the authority to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. 
B.  Any person who continues to conduct a bingo game after any summary suspension thereof under subsection A of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  The order issued under subsection A of this section shall also notify the licensee that it shall have five days from the date of such order to request a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the chief of police within the five-day period shall result in a revocation of the license. 
D.  Upon such request by the licensee, whose license has been suspended under subsection A of this section, for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be revoked, the chief of police shall provide such hearing within ten days after receipt of such request at which hearing the suspended licensee may appear before the chief of police for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing has first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation. 
E.  Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the town until such time as the town council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the chief of police. (Ord. 129 §5.12.080, 1985)  
5.12.090 - Revocation without summary suspension. 
A.  Whenever it appears to the chief of police that the licensee is conducting bingo games in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or that the license was obtained by fraudulent representation and no summary suspension is ordered under Section 5.12.080, the license may be revoked; provided, however, that the licensee may appear before the chief of police at the time fixed by the chief of police, for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be revoked. No license shall be revoked under this section unless written notice has first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the ground advanced as the basis of the revocation. 
B.  Any organization whose license is revoked under this section shall not conduct any bingo game in the town until such time as the town council, on appeal, determines to overrule the decision of the chief of police. (Ord. 129 §5.12.090, 1985)  
5.12.100 - Appeal of revocation. 
A.  Any holder of a license whose license is revoked under this chapter has the right, within ten days after receiving notice in writing of the revocation, to file a written appeal to the town council. Such appeal shall set forth the specific ground or grounds on which it is based. The town council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days after its receipt by the town, or at a time thereafter agreed upon and shall cause the appellant to be given at least ten days written notice of such hearing. At the hearing the appellant or his authorized representative shall have the right to present evidence and a written or oral argument, or both, in support of his appeal. The determination of the town council on the appeal shall be final. 
B.  Any organization whose license is finally revoked may not again apply for a license to conduct bingo games in the town for a period of one year from the date of such revocation; provided, however, if the ground for revocation is cancellation of the exemption granted under Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, such organization may again apply for a license upon proof of reinstatement of the exemption. (Ord. 129 §5.12.100, 1985)  
5.12.110 - Prize value. 
The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed the dollar amount set forth in Penal Code Section 326.5(n) either in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game, which is held. 
(Ord. No. 530, § 2, 6-25-2013; Ord. 129 §5.12.110, 1985)  
5.12.120 - Records and accounts—Use of proceeds. 
A.  With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except: 
1.  Such proceeds may be used for prizes. 
2.  A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead and administrative expenses. 
B.  The licensee shall keep a full and accurate record of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, promotion, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter. The town, by and through its authorized officers, shall have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and the licensee shall fully cooperate with the town by making such record available. (Ord. 129 §5.12.120, 1985)  
5.12.130 - Exclusive financial interest. 
No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Ord. 129 §5.12.130, 1985)  
5.12.140 - Exclusive operation. 
A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. (Ord. 129 §5.12.140, 1985)  
5.12.150 - Public access. 
All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. (Ord. 129 §5.12.150, 1985)  
5.12.160 - Attendance limited. 
Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and town manager's office in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. The licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Ord. 129 §5.12.160, 1985)  
5.12.170 - Place of games. 
A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized. If the licensee shall dispose of the property, then the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization. (Ord. 129 §5.12.170, 1985)  
5.12.180 - Minors. 
No person under the age of eighteen years shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 129 §5.12.180, 1985)  
5.12.190 - Intoxicated persons. 
No person who is obviously intoxicated or under the influence of any narcotic or dangerous drug shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game. (Ord. 129 §5.12.190, 1985)  
5.12.200 - Hours. 
No licensee shall conduct any bingo game for more than six hours out of any twenty-four-hour period. No bingo game shall be conducted before nine a.m. nor after two a.m. of any day. (Ord. 129 §5.12.200, 1985)  
5.12.210 - Presence of participants. 
No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game, unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 129 §5.12.210, 1985)  
5.12.220 - Receipt of profit, wage or salary. 
It is a misdemeanor under Section 326.5(b) of the Penal Code of the state for any person to receive or to pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter, a violation of which is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars, which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the town. (Ord. 129 §5.12.220, 1985)  
5.12.230 - Violation—Enjoinment. 
The town may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Ord. 129 §5.12.230, 1985)  
5.12.240 - Violation—Penalty. 
Every person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 129 §5.12.240, 1985)  
Chapter 5.13 - SOLICITORS 
 
5.13.010 - Solicitor defined. 
"Solicitor," as used in this chapter, means any person and each individual person, whether working for himself or another person, who goes from house to house or from place to place in the town selling or taking orders for or offering to sell or take orders for, goods, wares or merchandise or any other article, for services to be performed or for the making, manufacturing or repairing of any article or thing whatsoever; provided, that this definition shall not apply to or include representatives of wholesalers, manufacturers or jobbers taking orders from or selling directly to local merchants, businesses or professions maintaining a fixed place of business, as defined in subsection C of Section 5.01.030. (Ord. 129 §5.13.010, 1985)  
5.13.020 - License—Required. 
It shall be unlawful to engage in the business of a solicitor in the town without first obtaining a business license and paying a fee for such license as shall be determined by council resolution. (Ord. 129 §5.13.020, 1985)  
5.13.030 - Orders to be written and in duplicate. 
All orders taken by any solicitor shall be in writing, in duplicate, stating the terms thereof and the amount received in advance by the solicitor. One copy shall be given to the purchaser at the time the order is taken and the deposit paid. (Ord. 129 §5.13.030, 1985)  
5.13.040 - License—Term. 
A solicitor's business license shall be valid until December 31st of the year next succeeding the year in which said solicitor's special business license is issued. (Ord. 129 §5.13.040, 1985)  
5.13.050 - License—Application—Generally. 
Any person required to have a license under this chapter shall make application therefor to the police department upon such application form as may be prescribed, from time to time hereafter, by the town manager. Such application shall set forth the following information: name, address, personal description, nature of business, name and address of employer or supplier of goods to be sold, duration of solicitation, and prior felony convictions, if any, and any other pertinent information as required by the police department. (Ord. 129 §5.13.050, 1985)  
5.13.060 - Denial of license. 
The applicant upon compliance with Section 5.13.010 shall be registered, unless the applicant has prior felony conviction, in which case the chief of police may deny registration, and the applicant may appeal to the town council. (Ord. 129 §5.13.060, 1985)  
5.13.070 - Issuance of a license. 
Upon approval of the application and the receipt of the required fees, the police department shall issue an identification card in the name of the individual solicitor. The identification card shall contain the following information: a picture and the full name of the solicitor, date of birth, the company, firm or organization represented, the date of issuance and the date of expiration. (Ord. 129 §5.13.070, 1985)  
5.13.080 - Display of identification card. 
The identification card of each solicitor shall be displayed and affixed to the outermost garment in the area of the left breast pocket at all times whenever the person is soliciting. (Ord. 129 §5.13.080, 1985)  
5.13.090 - Fraudulent use of identification card. 
It shall be unlawful to use or display a solicitor's identification card which has been issued in the name of another. (Ord. 129 §5.13.090, 1985)  
5.13.100 - Surrender of identification card. 
The solicitor's identification card must be surrendered to any Paradise police officer upon request. (Ord. 129 §5.13.100, 1985)  
5.13.110 - Manner of solicitation. 
Any person soliciting within the town shall conform to the following regulations: 
A.  Solicitation is to be done in an orderly and lawful manner. 
B.  Solicitation is limited to the hours of nine a.m. to five p.m. or until sunset, whichever is earlier. (Ord. 129 §5.13.110, 1985)  
5.13.120 - Charitable and nonprofit organizations—Exemption. 
When a solicitor represents or is sponsored by a charitable or nonprofit organization based within the boundaries of the town, the town council may grant a license to this organization without payment of a fee. (Ord. 129 §5.13.120, 1985)  
Chapter - 5.14 ONSITE SANITATION SYSTEMS OPERATION EVALUATOR(S)[5] 
Sections : 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 519, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 5.14, §§ 5.14.010—5.14.090, and enacted a new Ch. 5.14 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.14 pertained to evaluator of on-site wastewater treatment and disposal systems operation, and derived from Ord. 221, 1993; Ord. 245, 1995. 
 
5.14.010 - Evaluator defined. 
"Evaluator" as used in this chapter, means any person that demonstrates competence, knowledge and ability in the observance and performance of onsite sanitation treatment/disposal systems and has been duly licensed by the town to perform onsite sanitation systems operations performance evaluations in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 13.04 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.14.020 - Evaluator license—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of evaluating the performance operation of any onsite sanitation treatment/disposal systems within the town limits without first obtaining an evaluator's license from the town as provided in this chapter and paying the fee for such license. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.14.030 - Evaluator license—Term. 
The term of the evaluator's license shall be three (3) years beginning with the date the license is approved and issued by the town. Thereafter, the license is renewable by subsequent application and current examination on or prior to expiration date of the first license. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.14.040 - Evaluator license—Application and qualifications. 
Any person required to obtain an evaluator's license in accordance with this chapter, Chapter 13.04 and/or other provisions of this code, shall submit an application to the director of the public works department on a form prescribed by the town manager. Applicants possessing any of the following qualifications shall be eligible to be licensed as evaluators: 
A.  During the preceding three (3) years the applicant has been licensed by the town as an evaluator; and has performed, at minimum, two (2) onsite sanitation systems operations performance evaluations during, the preceding one year. 
B.  The applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the onsite sanitary official that the applicant has a minimum one year of experience in the onsite wastewater field and has successfully completed training by the onsite sanitation division relating to onsite systems evaluations and has successfully passed the current licensed evaluators examination. 
C.  The applicant is a registered civil or sanitary engineer, a registered engineering geologist, or a registered environmental health specialist with the State of California and has successfully passed the current licensed evaluators examination. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.14.050 - Evaluations and reporting thereof. 
Each evaluation performed by a licensed evaluator as required by this chapter and Chapter 13.04, shall be reported to the town onsite sanitary official upon a form provided by and filed with the town within seven (7) days following the date of the evaluation, or earlier as prescribed upon the town's evaluation form. The evaluation of the onsite sanitation system shall be completed by a licensed evaluator as required by the directives of the system report form provided by the town. If the town's form is altered or not completely filled out, it may not be officially accepted by the town onsite sanitary official. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.14.060 - Evaluations not a license to construct. 
The evaluator is only licensed to evaluate the performance of the onsite sanitation system and as such shall report the observed operating performance and/or operating deficiencies, if any, associated with the onsite sanitation system. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to confer upon the evaluator the authority to grant any license to construct. The evaluator's observations of an onsite sanitation system operation shall not require any action by the property owner unless and until the property owner is directed by the town onsite sanitary official to correct the evaluated system. The property owner shall have sole authority as to which contractor may perform the corrective construction and/or operational modifications to alleviate any performance and/or operating deficiencies of the associated onsite sanitation system. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.14.080 - Evaluator license—Revocation. 
Each evaluator shall perform onsite sanitation systems operational performance evaluations in a diligent and workmanlike manner. Failure to perform such duties in accordance with this chapter, Chapter 13.04 or the town's adopted Manual for the Onsite Treatment of Wastewater may result in disciplinary action against the licensee and possible revocation of the evaluator's license. If a licensed evaluator provides false information on the evaluator application or upon an onsite sanitation system evaluation report form or fails on two (2) separate occasions to comply with the provisions of this chapter, Chapter 13.04 or the town's adopted Manual for the Onsite Treatment of Wastewater, the town may implement action to revoke the evaluator's license. Any party who is subject to having a license revoked shall be entitled to a hearing. Hearings for revocation of an evaluator's license shall be conducted as follows: 
A.  The town onsite sanitary official shall mail, by first class U.S. mail, a written notice to the evaluator of a scheduled hearing to consider revocation of his or her license based upon the evaluator's conduct or omissions as set forth in the notice. The notice shall be mailed to the evaluator at least ten (10) days before the scheduled hearing date. The notice shall also state the time and place of hearing and the name of the hearing officer. The hearing shall not be conducted under the formal rules of evidence. However, the hearing officer shall attempt to restrict testimony to matter relevant to the facts stated in the notice. 
B.  The hearing officer, who shall be named by the town manager, shall be a neutral party to the revocation action. 
C.  The town staff and the evaluator shall both have an opportunity to be heard and the right to be represented at the hearing. 
D.  Within ten (10) days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall, in writing, notify the town and the evaluator of his or her decision setting forth a statement of findings of law and fact. 
E.  The hearing officer shall not have the authority to amend any town ordinance or town adopted regulatory procedures as part of the hearing process; and the decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
5.14.090 - Violations an infraction. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. False representations submitted on the licensing application or any subsequent report submitted by the evaluator constitutes a separate and distinct violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 519, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 5.15 - KENNELS 
 
5.15.010 - Kennel defined. 
"Kennel" means a facility or site for breeding, boarding, keeping, and/or training of five or more dogs or cats older than four months of age. (Ord. 178 §3 (B), 1988: Ord. 129 §5.15.010, 1985)  
5.15.020 - License required of kennel owners. 
Every person who owns or controls a kennel shall obtain a kennel license and pay the fees as set by council resolution within thirty days after the kennel is established. (Ord. 129 §5.15.020, 1985)  
5.15.030 - Rabies and animal control clearance required. 
No kennel license shall be issued unless proof has been presented that all dogs owned by the kennel owner or operator in the kennel have been vaccinated against rabies, nor shall any kennel license be issued until the town's animal control officer or his authorized representative has first issued a certificate that the kennel is operated in a sanitary and proper manner so as not to constitute a nuisance to the neighborhood. (Ord. 129 §5.15.030, 1985)  
5.15.040 - Zoning compliance required. 
No kennel license shall be issued unless evidence is presented that the subject kennel complies with all applicable zoning regulations. (See Title 17 of this code, zoning.) (Ord. 178 §1 (A), 1988)  
Chapter 5.16 - CARDROOMS 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
A.  "Cardroom" means any space, room or enclosure, furnished or equipped with a table used or intended to be used as a card table for the playing of cards and similar games and the use of which is available to the public, or any portion of the public. 
B.  "Gambling" means the playing of any game with cards or otherwise, or the playing of any contrivance or device, mechanical or otherwise, for money, credit, merchandise or other things of value. (Ord. 129 §5.16.010, 1985)  
5.16.020 - Gambling restricted. 
It is unlawful to gamble in the town or for a person to permit gambling on any premises occupied, leased or owned by him or under his control, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 129 §5.16.020, 1985)  
5.16.030 - Draw poker. 
The game of draw poker, including lo-ball poker, is permitted when played in a cardroom or other facility having a cardroom license, or in private residences when such games are not open to the public. A game is open to the public when participation is permitted other than by direct invitation of the tenant of the residence or those present. (Ord. 129 §5.16.030, 1985)  
5.16.040 - License required. 
It is unlawful for any person, for himself or for any other person, to engage in or carry on, or to maintain, or to conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained or conducted, any cardroom in the town without first having secured a license from the town to do so in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 129 §5.16.040, 1985)  
5.16.045 - Limitation of number of card tables. 
A.  At no time shall there be issued and in effect cardroom licenses for more than eight card tables divided among the total number of cardrooms in existence within the town and subject to this chapter; provided, however, that if and when any existing license is surrendered, revoked or not renewed as required by the provisions of this chapter, the maximum number of card tables may be reduced at the discretion of the town council. 
B.  If a licensee does not actually operate the number of permitted card tables for a period of thirty consecutive days, the number of permitted card tables under the license shall be reduced by the number of card tables not used. (Ord. 285 §1, 1997: Ord. 129 §5.16.045, 1985)  
5.16.050 - License application. 
A.  An application for a license, as required in this chapter, shall be completed and filed with the police department upon such forms as may be furnished by the police department. 
B.  The application shall set forth and include the following: 
1.  The location of the cardroom for which the license is requested, including a specific description of the building or structure, or portion of the building or structure, within which the cardroom is to be maintained; 
2.  The true and complete name and address of each owner of the building and/or structure within which the cardroom is proposed to be maintained; 
3.  The types of card games proposed to be played within the cardroom; 
4.  The true and complete name, home and business address of the applicant; 
5.  The complete name and address of each person to be employed in the cardroom to the extent that such information is known at the time the application is filed; 
6.  The complete name and address of all persons financially interested in the business. "Persons financially interested" includes all persons who share in the profits of the business on the basis of gross or net revenue; 
7.  A statement of past criminal record by the applicant, all employees and other persons financially interested in the business; 
8.  A photograph, physical description and clearly identifiable set of fingerprints of the applicant, all employees and other persons financially interested in the business; 
9.  A statement as to whether the applicant has had any permit or license to establish, operate or maintain a cardroom revoked or denied, the date and jurisdiction of the revocation or denial, and the reason therefor; 
10.  A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that the cardroom established or maintained under any license issued pursuant to the application filed shall be established, operated, managed and maintained in full conformity with the regulations of the town, and the laws of the state, and any violation of such regulations or law in the cardroom shall render the license therefor subject to suspension or revocation; 
11.  A statement that the applicant understands and agrees that the chief of police, or a designated representative thereof, shall have access to the cardroom premises and to the business records of the applicant for the purpose of investigating compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other applicable laws and regulations, and the applicant consents to any such search and consequential seizure; 
12.  Such other information as the applicant considers pertinent; 
13.  The number of card tables to be used. (Ord. 285 §2, 1997: Ord. 129 §5.16.050, 1985)  
5.16.055 - Application acceptance, investigation and reporting. 
A.  The police department shall accept any application which contains all of the information required by Section 5.16.050 and for which all applicable fees have been paid. 
B.  The police department shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the contents of the application for the purpose of determining whether any applicant, employee or other persons financially interested in the business has been convicted of any crime which would constitute grounds for denial of the application as defined under Section 5.16.080. 
C.  A copy of the application shall be forwarded to the fire department. The fire department shall investigate, or cause to be investigated, the information set forth in the application, and determine whether or not the proposed use conforms to all applicable fire laws and regulations. The fire department shall report their findings to the police department. (Ord. 129 §5.16.055, 1985)  
5.16.060 - Fee—Term. 
A.  The applicant for a cardroom license shall deposit a license fee with the application. If the application is granted, the entire fee shall be retained by the town. If the application is denied, the town shall retain only that amount necessary to cover administrative costs associated with the processing of the application, and the balance to be refunded to the applicant. Both the amount of the license fee and the amount to be retained by the town in the event of denial of the application shall be established by town council resolution. 
B.  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid for a term of one year from the date of issuance. (Ord. 129 §5.16.060, 1985)  
5.16.065 - Obligation to inform of certain changes concerning licenses and employees. 
The licensee shall notify the police department in writing and within fourteen days of any change in the information required in an application for license issuance or renewal as provided in Section 5.16.050. (Ord. 129 §5.16.065, 1985)  
5.16.070 - Licenses nonassignable—Incorporation prohibited. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no cardroom license or any table operated under a cardroom license may be sold, transferred or assigned by the licensee or by operation of law, to any other person, persons, or legal entity, and any such sale, transfer, or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed a voluntary surrender of the license, which license shall thereupon be terminated and void; provided, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners dies, the surviving partner or partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without affecting a surrender or termination of the license. A license issued to an individual shall terminate with the death of the individual. No person shall be granted a license to conduct more than one cardroom. 
B.  A licensee may not incorporate after approval of the license. Any such incorporation, or attempted incorporation, shall be deemed a voluntary surrender of the license, and the license shall thereupon be terminated. (Ord. 129 §5.16.070, 1985)  
5.16.075 - Zoning compliance required. 
No cardroom license shall be issued unless evidence is presented that the subject cardroom complies with all applicable zoning regulations. (See Title 17 of this code, zoning.) (Ord. 178 §1 (B), 1988)  
5.16.080 - Issuance, denial and appeal. 
The police department shall issue the license applied for unless it appears that one of the following facts exists: 
A.  The total number of card tables that would be maintained within the town, should the application be approved, exceeds the number authorized by Section 5.16.045; or 
B.  The applicant is a corporation; or 
C.  The report of the fire department indicates that the application would result in a violation of the laws or regulations it administers; or 
D.  The police department determines that: 
1.  Approval of the application would aggravate the crime problems in the area where the cardroom is proposed, or otherwise be detrimental to the crime prevention efforts of the police department, 
2.  The applicant is unfit to be entrusted with the operation of a cardroom business because of prior criminal convictions, prior license or permit history, business and credit history, or that the application contains false statements knowingly made. In the consideration of criminal history, the applicant's record must be free of any convictions involving gambling, larceny, usury, bribery, extortion, bookmaking, fraud, prostitution, pimping, pandering, any narcotics violations and/or crime involving moral turpitude; 
E.  The action of the police department in denying or approving such a license shall be subject to an appeal to the town council. Notice of the appeal shall be filed with the town clerk within ten days after denial of the license. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the police department in denying or approving the license shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 129 §5.16.080, 1985)  
5.16.090 - Revocation. 
If any licensee shall not daily operate the cardroom licensed thereby during the usual hours of operation for at least eleven months of each year, the police department shall revoke and cancel such license. (Ord. 129 §5.16.090, 1985)  
5.16.095 - Existing licenses continued. 
Notwithstanding the limitation imposed on the number of card tables set forth in Section 5.16.045, each valid, unrevoked and unexpired cardroom license heretofore issued by the town under predecessor regulations shall expire sixty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, and shall be subject to application for renewal within the time and manner provided by Section 5.16.050. (Ord. 129 §5.16.095, 1985)  
5.16.096 - Display of license. 
The actual cardroom license granted by the town shall be visibly displayed on a wall, or similar structure, so as to be in the full view of patrons seated at the cardroom tables. Placement of the license will be at least five feet above the level of the floor but no higher than six feet above the floor. (Ord. 129 §5.16.096, 1985)  
5.16.100 - Exempted organizations. 
A nonprofit society, club, fraternal, labor or other organization having adopted bylaws and duly elected directors and members may be granted a license, without payment of a fee, by the police department when it appears that the tables are for the exclusive use of members of the society, club, fraternal, labor or other organization and no charge is made for any of the facilities. (Ord. 129 §5.16.100, 1985)  
5.16.110 - Employee work permits—Required. 
Cardroom employees must obtain a work permit from the police department. "Cardroom employees," for the purpose of this chapter, means dealers, overseers and others directly connected with the operation and supervision of the card tables and excluding waitresses, bartenders, culinary workers and others not connected with such operation and supervision. (Ord. 129 §5.16.110, 1985)  
5.16.120 - Employee work permits—Application. 
Applications for work permits for cardroom employees shall be submitted under oath and contain the past criminal records, if any, of the applicant. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints, a photograph and a physical description of the applicant. (Ord. 129 §5.16.120, 1985)  
5.16.121 - Change in information. 
Each person registered as a cardroom employee or agent shall notify the police department in writing and within fourteen days of any change in the information required by Section 5.16.120. (Ord. 129 §5.16.121, 1985)  
5.16.125 - Display of dealer permit. 
The employee work permit (dealer permit) shall be visibly displayed on the employee and affixed to the left breast pocket area. The permit shall be displayed any time that the employee is present on the premises whether it is their work time or not. This is to insure that any and all patrons will be able to readily recognize any employee of the cardroom. (Ord. 129 §5.16.125, 1985)  
5.16.130 - Employee work permits—Denial of permit. 
The police department shall deny to such applicant a work permit if the applicant has within a period of ten years prior to the application been convicted of any crime involving gambling, larceny, usury, bribery, extortion, bookmaking, fraud, prostitution, pimping, pandering, any narcotics violations and/or any crime involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 129 §5.16.130, 1985)  
5.16.140 - Denial—Appeal. 
The action of the police department in denying such a work permit shall be subject to an appeal to the town council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the town clerk, within ten days after the denial of the work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the police department in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 129 §5.16.140, 1985)  
5.16.150 - Fee—Term. 
An employee work permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for a period of one year. The applicant for an employee work permit shall submit, along with the application, a nonrefundable fee in an amount to be determined by resolution of the town council. Only one such work permit shall be required each year, even though the holder of the work permit may change his place of employment within the town. (Ord. 129 §5.16.150, 1985)  
5.16.160 - Suspension or revocation. 
The police department shall have the right for cause to revoke or suspend any cardroom work permit issued under this chapter and to take possession of such permits. Any of the grounds upon which the police department is required to refuse to issue an initial cardroom license or cardroom work permit shall also constitute grounds for such revocation or suspension. In addition, the failure of a holder of a cardroom license or cardroom work permit to comply with any provision of this chapter shall also constitute grounds for revocation or suspension of such license or work permit. The action of the police department in this respect shall be subject to an appeal to the town council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the town clerk within ten days after the revocation or suspension. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the police department in revoking or suspending the license or work permit shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 129 §5.16.160, 1985)  
5.16.170 - Rules and regulations—Operation in violation unlawful. 
It is unlawful to operate a cardroom in violation of any of the regulations and rules set out in this chapter. (Ord. 129 §5.16.170, 1985)  
5.16.180 - Number at a location. 
Not more than one cardroom shall be located at any one address. (Ord. 129 §5.16.180, 1985)  
5.16.185 - Separation from alcohol sales. 
If the proposed cardroom is located in any building or structure, or any portion of a building or structure, wherein alcoholic beverages of any type are sold or dispensed, the cardroom shall be separated from the tavern section of the building or structure, by means of a solid, floor-to-ceiling wall, and accessible only by means of a doorway which shall remain in the closed and unlocked position. (Ord. 129 §5.16.185, 1985)  
5.16.190 - Visibility. 
Cardrooms shall be located and so arranged that card tables and the players at the tables are plainly visible from the front door opening to the cardroom when the door is opened. No wall, partition, screen or similar structure between the front door opening and any card table located in the cardroom shall be permitted if it interferes with such visibility. (Ord. 129 §5.16.190, 1985)  
5.16.191 - Loaning of money. 
No licensee or any other person in charge or control of any cardroom shall, nor shall any employee or agent of the licensee or person, loan any money, check or anything of value, to any person who is playing, or intends to play, any card game. (Ord. 129 §5.16.191, 1985)  
5.16.192 - Credit. 
No licensee or any other person in charge or control of any cardroom shall, nor shall any employee or agent of the licensee or person, extend credit to any person who is playing, or intends to play, any card game. (Ord. 129 §5.16.192, 1985)  
5.16.193 - Purchase of property. 
No licensee or any other person in charge or control of any cardroom shall, nor shall any employee or agent of the licensee or person, purchase or agree to purchase, any real or personal property from any person who is playing, or intends to play, any card game. (Ord. 129 §5.16.193, 1985)  
5.16.194 - Fee for check cashing. 
No licensee or any other person in charge or control of any cardroom shall, nor shall any employee or agent of the licensee or person, charge any fee to cash a check of any person who is playing, or intends to play, any card game. (Ord. 129 §5.16.194, 1985)  
5.16.195 - Communication. 
No licensee or other person in charge or control of any cardroom shall, nor shall any employee or agent of the licensee or person, communicate in any way, whether verbally or nonverbally, to any other person, whether playing a card game or not, any information concerning the cards held, or the card game being played, by any person in the cardroom. (Ord. 129 §5.16.195, 1985)  
5.16.196 - Law violation—General. 
No licensee or any other person in charge or control of any cardroom shall, nor shall any employee or agent of the licensee or person, engage in, or permit any other person on the premises to engage in, any act that violates the laws of the state. (Ord. 129 §5.16.196, 1985)  
5.16.200 - Minors present. 
No licensee or any other person in charge or control of any cardroom shall, nor shall any employee or agent of the licensee or person, permit or allow any person under the age of twenty-one years at any time to be in or upon the cardroom premises. (Ord. 129 §5.16.200, 1985)  
5.16.210 - Hours. 
All cardrooms shall be closed at five a.m. and shall remain closed until nine a.m. Cardrooms may operate seven days a week. (Ord. 129 §5.16.210, 1985)  
5.16.220 - Inspection access. 
All cardrooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. (Ord. 129 §5.16.220, 1985)  
5.16.230 - Public access. 
During hours of operation, doors must be unlocked and accessible to the general public. (Ord. 129 §5.16.230, 1985)  
5.16.240 - Supervision of tables. 
Each card table shall have assigned to it a person whose duty shall be to supervise the game and to see that it is played strictly in accordance with the terms of this chapter and with the provisions of the Penal Code of the state. This person may have more than one table under his supervision. (Ord. 129 §5.16.240, 1985)  
5.16.250 - Posting of regulations. 
There shall be posted in every cardroom in letters plainly visible from all parts thereof, signs stating that no game except pangini, lo-ball or draw poker, without variations as defined by Hoyle, shall be played in the cardroom. These signs shall also contain such other information relating to the regulations contained in this chapter as the chief of police may require, including the amount of the time-charge for participation. (Ord. 129 §5.16.250, 1985)  
5.16.260 - Intoxicated persons. 
No licensee or any other person in charge or control of any cardroom shall permit any person to enter or remain on the premises of the cardroom or to play any card game permitted by the provisions of this chapter while such person is under the influence of any intoxicating beverage, narcotic or dangerous drug. (Ord. 129 §5.16.260, 1985)  
5.16.270 - Cuts of pots. 
The operator of a cardroom shall establish a reasonable time-charge to customers and there shall not be permitted any "rake-off" or "cut" of any pots or bets retained by operator. Nothing in this section precludes the reasonable designation of a portion of each lo-ball pot to be used as a progressive jackpot. The progressive jackpot shall be awarded in those cases where the second best hand holds a 6-4 (ace, deuce, trey, four-six). The operator shall advise each player with regard to the progressive jackpot. No player shall be required to contribute. A player who does not contribute may not be eligible for the jackpot. The operator shall maintain a strict accounting of all amounts retained for use in a progressive jackpot. (Ord. 129 §5.16.270, 1985)  
5.16.280 - Shills. 
No operator nor employee may use a "shill" in any card game unless a work permit is obtained under Section 5.16.110 and a copy of the same is posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. (Ord. 129 §5.16.280, 1985)  
5.16.290 - Solicitation of players. 
No cardroom operator or employee shall solicit or induce a person to participate in a card game by offering or providing to such person free food or drink. (Ord. 149 §1, 1986: Ord. 129 §5.16.290, 1985)  
5.16.300 - Money. 
It shall be illegal to have money on any card table or to use money in any card game. (Ord. 129 §5.16.300, 1985)  
5.16.310 - Exhibition of permits. 
Operators and employees are required to exhibit their permits on demand of any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 129 §5.16.310, 1985)  
5.16.320 - Violations—State law unaffected. 
The town council declares that it is not the intention of this chapter to permit the licensing of any cardroom for the playing of any game prohibited by the laws of the state, including, but not limited to, those games enumerated in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state, which section includes banking and percentage games. (Ord. 129 §5.16.320, 1985)  
5.16.330 - Penalty. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each and every violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 129 §5.16.330, 1985)  
5.16.340 - Injunctive relief. 
In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this chapter, the operation of any cardroom in violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws and regulations is deemed a public nuisance and the town may bring an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin such violation. (Ord. 129 §5.16.340, 1985)  
Chapter 5.17 - TATTOO ARTISTS AND TATTOOING ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
5.17.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
A.  "Operator" means any person, whether the proprietor or another person, administering a tattoo to any customer of a tattooing establishment. 
B.  "Proprietor" means the person having general control and management over the conduct of business at a tattooing establishment, whether or not such person is the legal owner of the premises or the business. 
C.  "Tattoo" means an indelible mark or figure fixed upon a body by insertion of pigment under the skin or by production of scars. 
D.  "Tattooing establishment" means premises used for the business of marking or coloring the skin with tattoos, and all furnishing, equipment, instruments, dyes and inks, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use. (Ord. 129 §5.17.010, 1985)  
5.17.020 - Application for license. 
Every person engaged as a tattoo artist shall obtain a license to operate in the town and pay a license fee in advance as set by council resolution, payable to the administrative services department. Upon application being made, the administrative services department shall immediately refer the applicant and the application to the police department, and the police department shall either approve or disapprove of the granting of the license within thirty days. If the application is approved by the police department, the applicant shall furnish to the police department, the name, age, sex, permanent address, prior felony convictions, if any, and other pertinent information required by the police department concerning each and every person who shall be employed by applicant in such business or take part therein, in any manner whatsoever and the applicant shall keep any and all records of such business as shall be required by the police department and shall submit copies thereof to the police department as may be required. (Ord. 129 §5.17.020, 1985)  
5.17.030 - Insurance certificate. 
Every proprietor of a tattooing establishment shall file with the administrative services department a certificate of general liability insurance in the minimum amount of one hundred thousand dollars. (Ord. 129 §5.17.030, 1985)  
Chapter 5.18 - MASSEUR/MASSEUSE AND MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
 
5.18.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them respectively: 
A.  "Massage" means the manipulation of body tissues for remedial or hygienic purposes (as by rubbing, stroking, kneading, or tapping) with the hand or an instrument, excluding treatments by a licensed physical therapist or chiropractic doctor or a member of the American Massage Therapy Association. 
B.  "Massage establishment" means premises used for the business of performing massages and all furnishings, equipment, instruments, and other facilities maintained therein incidental to such use. 
C.  "Masseur" or "masseuse" means any person, whether the proprietor or another person, administering a massage to any customer of a massage establishment. 
D.  "Proprietor" means the person having general control and management over the conduct of business at a massage establishment, whether or not such person is the legal owner of the premises or the business. 
(Ord. 182 §1, 1988; Ord. 129 §5.18.010, 1985)  
5.18.020 - Application for license. 
Every person engaged as a masseur or a masseuse shall obtain a license to operate in the town and pay a license fee in advance as set by council resolution payable to the administrative services department. Upon application being made, the administrative services department shall refer the applicant and application to the police department and all applicants shall be photographed and fingerprinted by the police department, and the police department shall either approve or disapprove of the granting of the license within thirty days. If the application is approved by the police department, the applicant shall furnish to the police department the name, age, sex, permanent address, prior felony convictions, if any, and any other pertinent information required by the police department concerning each and every person who shall be employed by the applicant in such business or take part therein, in any manner whatsoever and the applicant shall keep any and all records of such business as shall be required by the police department and shall submit copies thereof to the police department as may be required. 
(Ord. 129 §5.18.020, 1985)  
Chapter 5.19 - TAXICABS AND RENT CARS 
 
5.19.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases used herein are defined as follows: 
A.  "Driver" means every person in charge of or operating any taxicab or rent car, either as agent, employee, or otherwise, under the direction of the owner or as owner. 
B.  "Owner" means every person having use or control of any taxicab or rent car, whether as owner, lessee, or otherwise. 
C.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, association, corporation or other organization owning, operating or proposing to operate any taxicab or rent car in the town. 
D.  "Rent car" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle, excluding taxicabs, operated at rates per hour or a flat fee per trip and not equipped with a taximeter, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the town and not over a defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the town, and such vehicle is routed as to destination under the direction of a passenger or of a person hiring same. 
E.  "Street" means any place commonly used for the purpose of public travel. 
F.  "Taxicab" means every automobile or motor-propelled vehicle operated at rates per mile or for wait-time, or for both, and equipped with a taximeter, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over the public streets of the town and not over a defined route, irrespective of whether the operations extend beyond the boundary limits of the town, and such vehicle is routed as to destination under the direction of a passenger or of a person hiring the same. 
G.  "Taximeter" means any mechanical instrument, appliance, device or machine by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying vehicle is mechanically calculated, either for distance traveled or time consumed, or both, and upon which instrument, appliance, device or machine such charge is indicated by figures. 
(Ord. 242 §2, 1995; Ord. 129 §5.19.010, 1985)  
5.19.020 - Owner's business license—Required. 
It shall be unlawful to operate any taxicab or rent car business in the town unless the owner or official representative thereof shall apply for and obtain a business license to do so, which business license shall be applied for, granted and in effect, all in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 242 §3, 1995: Ord. 129 §5.19.020, 1985)  
5.19.030 - Owner's business license—Application. 
The application for an owner's business license shall be in writing, and shall be filed with the police department. Each applicant shall provide the following: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  The name and address of the business to be approved by the town planning director; 
C.  The number of vehicles actually owned and the number of vehicles actually operated by the owner on the date of application; 
D.  The make, model, year, license plate number and description of each vehicle operated by owner as part of the business; 
E.  Proof of valid insurance in the following amounts and coverages: comprehensive automobile and general liability insurance policy in an amount no less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single limit per occurrence; issued by an insurer approved by the town's risk manager; naming the town and in their capacities as such, its officers, employees and agents as insured; covering all losses and damages as specified in this section; stipulating that the policy will operate as primary insurance and that no other insurance will be called on to contribute to a loss covered thereunder; and providing that no cancellation, change in coverage, or expiration by the insurance company or the insured shall occur during the term of the license, without thirty (30) days' written notice to the police chief prior to the effective date of such cancellation or change in coverage; 
F.  The applicant shall provide his or her fingerprints as directed by the police department; and 
G.  An application fee, as set forth in the resolution establishing fees and charges for various municipal services, shall accompany each application for an owner's business license. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 1, 6-10-2014; Ord. 242 §4, 1995: Ord. 129 §5.19.030, 1985)  
5.19.031 - Taxicab business license. 
Upon receiving an application for a taxicab business license, the chief of police shall determine, based on substantial evidence, whether the public health, safety and welfare would not be harmed by the issuance of the license. The application shall be denied where the results of an investigation by the police department show that the applicant has any of the following: 
A.  Been convicted within five years prior to application of any crime involving moral turpitude or for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs or for reckless driving; 
B.  A proposed taxicab is in an unsafe condition; or 
C.  Falsified any information in the application. 
(Ord. No. 542, § 2, 6-10-2014; Ord. No. 404, § 1, 9-9-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 404, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 2003, repealed § 5.19.031 in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out and subsequently amended. Prior to amendment, § 5.19.031 pertained to Owner's business license—Investigation and approval and derived from Ord. No. 242, § 5, adopted 1995.  
5.19.035 - Taxi driver's license—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate any taxicab or rent car in the town unless the driver shall apply for and obtain a taxi driver's license to do so. Such license, issued by the town, shall be in the driver's possession at all times while operating a taxicab or rent car within the town limits and shall be presented to any California peace officer upon demand. Inspection of the taxi driver's license by a California peace officer may be accomplished whenever and wherever the taxicab or rent car is being operated within the town without any other probable cause for action by the peace officer. 
(Ord. 242 §6, 1995)  
5.19.036 - Taxicab driver's license application. 
The application for a taxicab driver's license shall be in writing and shall be filed with the police department along with a certified copy of the applicant's department of motor vehicles driver's license status print out dated within 30 days of the application and the fees established by town council resolution. Each application shall provide the following: 
A.  The name, current residential address and date of birth of the applicant. 
B.  The number of applicant's valid California driver's license, which is properly classed or endorsed by the state of California Department of Motor Vehicles to operate a taxicab or rent car; 
C.  A full set of his or her fingerprints as directed by the police department. 
The police department shall investigate the background of each applicant and deny the application if the applicant has falsified any information in the application or has been convicted within five years before the application date of any crime involving moral turpitude or for operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs or for reckless driving, and which conviction or convictions should, in the judgment of the chief of police, render such applicant not a competent person to operate a taxicab in the town. If, after being informed by the police department that an applicant is not a competent person to operate a taxicab, the taxicab business owner shall not employ the applicant in such capacity. 
Each time a taxicab business owner proposes to hire a new driver, the owner shall immediately submit the information required by the provisions of this section to the police department. Owner shall also notify the police department when a driver terminates his or her employment. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 2, 9-9-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 404, § 2, adopted Sept. 9, 2003, repealed § 5.19.036, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment § 5.19.036, pertained to Taxi driver's license—Application and derived from Ord. No. 242, § 7, adopted 1995.  
5.19.037 - Operation without a taxi driver's license. 
Operation of a taxicab or rent vehicle within the town without possession of a valid town issued taxi driver's license is declared to be unlawful. A taxicab or rent vehicle found to be operating by a driver without a valid taxi driver's license shall, upon issuance of a citation or other appropriate action being taken, be impounded and stored and the owner's business license to operate a taxicab or rent vehicle business within the town shall be immediately suspended as described within section 5.19.050. Release of the impounded vehicle shall be pursuant to the normal procedure for the release of any vehicle towed and stored by the police department. 
(Ord. 242 §8, 1995; Ord. No. 401, § 3, 8-26-2003)  
5.19.038 - Drug and alcohol test. 
Pursuant to Government Code § 53075.5, prior to the issuance or renewal of a taxi driver's license, the applicant shall be required to pass a mandatory drug and alcohol test conducted in compliance with Part 40 of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. A certified copy of the test results shall be delivered to the police department by the applicant. If an applicant fails to pass the test, his or her application shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 3, 9-9-2003)  
5.19.039 - Compliance with California Vehicle Code. 
All taxicabs shall comply with all the requirements of the California Vehicle Code. In addition, all taxicabs shall have fare rates and charges posted in a conspicuous place in clear view of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 4, 9-9-2003)  
5.19.050 - Denial, suspension or revocation of license by police department. 
The police department may suspend or revoke any license to operate a taxicab business or to drive a taxicab in the event a licensee has provided false information to it, or the police department determines, based upon competent evidence, that it would be harmful to the public health, safety and welfare to permit the licensee to operate a taxicab business or to drive a taxicab within the town. The licensee may exercise his or her right to appeal such denial and/or suspension to the town manager within five days of the licensee being notified of the action relating to the appeal. The town manager shall conduct a hearing on the appeal within 15 days and at least five days prior thereto send notice to the appellant. The town manger, subsequent to the hearing, shall affirm, modify or rescind the action of the police department. 
If the appellant is dissatisfied with the decision of the town manager, the appellant shall have the right to appeal the matter further to the town council by filing a written notice of appeal with the town clerk within ten days of the town manager's decision. The town council will then hold a hearing on the matter as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 5, 9-9-2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 404, § 5, adopted Sept. 9, 2003, repealed § 5.19.050, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment § 5.19.050, pertained to denial or suspension of license by police department and derived from Ord. No. 242, § 10, adopted 1995; and Ord. No. 129, § 5.19.050, adopted 1985.  
5.19.051 - Appeals. 
The applicant or licensee may exercise his or her right to appeal any denial, suspension or revocation to the town manager within five days of the applicant or licensee being notified of the action relating to the appeal. The town manager shall review the appeal within 15 days. The town manager shall affirm, modify or rescind the action of the police department. 
If the appellant is dissatisfied with the decision of the town manager, the appellant shall have the right to appeal the matter further to the town council by filing a written notice of appeal with the town clerk within ten days of the town manager's decision. The town council will then hold a hearing on the matter as soon as practicable. 
(Ord. No. 404, § 6, 9-9-2003)  
Chapter 5.20 - SOUND TRUCKS AND SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Sound-amplifying equipment" means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or other sound. "Sound-amplifying equipment" shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
B.  "Sound truck" means any vehicle having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound-amplifying equipment. 
(Ord. 129 §5.20.010, 1985)  
5.20.020 - License required—Fee. 
No person shall use, or cause to be used, a sound truck with its sound-amplifying equipment in operation in the town before filing an application, along with the fee set forth in the council resolution, with the police department. This shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following: 
A.  Name and home address of the applicant; 
B.  Address of place of business of applicant; 
C.  License number, if any, of the sound truck to be used by the applicant; 
D.  Name and address of the person who owns the sound truck; 
E.  Name and address of the person having direct charge of the sound truck; 
F.  Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck; 
G.  The purpose for which the sound truck will be used; 
H.  A general statement as to the section or sections of the town in which the sound truck will be used; 
I.  The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck; 
J.  The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck; 
K.  A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be used; 
L.  The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying equipment to be used in or on the sound truck. State the following: 
1.  The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced, 
2.  The approximate maximum distance for which the sound will be thrown from the sound truck. 
(Ord. 129 §5.20.020, 1985)  
5.20.030 - Changes in application information. 
All persons using, or causing to be used, sound trucks shall amend any application filed pursuant to Section 5.20.020 within forty-eight hours after any change in the information therein furnished. 
(Ord. 129 §5.20.030, 1985)  
5.20.040 - Possession of certified statement. 
The police department shall return to each applicant under Section 5.20.020 one copy of the application approved by the chief of police or his designee. This copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound truck at all times while the sound truck's sound-amplifying equipment is in operation and the copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any law officer of the town or state upon request. 
(Ord. 129 §5.20.040, 1985)  
5.20.050 - Regulations for use. 
Use of sound trucks in the town with sound-amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations: 
A.  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech. 
B.  Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays, when no operations are authorized. The permitted four hours of operation are between the hours of eleven-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m., and between the hours of four-thirty p.m. and six-thirty p.m. 
C.  Sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour except when the truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic the sound-amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each such stop. 
D.  Sound shall not be issued within one hundred yards of hospitals, schools, churches or courthouses. 
E.  The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous. 
F.  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of one hundred feet from the sound truck and so that the volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
G.  No sound-amplifying equipment shall be operated with an excess of fifteen watts of power in the last stage of amplification. 
(Ord. 129 §5.20.050, 1985)  
Chapter 5.21 - VIOLATIONS 
 
5.21.010 - Violation—Penalty. 
With the exception of the provisions of chapter 5.05 [retail firearms sales establishment], chapter 5.12 [bingo games], and chapter 5.16 [cardrooms] any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code § 36900. Any additional violation of this title within one year of the first violation may be prosecuted by the town attorney as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or six months in the county jail; and provided, however, the town attorney shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 4, 8-26-2003; Ord. 129 §5.21.010, 1985)  
5.21.020 - Effect on past actions—Unexpired licenses. 
Neither the adoption of this title nor its superseding of any portion of any other title of the town shall in any manner be construed to effect prosecution for violation of any other title committed prior to the effective date hereof, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any title to be posted, filed, or deposited, and all rights and obligations thereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
Where a license has been issued to any person by the town and the fee paid for the business for which the license has been issued under the provisions of any title heretofore enacted and the term of such license has not expired, then the license fee prescribed for said business by this title shall not be payable until the expiration of the term of such unexpired license. 
(Ord. 129 §5.22.010, 1985)  
Chapter 5.22 - BUSINESS LICENSE 
 
5.22.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for and establish an annual business license program to promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the town by providing information about business activity being conducted within town limits. This chapter is not intended to impose any form of taxation on the business community nor to collect in fees more money than is necessary to recover the administrative costs of processing an application for the issuance or renewal of a business license certificate. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1, 3-13-2018)  
5.22.020 - Definition. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
A.  "Business" means any for-profit, nonprofit (with paid employees and a physical place of business), commercial, industrial, professional operation, occupation, home based business, work, trade, or any other business whether provided in a physical location or by a mobile service within the jurisdiction of the town, except the types of activities identified in Section 5.22.070. 
B.  "Doing business" means conducting or carrying on an activity or enterprise by which goods or services are provided to others. 
C.  "Home based business" means a home occupation or a residential rental project consisting of two (2) or more units. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1, 3-13-2018)  
5.22.030 - Business license. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of Title 5, all businesses doing business within the town jurisdiction shall register annually with the town. Existing businesses shall register no later than January 1, 2019. All new businesses shall register before conducting any activities or providing any goods or services within the town. After the initial license, each business shall renew their business license annually. A business operating in another city that has no physical location in town, but provides services to town residents or businesses shall be required to obtain a business license from the town. A business operating in another city which only provides deliveries to town residents or businesses shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1, 3-13-2018)  
5.22.040 - License information. 
The business license required by this chapter shall be in addition to any other business license requirement of Title 5. All businesses shall provide the required information on the application, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
• Name of owner; 
• Mailing and site address; 
• Assessor's parcel number of business site; 
• Contact name and phone numbers, including emergency contacts; 
• Type of business/specific activities being conducted on premises; 
• Alarm company contact (if applicable); 
• Building security information (lights, back entries, etc.); 
• Whether hazardous materials or chemicals will be used and/or stored at the business location; 
• Such other and further information as is deemed necessary to enforce the laws described and administer provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1, 3-13-2018)  
5.22.050 - Number of licenses. 
In instances where space within an office building, shopping center, warehouse, department store or other structure or property is leased for business or commercial use, each tenant of the premises operating an enterprise required to be licensed hereunder shall apply for and obtain a general business license; provided, that aggregations of identical businesses (such as, but not limited to, antique malls, barber and beauty salons, offices housing multiple independent agents such as insurance or real estate, or other similar enterprises) in one location shall require only one general business license for the location. 
When a particular business has more than one fixed location or branch within the incorporated area, a separate general business license shall be required for each location or branch. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1, 3-13-2018)  
5.22.060 - Fee. 
All new license applicants shall pay a forty dollar ($40.00) administrative fee to the town. All renewal license applicants shall pay a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) annual administrative fee to the town. The annual fee shall not be increased except by amendment of this section. Any business that obtains a license prior to July 1 ,2019 shall be exempt from paying the forty dollar ($40.00) fee, but shall be required to renew their license annually and pay the twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee. A business that is required to obtain a special license under another chapter of this Title 5 shall be exempt from paying the fee under this section. A home-based business that is operated entirely out of a place of residence shall be exempt from paying the fee under this section. A financial institution that pays the bank and corporation tax to the State of California shall be exempt from paying the fee under this section. A church shall be exempt from paying the fee under this section. 
(Ord. No. 574, § 1, 1-23-2019; Ord. No. 568, § 1, 3-13-2018)  
5.22.070 - Exemption. 
A business license shall not be required for, and the provisions of this chapter shall not be otherwise applicable to the following enterprises: 
A.  Libraries: Libraries, whether publicly or privately operated, are exempt from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Agriculture: The following agricultural activities are exempt: agricultural pursuits consisting of the growing of crops, raising of livestock, and dairying, including auxiliary and ancillary uses incidental to the operation of a farm or ranch, consisting of the purchase and storage of substances, materials, supplies, animal feeds and produce, and the marketing of farm products; provided, however, that a general business license shall be required in connection with any wholesaling, processing, storage or manufacturing use which involves assembly of the products of multiple farms or ranches by a cooperative or other business enterprise for marketing distribution. 
C.  Businesses located outside Paradise, that deliver to Paradise addresses, but provide no other service: A business located outside the town limits that delivers products to Paradise addresses, but provides no other service shall be exempt. 
D.  Service clubs: Groups identified as service clubs, whose membership is made of up of volunteers and who gather to serve their community and whose aim is to promote community welfare shall be exempt. This includes groups such as the Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks, Moose International, local garden clubs, scouting organizations, etc. 
E.  Nonprofit organizations with no paid employees or physical place of business: Nonprofit tax-exempt organizations that do not have paid employees, or which do not have a physical place of business shall be exempt from obtaining a business license. 
F.  Vendors at community events: Vendors who participate in town approved and permitted events shall be exempt from obtaining a business license. 
G.  Residential rental properties: Residential rental properties with no more than one unit shall be exempt from obtaining a business license. 
H.  Persons exempt from business license fees pursuant to federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1, 3-13-2018)  
5.22.080 - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful and an infraction for any person to violate this chapter. If a person is found guilty of violating this chapter, the fine shall be in accordance with Government Code Section 36900. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1, 3-13-2018)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS  
Chapter 6.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
6.04.010 - Applicability. 
For the purpose of this title, the words and phrases set out in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. 
(Ord. 57 § 1(part), 1982)  
6.04.020 - Animal. 
"Animal" means all mammals, fowl, birds, reptiles and fish. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 § 1(A), 1982)  
6.04.022 - Cat. 
"Cat" means any domesticated member of the feline family of either sex, of any age. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.04.023 - Cat kennel. 
"Cat kennel" means any lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises, where five or more cats over the age of four months are kept. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.04.025 - Dog kennel. 
"Dog kennel" means any lot, building, structure, enclosure, or premises, where five or more dogs over the age of four months are kept. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.04.030 - Breedable condition. 
"Breedable condition" means the condition of a female dog commonly referred to as being "in heat." 
(Ord. 57 § 1(B), 1982)  
6.04.040 - Impounding fees. 
"Impounding fees" shall be fixed by the town council resolution and required to be paid for the release of an impounded animal. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 § 1(C), 1982)  
6.04.041 - Impounded. 
"Impounded" means having been received into the custody of the town or into the custody of the director of animal control or any authorized agent or representative thereof. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.04.042 - Kennel. 
"Kennel" means any lot, building, structure or premises whereon or wherein five or more dogs or five or more cats over the age of four months are kept or maintained for any purpose. Kennel definition shall not be construed as applying to a duly licensed veterinary hospital or public animal shelter. 
(Ord. 200 § 1(part), 1990: Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.04.045 - Pet shop. 
"Pet shop" means any indoor boarding and sale of dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles, and/or other animals. Pet shop definition shall not be construed as applying to a duly licensed veterinary hospital or public animal shelter. 
(Ord. 200 § 1(part), 1990: Ord. 178 § 3(C), 1988: Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.04.050 - Leash. 
"Leash" means a flexible rope, strap, cord or chain, not over six feet in length, of such strength and design as to be capable of restraining the dog which it is being used to lead or restrain. 
(Ord. 57 § 1(D), 1982)  
6.04.060 - Owner. 
"Owner" means any person, firm, association, corporation, owning, harboring, having control, custody or possession of any animal and in the case of an animal which is owned by a minor, the parent or guardian of the minor shall be considered the owner. 
(Ord. 123 § 1 (part), 1984: Ord. 57 § 1(E), 1982)  
6.04.070 - Private premises. 
"Private premises" means any place or premises not publicly owned. 
(Ord. 57 § 1(F), 1982)  
6.04.080 - Public place. 
"Public place" means any public building, street, alley, sidewalk, park, way or other premises publicly owned. 
(Ord. 57 § 1(G), 1982)  
6.04.090 - Rabies area. 
"Rabies area" means that area within the state as determined by the Director of the State Department of Public Health, as provided by Division 3, Chapter 3 of the Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. 57 § 1(H), 1982)  
6.04.100 - Rabies vaccination. 
"Rabies vaccination" means the injection with a canine rabies vaccine of a type approved under the provisions of Section 2606.4 of Title 17 of the California Administrative Code. 
(Ord. 57 § 1(I), 1982)  
6.04.110 - Running at large. 
"Running at large" means the presence of any dog in or upon any public place, or any private place or premises without the consent of the owner or occupant of such private premises, unless restrained by a leash under the control of a person physically capable of retaining control of the dog, or tethered upon such private premises to a fixture in such manner as not to create a nuisance. 
(Ord. 57 § 1(J), 1982)  
Chapter 6.08 - DOG LICENSES 
 
6.08.010 - Required—Impoundment generally. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to own or keep any dog in the town over the age of four months for a longer period than thirty days after it has attained the age of four months, and in the case of a dog that is brought into the town that is over four months of age, for a longer period than thirty days after it is brought into the town, without having obtained a license therefor, as provided in this chapter; except, that in the case where a dog brought into the town bears an unexpired license issued by any other jurisdiction, the owner shall apply for a replacement tag pursuant to Section 6.08.090. 
B.  Any dog over the age of four months unlicensed and unvaccinated as provided in this title, or found to be running at large, whether licensed or not, shall be impounded in the town animal shelter, subject to sale, retention, disposition or release as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 57 § 3(A), 1982)  
6.08.020 - Dog licenses—Fees. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Government Code Section 38792, the following license period and fee requirement shall apply: 
A.  The license period shall be year around based on the rabies vaccination expiration date. 
B.  A dog may be licensed for a period not to exceed three (3) years. 
C.  Fees for licenses required by this chapter shall be fixed and determined by council resolution. Any owner failing to renew a dog license shall be subject to an additional late fee as prescribed by council resolution. The license fee for a dog certified to be spayed or neutered shall be fifty (50) percent of the fee for an unaltered dog. 
D.  A puppy license shall be available for all dogs aged four (4) months to one (1) year. The license period for the puppy license shall be one (1) year. The fee for a puppy license shall be the same as for an altered dog. 
(Ord. No. 544, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. 306 § 1, 1998: Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 57 § 3(B), 1982) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 544, § 1, adopted July 8, 2014, amended § 6.08.020, formerly titled "Period—Fees," to read as herein set out, but at the time of supplementation was not yet effective. Said ordinance shall take effect Aug. 7, 2014.  
6.08.025 - Waiver of late fee. 
Any request for a waiver of the late fee under Section 6.08.020 shall be made in writing to the supervising animal control officer, who may grant the request after one of the following determinations has been made: 
A.  The licensee has moved during the last licensing period. 
B.  The licensee was not in town during the renewal period. 
C.  The licensee was incapacitated during the renewal period. 
(Ord. 284 § 1, 1997)  
6.08.030 - Application. 
A.  Application for dog licenses shall be made at either the office of the administrative services director or such other office or location as is designated by the town manager or by contract. A license tag shall be issued and delivered to an applicant upon receipt of payment of the required fee. 
B.  Every person applying for a dog license must exhibit a certificate issued by a person licensed by the state to practice veterinary medicine, which certificate shall show that the dog for which the license shall be issued, either: 
1.  Has been vaccinated for rabies; or 
2.  Should not be so vaccinated by reason of age, infirmity or other disability. 
Such exemption shall be valid for a period not to exceed one year. A license for any dog shall not be issued unless and until either such certificate is exhibited. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984: Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 73 § 2(part), 1982: Ord. 57 § 3(C), 1982)  
6.08.040 - Transfer. 
A.  Where ownership of a duly licensed dog is transferred, the transferring owner shall cause such license to be transferred to the new owner by making application therefor in the same manner as required by Section 6.08.030 when applying for a new license, and paying the transfer fee fixed by resolution of the town council. 
B.  A transferring owner who fails to comply with this section shall be presumed to still be the owner of such dog and subject to all the provisions of this title applicable to owners of dogs. 
(Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 57 § 3(D), 1982)  
6.08.050 - Contents. 
The dog license, issued pursuant to this title, shall set forth a description of the dog licensed, the year in which issued, the date of rabies vaccination, the veterinarian's certificate number or the serum number, the sex of the dog, the number of the license, and a statement showing the amount of the fee and that the same has been paid, and the name and address of the owner. 
(Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 57 § 3(E), 1982)  
6.08.060 - Exhibition upon request. 
It is unlawful for any person required to have a license pursuant to this title to fail, refuse or neglect to exhibit the same, upon request, to the director of animal control or other authorized person. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984: Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 57 § 3(F), 1982)  
6.08.070 - Tags—Display on dog. 
The owner of a licensed dog shall cause the license tag issued for such dog to be affixed by a permanent metal fastening to the collar or harness on the dog in such a way that the tag may be easily seen by the director of animal control or other authorized person. It shall be the duty of the owner of a licensed dog to cause the dog collar or harness on which the license tag is attached to be worn by such dog at all times. Any dog not wearing a license tag as provided in this section shall be impounded in the town animal shelter subject to retention, sale or disposition as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984: Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 57 § 3(G), 1982)  
6.08.080 - Tags—Counterfeit. 
It is unlawful for any person either to imitate or counterfeit the license tags provided for in this title or knowingly to use any imitation or counterfeit of such tags. 
(Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 57 § 3(H), 1982)  
6.08.090 - Tags—Replacement. 
In the event that a current license tag is lost, the owner shall promptly apply for the issuance of a replacement tag. At the time of applying for the replacement tag, the owner shall surrender the license pertaining thereto and shall pay a fee as prescribed by town council resolution. 
(Ord. 93 § 2(part), 1983: Ord. 57 § 3(I), 1982)  
6.08.100 - License, taxes, fees, right to sue for recovery. 
A.  The amount of any license tax or penalty imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the town. 
B.  Any person owning, having or keeping any dog in this town without having obtained a license to do so shall be liable to an action in the name of this town in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any license tax imposed by and required by this chapter to be paid for the privilege of keeping and having such dog. 
C.  It shall be the duty of the director of animal control to cause a complaint to be filed against any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter and to cause an action to be brought against any person failing to pay any license tax required by the provisions of this chapter for the recovery of such tax. 
D.  Such action shall be cumulative and shall not be deemed as a bar to or a waiver of the right of this town to prosecute any person for a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.08.110 - Optional identification license for cats. 
In order to provide a method of identifying cats, a license may be obtained. The fee for such license shall be determined from time to time by the town council. This section shall not require the licensing of cats, but merely provides for their optional licensing. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
Chapter 6.12 - RUNNING AT LARGE—NUISANCES 
 
6.12.010 - Animals at large. 
It is unlawful for any person owning, or having possession, charge, custody or control of any animal, except cats which are not in heat or season, to cause, permit or allow such animal to stray, run, or in any manner be at large upon any public land, or any public place; provided, however, a cat at large should wear, at all times, a tag with the name, address and telephone number of its owner. The term "at large" as defined in Section 6.04.110 shall not be deemed to apply where the following circumstances are present: 
A.  Where a dog is being shown or participating in a dog show for which a permit has been granted by appropriate town authority, and while such dog is being shown and participating under the control of the owner or custodian of such dog; 
B.  Where in an area that has been set aside and designated as a dog exercise area in the town by the town council, and a dog is being run or exercised in such area under the control of the owner or custodian. 
(Ord. 334, § 1, 1999: Ord. 123, § 1(part), 1984: Ord. 57, § 4(A), 1982)  
6.12.015 - Restraint of dogs. 
A.  Every person owning or having charge, care, custody or control of any dog shall keep such dog exclusively upon its own premises; provided, however, that a dog may be taken off its premises: 
1.  When the dog is under the care of a person physically capable of controlling and restraining the dog with a chain or leash not exceeding six feet in length. 
2.  When the dog is enclosed inside a vehicle or within the rear bed of a truck in a manner that physically prevents the dog from moving beyond the body of the vehicle or truck. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to leave an unattended dog tethered upon or along any public right-of-way. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, every violation of any of the provisions of this section shall be punishable as an infraction with a fine up to $500.00. 
(Ord. No. 443, § 1, 1-10-2006: Ord. 123, § 1(part), 1984)  
6.12.020 - Nuisances—Committing—Curbing dogs. 
No owner or person having the possession, custody or control of a dog within the town shall allow or permit such dog to commit a nuisance upon any public or any private property; provided, that this shall not apply to street gutters outside of pedestrian ways, it being the intent of this section that it shall be the duty of all persons having control of a dog to curb such dog when necessary. 
(Ord. 57, § 4(B), 1982)  
6.12.030 - Nuisances—Designated. 
Without limitation as to the general provisions of Section 6.12.020, the following specific acts and conditions committed by a dog are hereby declared to be unlawful and to constitute a public nuisance, and the owner of a dog committing any of the following shall be subject to the penalties provided by Section 6.12.040: 
A.  Being in or upon any public building or public or private school grounds, except when authorized by appropriate officials, and excepting further, "Seeing Eye" dogs while guiding, in attendance with, or waiting for a blind person; 
B.  Annoying, harassing, nipping, mauling or biting any person or persons; 
C.  A female dog in breedable condition being within the town, except when confined in or upon the premises of its owner; 
D.  Damaging or destroying any property or thing of value; 
E.  Creating a noise in a neighborhood by howling, barking or making unusual sounds that disturb two or more persons residing in different residences during three separate days within a seven day period; 
F.  Leaving excretion on any property other than the property of its owner. 
(Ord. 339, §§ 1, 2, 2000)  
6.12.040 - Violation of Section 6.12.030. 
Notwithstanding Section 6.32.040, any person violating any provision of Section 6.12.030 shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be punished in accordance with the fines set forth in Government Code 36900. 
(Ord. 339, §§ 1, 3, 2000)  
6.12.050 - Dogs—Dog defecation to be removed by owner. 
It is unlawful for the owner or person having custody of any dog to fail to immediately remove and dispose of in a sanitary manner, by placing in a closed or sealed container and depositing in a trash receptacle, any feces deposited by such dog upon public or private property, without the consent of the public or private owner or person in lawful possession of the property, other than property owned or controlled by the owner or person having custody of such dog. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a blind person being accompanied by a guide dog. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, violation shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.12.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 484, § 1, adopted July 15, 2008, repealed § 6.12.060, which pertained to vicious animals on private premises.  
6.12.070 - Cost of capture. 
In the event it is necessary for the director of animal control services to cause the impoundment of any large quadruped domestic animal or any other animal as defined in this title, there shall be collected from the owner of such animal in addition to all other fees, a capture fee which shall be the actual cost of the capture including but not limited to, the salaries of the town personnel. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.12.075 - Redeeming impounded animals other than dogs. 
A.  When the director of animal control, under the provisions of this title, has impounded any animal for at least seventy-two hours and the animal has not been redeemed, the director of animal control shall be free to dispose of such animal. If, in the opinion of the director of animal control, the value of the animal will exceed the expense of keeping it, he shall advertise in the official newspaper that such animal is for sale. If the animal is not redeemed prior to the sale, the animal shall be sold for cash to the highest bidder. 
B.  The director of animal control services may not transfer title to any animal to any institution engaged in the diagnosis or treatment of human or animal disease, or in research for the advancement of veterinary, dental, medical, or biologic science, or in the testing or diagnosis, improvement or standardization of laboratory specimens, biologic products, pharmaceuticals or drugs. 
C.  When any animal is impounded, the owner or any person interested therein may redeem the animal upon paying to the director of animal control services a fee as determined and set by resolution of the town council, together with a further sum that is equal to the actual cost per day for the keep of such animal for each day such animal is impounded. If the animal has been offered for sale through public advertising, the owner or the person redeeming such animal shall pay the advertising costs in addition to the redemption fees set forth in this title. The director of animal control shall transmit such fees to the finance director. 
(Ord. 127 § 1(part), 1984: Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.12.080 - Fowls not to run at large. 
It is declared a nuisance and no person shall suffer or permit any permitted birds and/or fowl, owned or controlled by him or it, to run or fly at large or go upon the premises of any other person in the town. Fowl may only be kept in locations and in a manner specifically permitted by provisions of the zoning and land use regulations established within this code. 
(Ord. 216 § 7, 1992: Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.12.085 - Fowl and animals other than dogs—Loud noises prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm, association, corporation or entity to own, possess or harbor any animal other than a dog including fowl which howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds during the day or night at frequent and/or extended periods of time so as to be a nuisance to one or more persons occupying a house or houses in any immediate neighborhood thereby preventing such person or persons from the comfortable enjoyment of their homes. 
(Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
Chapter 6.13 - POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS, DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS ANIMALS 
 
6.13.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter is intended to reduce the risk of attacks or bites by dogs and other animals. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
1.  Mitigations. The following circumstances shall be deemed to be "mitigations." Mitigation shall be a factor in consideration of whether an animal is potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious and will be weighed with other circumstances in making such determination, including, but not limited to, circumstances such as, the nature of a trespass, the age of a trespasser, and the training of the animal in the use of deadly force. Mitigation shall not be considered if the animal has been trained to attack in a manner violating any other provision of law. 
2.  A person is "peaceably and lawfully upon the private property of an owner or possessor of the animal" when he or she is on such property in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by the laws of this state or any city or county, or by the laws or postal regulations of the United States, or when he or she is on such property upon invitation, expressed or implied. 
3.  "Proper enclosure of an animal" means that a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall be securely and humanely confined on the owner's property in either of the following: 
a.  Within a fence line or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and which is suitable to confine a potentially dangerous animal in conjunction with other measures which shall be taken by the owner or keeper of the animal, such as keeping the animal held securely in an enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed in order to prevent the animal from escaping; or 
b.  In an enclosed and locked (with a key or combination lock) pen or structure, suitable to prevent the animal from escaping or the entry of unauthorized persons. The pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top over entire structure which protects the animal from the elements. All sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two (2) feet unless the bottom is adequately secured to the sides. The structure must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and provide adequate light and ventilation. The enclosure shall be not less than five (5) feet by ten (10) feet, and not less than six (6) feet high. 
4.  "Severe injury" means any physical injury to a human being or other animal that results in death, a muscle tear, a broken bone or a laceration requiring sutures. 
5.  "When unprovoked" means person who has suffered the injury has not caused nor been a party to any act of teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, which act of teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting resulted in the animal inflicting injury on that person. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.030 - Investigation, confinement, seizures and impoundment. 
A.  Whenever an animal suspected of being potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious is reported, an animal control officer shall investigate the circumstances, and if he or she finds that the animal shows a propensity to attack, bite, scratch, or harass people, domestic animals or livestock without provocation, or displays any other such behavior, he or she shall notify the owner in writing, stating all the facts and circumstances. The animal control officer may order that the animal be kept within a proper enclosure, securely leashed or otherwise controlled. 
B.  If the animal control officer has probable cause to believe an animal may be designated as "potentially dangerous," "dangerous" or "vicious" under this chapter, the owner is unwilling or unable to properly contain or control the animal immediately and the animal poses an immediate threat to the safety of persons, domestic animals or livestock, the animal may be seized, pending the outcome of hearing or appeal; or during the period of time the owner requires to comply with any requirements of this chapter. 
C.  The animal's owner shall be charged for all costs incurred or fees applicable with respect to impoundment under this section unless a finding is made that the animal is not potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious. An animal held under the provisions of this section shall not be released until the owner pays all charges as specified in this code. If the owner refuses to pay such charges, the animal shall be treated as unredeemed by the owner, and animal control shall dispose of the animal pursuant to this code. Disposal of the animal does not release the owner from his or her responsibility to pay the keeping charges. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.040 - Potentially dangerous animals. 
A.  Any animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, is a potentially dangerous animal if, on three (3) separate occasions within a twelve-month period, the animal has been observed uncontrolled and off its owner's or custodian's premises by an animal control officer or any peace officer or has been properly impounded three (3) times within a twelve-month period by an animal control officer. 
B.  An animal control officer may issue a notice designating an animal exhibiting the aforementioned characteristics as potentially dangerous and may recommend that the animal's owner take certain actions to prevent future injury by the animal, notwithstanding exceptions as provided for in Section 31626 of the Food and Agricultural Code. Such designation shall be subject to a hearing as provided for in Section 6.13.080B. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.050 - Dangerous animals. 
A.  Any animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any of the following behavior, is rebuttably presumed dangerous: 
1.  Any animal previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous animal which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, displays the behavior described in Section 6.13.040, or is maintained in violation of Section 6.13.080C; 
2.  Any animal that chases or approaches a person, domestic animal or livestock, anywhere other than on the property of the owner or custodian, in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, including, but not limited to, behavior such as growling or snarling; 
3.  Any animal which, when unprovoked, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the animal are off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal; 
4.  Any animal which, when unprovoked, bites, injures, or causes injury to, a person or domestic animal or livestock causing a less severe injury than as defined in Section 6.13.020; or 
5.  Any animal which, when unprovoked, has seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury attacking any domestic animal or livestock off the property of the owner or keeper of the animal. 
B.  An animal control officer may issue a notice designating an animal exhibiting the aforementioned characteristics as dangerous and may recommend that the animal's owner take certain actions to prevent future injury by the animal, notwithstanding exceptions as provided for in Section 31626 of the Food and Agricultural Code. Such designation shall be subject to a hearing as provided for in Section 6.13.080B. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.060 - Vicious animal. 
Any animal, except a dog assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any of the following behavior, is rebuttably presumed dangerous: 
A.  Any animal which, when unprovoked, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being, in a place where such person is conducting himself or herself peacefully and lawfully; 
B.  Any animal which, when unprovoked, inflicts severe injury on or kills a domestic animal or livestock; 
C.  An animal which has been trained to fight or which is owned or harbored for this purpose; 
D.  Any animal previously determined to be and currently listed as a dangerous animal which continues the behavior described in Section 6.13.050, or is maintained in violation of Section 6.13.080C. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.070 - Destruction of vicious animal. 
After the notice and hearing set forth in Section 6.13.080B, the hearing officer may further find, in writing with supporting substantial evidence, that an animal is so vicious, or that other special circumstances exist, such that maintaining the animal poses a substantial threat to health and safety of human beings, domestic animals, or livestock. Ten (10) business days after mailing notice of a finding under this section, the animal control department may dispose of the vicious animal by humanely destroying it by injection. This section shall not be applicable to appeals to the superior court. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.080 - Determination of potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal—Hearing. 
A.  An animal which exhibits any behavior described in Sections 6.13.040, 6.13.050 or 6.13.060, may be respectively determined to be a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal. The animal's status shall be established after a hearing as provided in this section. Proceedings may be instituted by: 
1.  Observation by an animal control officer or police officer; 
2.  A complaint under penalty of perjury by a person or persons, at least eighteen (18) years of age, who observed the animal's behavior. 
B.  Hearings for classification as "potentially dangerous," "dangerous," or "vicious" shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  The owner shall be given written notice, by first-class certified mail or by personal service, of the facts which are the basis of the complaint and notice of a hearing. The owner shall be notified of the restrictions which will apply to the animal if it is classified as a potentially dangerous, dangerous or vicious animal. 
2.  The owner may waive his or her right to a hearing by filing a written waiver with the animal control department, whereupon the animal control department shall make the findings and apply the sanctions provided in this chapter. 
3.  Any hearing shall be set not less than five (5) business days nor more than fifteen (15) business days after the notice was mailed to the owner by first-class return receipt mail or the owner was personally served, unless the animal has been seized, in which case the hearing shall be conducted not later than ten (10) days after the seizure. 
4.  If the owner fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing shall nevertheless proceed, and an appropriate order shall be issued. 
5.  The public hearing shall be conducted before a hearing officer. The appointment of the hearing officer shall be by the town manager. Any person designated to serve as a hearing officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. The town manager shall promulgate rules and procedures as are necessary to establish a list of qualified persons who are capable of acting on behalf of the town as hearing officers and for the disqualification of hearing officers. 
6.  The hearing officer may continue a hearing, based on good cause, as established by one of the parties to the hearing or the hearing officer. 
7.  The hearing officer shall consider all relevant evidence presented at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply. The hearing officer shall also consider circumstances of mitigation, as well as the owner's and animal's history. If the hearing is held as a result of a sworn complaint, at least one of the complainants shall appear and testify at the hearing or the complaint shall be dismissed. 
8.  After the hearing, the owner of the animal shall be notified in writing of the determination and orders issued, either personally or by first-class return receipt mail. The hearing officer shall make a written determination within fifteen (15) business days after the hearing is concluded, unless the animal has been seized, in which case the determination shall be made in seven (7) business days. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final unless appealed pursuant to this section. 
9.  If the owner or keeper of the animal contests the hearing officer's determination, the owner may, within five (5) business days of the receipt of the notice of determination, appeal the decision of the hearing officer to the Butte County Superior Court. The owner of the animal shall serve personally or by first-class return receipt mail, notice of the appeal to the town. Any such appeal shall be by trial de novo. 
10.  The determination of the superior court hearing an appeal shall be final and conclusive upon all parties. 
C.  If an animal is determined to be vicious, the animal shall be immediately removed from corporate limits of the town or destroyed pursuant to Section 6.13.070. If an animal is designated "potentially dangerous" or "dangerous," the following requirements shall apply: 
1.  The owner of the animal shall immediately confine the animal in a run which is totally enclosed or kept under other adequate control as approved by the animal control officer. If any of these means of restraint is impossible or impracticable, the animal shall be impounded in the animal shelter facility at the owner's expense, until such time as the owner of the animal shall provide for the restraint of the animal either in a run which is totally enclosed or held securely on a chain or kept under other adequate control as approved by an animal control officer. 
2.  The owner of the animal shall be required to provide proof that he or she has current liability insurance in the amount of $250,000.00 covering activities of the animal. 
3.  The animal shall have an identity micro-chip inserted under its skin. 
4.  The animal's color photograph shall be provided to the animal control department by its owner. 
5.  A potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall be securely confined in an enclosure as described in Section 6.13.020 or in the dwelling while on the owner's or custodian's property. The owner shall conspicuously display signs with a symbol warning of the presence of a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal. 
6.  While off the owner's premises, a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall, at all times, be muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length, held by and under the control of an adult capable of physically controlling the animal. 
7.  All potentially dangerous or dangerous animals shall be properly licensed and vaccinated. In addition, the town shall include a designation of potentially dangerous in the registration records of such animal, and the owner shall pay an annual potentially dangerous animal registration/permit fee, in addition to the regular license fee. The fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of council. 
8.  A dangerous dog shall be spayed or neutered, at the owner's expense, within thirty (30) days of a potentially dangerous animal determination. 
9.  The animal control officer and/or his or her designee is authorized to make whatever inspections he or she deems necessary to ensure compliance with these provisions. 
10.  The owner of the animal shall submit a permit application under Section 6.13.090 to the animal control department within ten (10) business days of notification of determination. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.090 - Permit for potentially dangerous or dangerous animal required. 
Upon receipt of a permit application to keep a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal, an animal control officer may investigate the application and after permit fees have been paid, may grant a town permit if he or she finds based on substantial evidence that all the following conditions are satisfied: 
A.  All requirements of Section 6.13.080C have been met; 
B.  The animal will not create any detriment or danger to the peace, health or safety of the people in the vicinity of the location the animal will be kept; 
C.  Possession and maintenance of the animal at the location has not resulted in and is not likely to result in the animal being subjected to neglect, suffering, cruelty or abuse; 
D.  The location where the animal is maintained is kept clean and sanitary, and the animal is provided with proper and adequate food, water, ventilation, shelter and care at all times; 
E.  Neither the applicant, owners nor the possessor of the animal has had a town potentially dangerous or dangerous animal permit or any other license required under this chapter revoked, or been convicted of a violation of this chapter or any law regulating animals within the preceding five (5) years; 
F.  Possession of the animal at the location specified shall not violate any law, chapter or regulation; 
G.  The animal shall not be possessed nor maintained at any other location than that expressed on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.100 - Unpermitted potentially dangerous or dangerous animals. 
If an animal is declared potentially dangerous or dangerous under this chapter and the animal's owner fails to obtain a permit pursuant to Sections 6.13.080C and 6.13.090, the owner shall be in violation of this chapter, and the animal control department shall be empowered to seize and impound or destroy the animal. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.110 - Time limit to meet requirements. 
All requirements for owners of potentially dangerous or dangerous animals shall be satisfied within fifteen (15) business days, unless otherwise specified, of the issuance of the permit. Satisfactory proof of compliance shall be provided to the animal control department. If all requirements for owners of dangerous animals are not satisfied within fifteen (15) business days of the permit issuance, or the owner is unable or unwilling to implement them, the animal shall be humanely euthanized either by the animal control department or by a licensed veterinarian. Proof of euthanasia shall be provided to the animal control department within three (3) business days of its occurrence. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.120 - Potentially dangerous or dangerous animals to be kept under control at all times. 
Even if the owner is in compliance with the regulations for keeping such a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal, if such animal attacks, bites, causes injury, or otherwise threatens the safety of a person, domestic animal, or livestock, then such animal shall be immediately impounded at the animal shelter facility and be subject to destruction. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.130 - Impoundment authorized. 
If upon receiving written notification the owner fails to restrain or control a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal, as ordered pursuant to this chapter, the owner is in violation of this chapter and the animal control department shall be empowered to seize and impound or destroy the animal. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.140 - Compliance required—Violation. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this chapter relating to the keeping, harboring, owning, possessing or controlling of any potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animals, which violation shall constitute an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.150 - Exception. 
Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any person or officer to take any proceedings against a potentially dangerous, dangerous, or vicious animal or the owner thereof otherwise permitted or provided by state law. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.20.160 - Restriction on future ownership. 
A.  Any person who owns, possesses, keeps or harbors an animal determined to be dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter may, after opportunity for hearing and a finding of good cause by the animal control department or hearing officer, be subject to restrictions relating to the ownership of other animals for a period of five (5) years after the original determination. 
B.  At least fifteen (15) business days prior to imposition of restrictions under this section, the animal control department shall mail or otherwise deliver to the person on whom restrictions are proposed a notice containing a statement of the reasons supporting the imposition of restrictions and specifying the proposed restrictions and notice of the person's right to request, in writing within five (5) business days of receipt of the notice, a hearing before the hearing officer as to the existence of good cause for imposition of restrictions. If a hearing is requested, the town shall mail or otherwise deliver to the requesting party notice of the time and place of the hearing. If, after the hearing, the hearing officer determines that good cause for restrictions exists, the hearing officer shall impose the specific restrictions within ten (10) days after mailing notice of the decision. If no hearing is requested, the animal control officer may impose restrictions within fifteen (15) business days of the original notice. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
6.13.170 - Notification of change of status. 
A.  The owner of an animal found to be a potentially dangerous or dangerous animal under this chapter shall notify the animal control department immediately if the animal is loose, unconfined, has attacked another animal or human being, or has died. 
B.  A potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall not be sold, bartered, given away, or placed in a new household without prior notification of and written approval by the animal control department. Any new owner shall comply with the requirements of this chapter. If the animal in question is sold, transferred or permanently removed from the town where the owner resides, the owner of the potentially dangerous or dangerous animal shall notify the animal control department of the changed condition and new location of the animal in writing within two (2) business days. 
(Ord. No. 484 § 2, 2008)  
Chapter 6.16 - DISEASE CONTROL  
Article I - RABIES 
 
6.16.010 - Suspects—Reporting required. 
It is unlawful for any person having in confinement animals suspected of rabies not to report the suspicion to the health officer and to submit such animals to the examination of the health officer or his representative. (Ord. 57 §5(A), 1982)  
6.16.020 - Suspects—Examination. 
It is the duty of the health officer, when called upon, to examine, or have examined, any animal if it is suspected of having rabies, and to ascertain whether or not such animal is afflicted with rabies. (Ord. 57 §5(B), 1982)  
6.16.030 - Suspects—Confinement—Disposition. 
Animals suspected of having rabies shall not be killed but shall be kept in confinement until the health officer or his representative finds that further observation of the live animal is not necessary for the determination of the presence or absence of rabies. After the permission of the health officer has been secured, the animals afflicted with rabies may be killed. The person or officer capturing any such animal shall, if the owner thereof is known to him, notify such owner that such animal has been captured. If any animal is found not to be afflicted with rabies and is not reclaimed by the owner thereof or other person claiming the same within five days after capture, such animal shall be killed in some humane manner by the person capturing the same, or the officer to whom the animal was delivered. (Ord. 57 §5(C), 1982)  
6.16.040 - Biters of persons. 
Whenever it is shown that any animal has bitten any person, the owner or person having the custody or possession thereof shall, upon order of the health officer, deliver such animal to the poundmaster who shall quarantine it and keep it tied up or confined for a period of two weeks. The health officer may make an inspection or examination thereof at any time during this period. If it appears to the health officer, upon examination as aforesaid, or otherwise, that the animal has rabies, he shall kill it forthwith. (Ord. 57 §5(D), 1982)  
6.16.050 - Animals bitten by rabid animals. 
Whenever any animal is bitten by another animal having rabies, the owner or person having the custody or possession of the animal so bitten shall, upon being informed thereof, either kill such animal or quarantine it and keep it tied up or confined for a period of six months. The health officer shall have power, in his discretion, to kill or quarantine the animal so bitten, in case the owner or person having custody or possession thereof shall fail to do so immediately or in case the owner or person having custody thereof is not readily accessible. (Ord. 57 §5(E), 1982)  
6.16.060 - Importing animals from rabid areas. 
It is unlawful for any person to bring an animal into the town from any place in which rabies has been known to exist within six months previously, except upon the written permission of the health officer. Such permission is to be granted only upon the condition that the animal, whenever in the town during a subsequent period of six months, will be confined or muzzled. (Ord. 57 §5(F), 1982)  
6.16.070 - Muzzling of dogs during outbreak. 
During the existence of rabies, or if such existence is suspected, the health officer is empowered to order all dogs in the town be muzzled, and to disobey such order is a misdemeanor. (Ord. 57 §5(G), 1982)  
6.16.080 - Vaccination required. 
Except as provided in this title, no dog of the age of four months or older shall be permitted in the town without having been vaccinated for rabies within a period of less than thirty months, provided that no license shall be issued as required by this title for any dog with respect to which dog a period of thirty months since its last vaccination will expire prior to the expiration of the license year or term for which such license is to be issued. Evidence of compliance with this section shall be a valid official vaccination certificate as issued by a doctor of veterinary medicine, which certificate shall be produced for inspection by any official of the town authorized to administer any provision of this title. The owner of any dog subject to the provisions of this section shall cause to be attached to a collar or harness to be worn by such dog a tag or emblem with sufficient inscription thereon from which it can be established that such dog has been vaccinated and the date thereof. (Ord. 57 §5(H), 1982)  
6.16.090 - Confinement until vaccine effective. 
A.  All dogs under four months of age and until thirty days have elapsed following a first rabies vaccination shall be confined to the premises of or kept under physical restraint by their owner, keeper or harborer. 
B.  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, all dogs shall be vaccinated when required by the provisions of Chapter 3 of Division 3 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. (Ord. 57 §5(I), 1982)  
Article II - DISEASES GENERALLY 
 
6.16.100 - Reporting by veterinarians. 
Every veterinary surgeon practicing in the town shall immediately report, in writing, to the health officer every case of contagious pleuro-pneumonia, tuberculosis, foot and mouth disease, anthrax, Texas fever, actinomycosis, glanders, farcy or hydrophobia with which any animal he shall treat or examine in the town shall be affected. (Ord. 57 §6(A), 1982)  
6.16.110 - Keeping tubercular animals. 
It is unlawful for a person to bring into the town or keep within the town, or permit to be kept on any premises owned or controlled by him within the town, any cow, or calf, or other animal afflicted with tuberculosis. (Ord. 57 §6(B), 1982)  
6.16.120 - Keeping horses with glanders. 
It is unlawful for a person to bring into the town, or keep within the town, or permit to be kept on any premises owned or controlled by him within the town, any horse afflicted with glanders. (Ord. 57 §6(C), 1982)  
6.16.130 - Tubercular or glanders-afflicted animals—Destruction. 
The health officer and his representatives are empowered under such regulations as such officer may determine to cause the destruction of any animal found in the town afflicted with tuberculosis or horse affected with glanders. (Ord. 57 §6(D), 1982)  
Chapter 6.20 - CARE AND KEEPING 
 
6.20.010 - Captured strays. 
Any person capturing a stray dog shall promptly deliver the same to the director of animal control or promptly notify the director of animal control of the capture and thereafter release the dog to the director of animal control on demand. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §7(A), 1982)  
6.20.020 - Commercial keepers—Emergency contact. 
Every person maintaining a commercial building, structure or premises, where animals are kept for commercial purposes, shall cause a notice, framed and enclosed under glass, containing the names, addresses and telephone numbers of persons to be notified during any hour of the day or night who will proceed immediately to the location so as to permit entry to the premises by representatives of the director of animal control to be posted on the premises near the entrance, the notice to be in such a position as to be legible from the sidewalk or ground level adjacent to the building. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §7(B), 1982)  
6.20.030 - Staking on unenclosed land. 
No person shall stake out, herd or graze any animal upon any unenclosed lot or land in any manner so that the animal may be or go beyond the boundary of such lot or land. (Ord. 57 §7(C), 1982)  
6.20.040 - Inadequate care. 
It shall be a violation of this title in addition to any other laws, rules or regulations to allow any animal to go without food, water or proper care. Whenever animals are kept within any building or on any premises without food, water or proper care and attention, it shall be the duty of any director of animal control, or his designee to enter the building or premises to take possession of, remove and impound the animals so abandoned or neglected. 
A.  Cleanliness of Premises Where Animals are Kept. Every person owning or occupying premises where any animals are kept, shall at all times keep the area in a clean and sanitary condition. 
B.  Size of Facilities. All rooms, cages, kennels, runs and primary enclosures in which any animal is kept shall be of sufficient size to adequately allow the animal to exercise as specified by the rules and regulations established by the director of animal control. 
C.  Food and Water. Every owner or animal keeper shall supply each animal, food and water daily. The food shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal as specified by a veterinarian. 
D.  Treatment of Sick or Injured Animals. Any animal requiring medical attention shall be taken to a veterinarian for examination or treatment at the owner's or animal keeper's expense if the director of animal control or his designee finds that this is necessary in order to maintain the health of the animal. 
E.  Transportation of Animals. Any animal while in transport by vehicle within the town shall be restrained by a leash, chain, rope, enclosure or other device of sufficient strength and stability to insure that the animal does not escape from the vehicle. 
F.  Animal Restraints. When a chain, rope or other restraint is used to tether an animal, it shall be so placed or attached that it cannot become entangled with the chain of any other animal or with any other object. It shall be affixed by means of a well-fitted collar, and shall be at least four times the length of the animal as measured from the tip of its nose to the base of its tail and shall allow the convenient access to food, water and shelter adequate to protect the animal from the elements. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §7(D), 1982)  
6.20.060 - Poisoning. 
No person shall place, leave or expose, in any place accessible to birds, fowls, domestic animals, dogs, cats or other such animals with the intent to kill or harm such birds, fowls or animals, any poisonous substance or ingredient, or any edible or any other substance or ingredient which has in any manner been treated or prepared with any poisonous substance or ingredient. (Ord. 57 §7(F), 1982)  
6.20.070 - Killing or interfering with songbirds. 
No person shall kill any songbird or destroy or rob the nest of any such bird. (Ord. 57 §7(G), 1982)  
6.20.080 - Zoning conformance. 
It is unlawful to keep within the town any animal of any species for any purpose except in locations and in a manner specifically permitted by provisions of the zoning and land use regulations established within this code. This provision does not apply to the riding or transporting of animals through the town. (Ord. 216 §8, 1992: Ord. 57 §7(H), 1982)  
Chapter 6.24 - WILD ANIMALS 
 
6.24.010 - Defined. 
"Wild animal" means any of the following: 
A.  Following members of the Class Reptilia: 
1.  Order Ophidia (such as, but not limited to, racers, boas, water snakes and pythons) over eight feet in length, and 
2.  Order Loricata (such as, but not limited to, alligators, caymans and crocodiles) over four feet in length; 
B.  Following members of the Class Aves: 
1.  Order Falconiformes (such as, but not limited to, hawks, eagles and vultures which are not kept pursuant to federal or state permit), and 
2.  Subdivision Ratitae (such as, but not limited to, ostriches, rheas, cassowaries and emus); 
C.  Following members of the Class Mammalia: 
1.  Order Carnivora, expressly excepting the domestic dog (canis familiaris) and the domestic cat (felis catus), but including, but not limited to, the family Felidae (such as ocelots, margays, tigers, jaguars, leopards and cougars), the family Canidae (such as wolves, dingos and jackals, excepting coyotes), 
2.  Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos, excepting opossums), 
3.  Order Chiroptera (bats), 
4.  Order Edentata (such as sloths, anteaters and armadillos), 
5.  Order Proboscidea (elephants), 
6.  Order Primata (including, but not limited to, chimpanzees and gorillas, excepting monkeys), and 
7.  Order Ungulata (expressly excluding any animal which would be included within the definition of "domestic animal" and including, but not limited to, antelope, deer, bison and excepting therefrom camels); 
D.  Any nondomestic species when kept, maintained or harbored in such a manner as to constitute the likelihood of danger to the animals themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings; 
E.  Any species of animal which is venomous to human beings whether it is venom transmitted by bite, sting, touch or other means, except honey producing bees. (Ord. 57 §8(H), 1982)  
6.24.015 - Allowing wild or vicious animals to run at large prohibited. 
A.  No person owning or having charge, custody, control or possession of any wild animal known by such person to be vicious or dangerous, or commonly so known, shall permit or allow the same to be at large upon any highway, street, lane, alley, court, or other public place or upon any private property other than within the enclosed premises of such person. 
B.  Any dog having a disposition or propensity to attack or bite any person or animal without provocation is defined as "a wild or vicious animal." The director of animal control, or his designee, shall notify the owner or harborer in writing to keep such animal within a substantial enclosure or securely attached to a chain under such circumstances. If such restraint is impossible or impracticable, such animal shall be impounded until the owner or harborer is able to comply with the director of animal control's order. If, upon receiving the written notification, the owner or harborer fails to provide adequate restraint or control of the animal as ordered by the director of animal control, or his designee, within a reasonable time, the animal shall then be subject to summary destruction. 
C.  Where the official records of the director of animal control indicate a dog has bitten any person or persons or animal on two or more separate occasions, it shall be prima facie evidence that the dog is a wild or vicious animal. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984)  
6.24.020 - Permit required. 
No person shall own or possess any wild animal within the town limits without first applying to and receiving from the director of animal control a permit to do so. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §8(A), 1982)  
6.24.030 - Application for permit. 
The application for a permit required pursuant to this chapter shall be made to the director of animal control in writing and upon a form furnished by the director of animal control as so required. The application shall be verified by the person who desires to have, keep, maintain or have in his possession, or under his control, in the town, the wild animal for which a permit is required, and shall set forth the following: 
A.  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant; 
B.  The applicant's interest in such wild animals; 
C.  The proposed location, and the name, address, and telephone number of the owner of such location, and of the lessee, if any; 
D.  The number and general description of all wild animals for which the permit is sought; 
E.  Any information known to the applicant concerning vicious or dangerous propensities of all such wild animals; 
F.  The housing arrangements for all such wild animals with particular details as to safety or structure, locks, or fencing; 
G.  Safety precautions; 
H.  Noises or odors anticipated in the keeping of such wild animals; 
I.  Prior history of incidents involving the public health or safety involving any of the wild animals; 
J.  Any additional information required by the director of animal control at the time of filing such application or thereafter. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §8(B)(1), 1982)  
6.24.040 - Fee. 
The initial fee for the issuance of each permit shall be by council resolution and shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of its issuance unless revoked or suspended. The fee shall cover either one animal or a collection, and the maximum number of specimens permitted to be kept shall be specified in the permit. Whenever a new animal or collection is added so as to exceed the maximum number permitted, a new permit must be secured and a new fee must be paid subject to the exceptions in Section 6.24.050. The fee shall be due and payable at the time of issuance of the permit and shall be a prerequisite of such issuance. (Ord. 57 §8(B)(2), 1982)  
6.24.050 - Collection changes. 
Whenever, in any given permit year, there are new animals in a collection due to the reproduction of members of the collection or due to trade, exchange or replacement in the same number and of the same zoological order as the members of the collection traded, exchanged or replaced, the new animals do not require an additional permit during that year, provided the director of animal control is notified in writing of the new animals within thirty days of acquisition. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §8(B)(3), 1982)  
6.24.060 - Renewal permit and fee. 
A.  Each succeeding year a renewal permit shall be obtained by a holder of a permit to keep wild animals. The fee for the issuance of a renewal permit shall be by council resolution, and it is due and payable each year on the anniversary of the date of the issuance of the initial permit. If during the preceding year or years, more than one initial permit has been issued an applicant, the former permits may be consolidated so that only one renewal permit is required; provided, however, that the renewal date for the consolidated permit shall be the date of the issuance of the earliest initial permit. 
B.  A renewal fee for a wild animal permit shall become delinquent ninety days after it becomes due and payable, and upon delinquency, an additional delinquent fee of twenty dollars shall be added to the regular fee. An unpaid delinquent fee shall be added to a succeeding year's renewal fee. (Ord. 57 §8(C), 1982)  
6.24.070 - Approval—Administrative review. 
Upon receipt of an application for an initial permit by the director of animal control, the application shall be forwarded to the building inspection department of the town and the public health department of the county, and designated employees of these departments shall ascertain whether or not the applicant's plan which, if made, would result in approval by the department in question. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984; Ord. 57 §8(D)(1), 1982)  
6.24.080 - Approval—Administrative approval. 
If the applicant's plan is in conformity with the law governing the departments provided for in Section 6.24.070, departmental approval shall be indicated on the face of the application. If the applicant's plan is not in conformity with the law governing the departments, the face of the application shall be marked "Not Approved," and the reason for nonapproval noted thereon along with any revisions or changes in the applicant's plan which, if made, would result in approval by the department in question. (Ord. 57 §8(D)(2), 1982)  
6.24.090 - Approval—Director of animal control investigation. 
Upon approval by the departments provided for in Section 6.24.070 of an application for an initial permit or upon the receipt of an application for a renewal permit, the director of animal control shall make any investigation he deems proper. He shall approve an application if he finds all of the following: 
A.  The keeping of the wild animal at the location specified in the application will not violate any law or ordinance of the town or any law of the state; 
B.  The keeping and maintenance of the wild animal will not endanger the peace, health or safety of persons in the immediate vicinity, or in the town as a whole; 
C.  The premises and housing where the wild animal is to be kept are in a clean and sanitary condition, and any wild animal will not be subject to suffering, cruelty or abuse; 
D.  The applicant has not had a permit provided for in this chapter revoked within a year prior to the date of application; 
E.  The keeping and maintenance of the wild animal does not constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §8(D), 1982)  
6.24.100 - Revocation and suspension. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked or suspended as provided in this section if, after investigation, the director of animal control finds any of the following to be true: 
A.  The owner, his agent or employee has been convicted of any offense involving the violation of Section 597 of the Penal Code, or any provision of this chapter, or is in violation of the zoning, health and safety or building ordinances relating to the keeping of wild animals; or 
B.  The owner has failed to keep and maintain the premises for housing for the wild animals in a clean and sanitary condition; or 
C.  The owner has at the place for which the permit is issued, failed to provide any wild animal with proper food, water, shelter or attention; or 
D.  The owner has violated any rules, regulations or conditions adopted by the director of animal control as necessary to insure that the wild animal will not endanger the safety of any person or property. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §8(E), 1982)  
6.24.110 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by any decision or action resulting from the application of this chapter may appeal to the town council. The appeal must be in writing and must be received by the town clerk not more than fifteen days after service of written notice of the decision or action. A public hearing may be requested by the party aggrieved by the decision. If a hearing is requested, the town council shall set a time for the hearing. At least fifteen days' notice shall be given. The decision of the town council shall be final. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 57 §8(F), 1982)  
6.24.120 - Separate offenses. 
Every person violating any provision of this title is guilty of a separate offense for each day, or portion thereof, during which the violation continues. (Ord. 57 §8(G), 1982)  
6.24.130 - Hunting and trapping of wild animals. 
A.  Purpose and Findings. The town council of the town of Paradise does find that hunting and trapping of wild vertebrate animals within the town limits creates a significant hazard to the health, safety and welfare of its citizens. This section is enacted to protect the health, safety and welfare of persons within the town limits. 
B.  Definition. For purposes of this section, the term "wildlife" means any and all vertebrate animals. 
C.  Hunting and Trapping of Wild Animals Within the Town Limits Prohibited. It is unlawful within the town to shoot, trap, snare, capture, wound, poison, molest or kill any species of wildlife or to take or destroy the nests or eggs or young of any wildlife, with the exception of any poisonous reptiles, mice, rats, gophers, moles or insects; provided, however, that if it shall be determined by the health officer or the director of animal control services, or his or her authorized representatives, that wildlife has become a menace to any person's health, safety or property, the health officer or the director of animal control services, or his or her authorized designee, shall issue a permit authorizing a licensed pest control provider to trap such wildlife in a manner prescribed by the director of animal control services. In no event shall any person use or employ poison or deceased material to kill or capture wildlife. Because of their lesser danger to citizens, all permits authorizing trapping shall require the use of "live animal" trap which are approved by animal control. All traps shall be checked daily and used only on private property with the property owner's permission. All traps will be placed in a manner to protect the animal from rain or snow. All skunks will be disposed of in a humane manner, and in accordance with state and local laws. Any animal trapped, other than a skunk, will be released at the location where trapped. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, it is lawful to trap feral cats, as defined under Food and Agriculture Code Section 31752.2, on private property with the prior permission of the private property owner without a permit. Only "live animal" traps shall be used, and traps shall be placed in such a manner to protect the animal from rain or snow. If a skunk is inadvertently trapped, it will be referred to a licensed pest control provider for disposal. If any other animal, including a cat displaying a tag containing the name, address and telephone number of the owner, is inadvertently trapped, it shall be released at the location where trapped. All trapped feral cats shall be either disposed in a manner as prescribed by state and local laws, taken to a veterinarian to be neutered, or adopted as a pet. All trapping, transportation, disposal and neutering shall be at the sole expense of the person conducting the trapping. (Ord. 334 §2, 1999: Ord. 325 §1, 1999: Ord. 154 §1, 1986)  
Chapter 6.28 - KENNELS/PET SHOPS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 57, 73 and 123. 
 
6.28.010 - License required. 
No person shall own, control, or operate a kennel or pet shop within the town limits without a license issued by the town. A license shall be required for each location where a kennel or pet shop exists. Fees for kennel or pet shop licenses shall be fixed and determined by council resolution. Any kennel or pet shop owner failing to obtain a license shall be subject to an additional fee as prescribed by council resolution. Where a pet shop and kennel share the same physical location and are owned by the same individual(s), the license fee exacted will be that of a kennel license only. (Ord. 200 §2(part), 1990)  
6.28.020 - Application for license. 
Application for kennel and pet shop licenses shall be made at either the office of the finance director or such other office or location as shall be designated by the town manager. Each application for a permit under this chapter shall be in writing upon a form to be furnished by the director of animal control and shall contain such information as the director of animal control, by rule or regulation, shall require. 
A.  All licenses issued by the town as required by this chapter shall expire on June 30th of each year, unless sooner revoked or suspended, or unless the holder of such license changes the location of their place of business, or sells, assigns, transfers or otherwise disposes of such business or their interest therein for a period of thirty days. Upon failure to make application for renewal of such license within the time herein provided, the applicant shall pay, in addition to the regular license fee, an additional fee as established by the town council by resolution. 
B.  All licenses issued hereunder shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
C.  Upon the filing of each application hereunder, either for an original license or a renewal thereof, the supervisor of animal control or his designee shall make such investigation as he deems proper, which includes at a minimum those subjects listed under subsections A, B and C of Section 6.28.025. He shall then issue a license to the applicant if he finds that: 
1.  The keeping of animals, or the conduct or operation of the business for which the license is requested will not violate any law or ordinance of the town, or any law of the state of California; and 
2.  The premises and establishment where animals are to be kept is maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and the animals will not be subject to any suffering, cruelty, or abuse; and 
3.  The applicant has not had a license revoked within one year prior to the application. (Ord. 200 §2(part), 1990)  
6.28.021 - Zoning compliance required. 
No application for renewal of license for a pet shop or kennel shall be considered for issuance until the applicant for such pet shop or kennel license has secured a signed statement from the town planning director or his designee indicating that the location of the proposed pet shop or kennel is legally sanctioned by the provisions of this code for such use. (Ord. 216 §9, 1992: Ord. 200 §2(part), 1990)  
6.28.025 - Revocation, suspension or denial—Grounds—Procedure. 
A.  Any license issued hereunder may be revoked, suspended or denied under the procedure outlined in this code, if, after due investigation, the director of animal control or his designee, finds: 
1.  That the licensee, his agent, or any employee, has been convicted of any offense involving the violation of applicable Sections of Title 14 of the Penal Code of the state of California, or any provision of this title; or 
2.  That the licensee, his agent, or employee, has at the place for which the license was issued, failed to provide for any animal in his possession, care or control, proper and sufficient food, drink, shelter, or protection, or subjected any animal to suffering, cruelty, or abuse; or 
3.  That the licensee, his agent, or employee, has failed to maintain the premises in a clean and sanitary condition. 
B.  The supervisor of animal control shall, either by direction from a higher authority or by self-initiation, cause an investigation to be conducted concerning violations of law by the licensee. The findings of such investigation shall be reduced to writing and forwarded to the director of animal control. If, after investigation, the director concludes that one or more grounds for revocation, suspension or denial exist(s), he shall cause written notice of hearing to be transmitted by mail to the address of the licensee. 
C.  Said notice shall specify the grounds of possible revocation, suspension or denial of the license and shall specify a date and time for an informal hearing to be held before the director of animal control. Said hearing date shall not be less than five days nor more than fifteen days subsequent to the date said notice is mailed. The licensee shall be invited to attend such hearing and present evidence. Based upon the evidence presented at said hearing, the director may uphold, revoke, or modify the terms of said license. Notice of said decision will be mailed to the licensee within ten days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
D.  If it is determined by the director of animal control that the health and safety of any of the animals is in peril, he may suspend the license immediately, pending further review or a hearing as described in subsection A of this section. Such immediate suspension does not prohibit or limit the licensee to pursue the appeal process, nor eliminate his rights to a hearing before the director of animal control. (Ord. 200 §2(part), 1990)  
6.28.028 - Appeal. 
Any person dissatisfied with the ruling of the director of animal control may within ten calendar days thereafter, appeal said decision to the town manager. Such appeal shall be a simple statement in writing setting forth in common terms, the basis of the appeal. A hearing may be requested. If a hearing is requested, the town manager shall set a time for said hearing. At least fifteen days' notice of hearing shall be given, and such hearing must be held within sixty days of the filing of the appeal unless waived by both the licensee and the town manager. A person dissatisfied with the ruling of the town manager may, within ten calendar days thereafter, appeal said decision to the town council using the same procedure as appealing to the town manager. (Ord. 200 §2(part), 1990)  
6.28.030 - Proof of vaccination required. 
No pet shop or kennel license shall be issued or renewed unless proof has been presented that all dogs in the pet shop or kennel have been vaccinated against rabies, and licensed as provided by Section 6.08.010 and 1920A of the state Health and Safety Code, if the dogs are being boarded for thirty days or more. (Ord. 200 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 6.32 - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
 
6.32.010 - Office of director of animal control services—Established. 
A.  Establishment. The office of the director of animal control services is established. The director of animal control may be either a town official, person, firm, association, corporation, or another municipality, as determined by the town council. The director of animal control shall serve for such period of time and shall receive such compensation as shall be established by ordinance, resolution or by contract executed by the town council. 
B.  Duties Generally. The duties of the director of animal control are as follows: 
1.  To impound any and all stock found running at large upon the streets, alleys or public places within the town and, having impounded such animals, if the owner of any such stock desires the release thereof, the director of animal control shall release the same upon the payment of fees as provided by council resolution. In the event any such stock so impounded is not redeemed by the owner as provided in this title, then the director of animal control is authorized to advertise and to sell the same in the manner provided by state law for estrays; 
2.  To apprehend and impound any animal as authorized by the provisions of this title, using all force deemed by the director of animal control necessary to accomplish that end. The use of force, as authorized in this title, shall include the employment of a tranquilizing device in order to bring an animal under control, and in the case of a vicious or rabid animal, when no other means of apprehension is available, to cause destruction of such animal; 
3.  To hold any dog not wearing a town license tag, or impounded cat, for a period of seventy-two hours whereupon, unless claimed by the owner within such time, the director of animal control may thereafter dispose of or cause to be disposed of such dog or cat either by humanely putting it to death or by placement with a new owner; provided, that no such dog or cat shall be placed for use in any form of laboratory research or hospital teaching; 
4.  To ascertain from the town's license records the owner of an impounded dog wearing a town license tag and forthwith give to the owner a written notice thereof, mailed to the owner's address as shown on such records. To attempt to notify the owner by forthwith calling the telephone number, if any, listed on such license records. If the owner does not reclaim such dog within one hundred twenty hours after the mailing of such notice, the director of animal control may dispose of such dog in the manner provided for in this title; 
5.  To collect from an owner reclaiming any animal from the animal shelter, fees and charges as fixed by council resolution; 
6.  To pay to the administrative services director, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the town manager, all funds collected from license fees, sales of dogs, penalties and charges for feeding and boarding animals in the animal shelter except as may be provided by contract; 
7.  To enforce the provisions of this title; provided, however, all members of the police department are also authorized to enforce such provisions; 
8.  To collect and dispose of dead animals found in public places; 
9.  To collect and dispose of confined bats or skunks at the request of any resident holding the same in confinement; 
10.  To hold animals needed by the town police or director of animal control as evidence in any matter being investigated or prosecuted for possible violation of state or local laws relating to the keeping or use of animals; 
11.  To enforce any other sections of this title whether enumerated as a duty or not; 
12.  To employ a private veterinarian whenever he deems it necessary in order to properly care for and maintain any animal. Owners shall pay for the veterinarian's services direct to the veterinarian; in those cases where the fee has been paid or incurred for the care or treatment of any animal by the town, such animal shall not thereafter be redeemed without payment by the owner of such fee, in addition to any and all other fees, so as to reimburse the town for its cost for veterinarian service for such animal. (Ord. 127 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 73 §2(part), 1982; Ord. 57 §2, 1982)  
6.32.011 - Contract for animal shelter. 
The town council may by contract designate an agency which shall establish, maintain, conduct, and operate a suitable enclosure to keep and safely hold all animals subject to be impounded, which enclosure shall be known as the town animal shelter. 
(Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984)  
6.32.020 - Interference with impoundment—Right of entry. 
It is unlawful to interfere with, oppose or resist any authorized person collecting or impounding dogs under the provisions of this section. Such authorized person shall wear a badge and may go upon private property of the owner in pursuit of a dog for the purpose of enforcing this section, after previous written notice to the dog owner, to comply with the provisions of this section; provided, that previous written notice shall not be required in the case of a biting dog or a suspected rabid dog. Nothing contained in this section shall authorize a violation of constitutional immunity from search and seizure. (Ord. 57 §10, 1982)  
6.32.025 - Police powers. 
The director of animal control and his deputies and/or designees shall be vested with the necessary police powers and duties of a police officer for the exclusive purpose of enforcing the provisions of this title, and it shall be their duty to issue citations for violations of any of the provisions of this title. The director of animal control shall enforce all of the laws of the town, county, and state relating to the care, treatment, impounding or other conditions of animals and to the prevention of cruelty to animals. (Ord. 123 § 1(part), 1984)  
6.32.035 - Inspections—Entering upon premises. 
The director of animal control, any officer or employee thereof or other duly designated representative of the town, or public officer shall have the right to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law by entering into any building or upon any property within the town when the person has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building and/or upon any property any violation of the provisions of this chapter or other applicable law provided that: 
A.  If such building and/or property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining his reasons therefor; and if such building and/or property is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner thereof or other persons having authority over the building and/or property and request entry explaining his reasons therefor. 
B.  If entry into the building or upon the property is refused, the director of animal control, any officer or employee thereof or other duly designated representative of the town, or any police officer shall obtain an inspection warrant pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (Sections 1822.50 to 1822.57), for the entry and inspection of the building and/or the property. 
C.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if the director of animal control, any officer or employee thereof, or other duly designated representative of the town, or any police officer has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or the maintaining of any animal is hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to safeguard the animal or the public health or safety, he shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such building and/or property, and may use any reasonable means required to effect such entry and make such inspection, whether such building and/or property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the building and/or property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry explaining his reasons therefor. 
This section shall not prohibit the director of animal control, any officer or employee thereof, or any police officer from entering upon any public or private property in the town for the purpose of capturing an animal running at large in violation of this title or other applicable law. Any person who denies or prevents, obstructs, or attempts to deny, prevent or obstruct the capture is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
D.  The permittee of any permit issued pursuant to this title by accepting such permit, does thereby consent and agree to the entry upon the premises described in the permit by the director of animal control or his authorized representative for the purpose of conducting such inspections as are required by this title or other applicable law. (Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 107 §1(part), 1983)  
6.32.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code § 36900. Any additional violation of this title within one year of the first violation may be prosecuted by the town attorney as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or six months in the county jail; and provided, however, the town attorney shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. 123 §1(part), 1984: Ord. 107 §1(part), 1983: Ord. 76 §8, 1982: Ord. 57 §12, 1982; Ord. No. 401, § 5, 8-26-2003)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY  
Chapter 8.04 - PUBLIC NUISANCE ABATEMENT 
 
8.04.005 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to educate the public and to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the public by requiring a level of maintenance of private property which will protect the livability, appearance and social and economic stability of the town and which also will protect the public from health and safety hazards and the impairment of property values which results from the neglect and deterioration of property. It is not the purpose of this chapter to regulate cultural or religious expression. 
B.  Public nuisances cause the following: 
1.  A reduction in property values; 
2.  An obstruction to or interference with the comfortable enjoyment of adjacent and/or surrounding properties; 
3.  Adverse impacts on the aesthetic quality of property, giving the appearance of blighted conditions and a deteriorated environment; and 
4.  Conditions which are injurious to the public health, safety and general welfare, including, but not limited to, a harborage for rodents and insects, a dangerous attraction for children and the potential for fire and health hazards. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 1, 3-10-2015)  
8.04.010 - Declaration of what constitutes an unlawful public nuisance. 
Each of the following conditions or acts is declared by the town council to be an unlawful public nuisance; and the violation of which shall be an infraction: 
A.  Fire hazards: Dry or dead shrub, dead tree, combustible refuse and waste, or any material growing on a street, sidewalk or upon private property within the town, which by reason of its size, manner of growth and location is determined by the town fire chief or fire marshal to constitute a fire hazard to a building, improvement, crop or other property, or when dry, will in reasonable probability constitute a fire hazard; 
B.  Hazardous obstructions: An obstacle, landscaping or thing installed, or maintained on private property near a roadway intersection or driveway and roadway intersection which by reason of its size, location, and height is determined by the town manager or designee to constitute a hazard obstructing the line of vision to the travelling public. Hazardous obstructions do not mean existing or future permanent buildings, otherwise constructed or maintained in accordance with applicable zoning and building regulations, public utility poles, or trees trimmed at the trunk at least eight (8) feet above the level of the ground surface, provided trees are spaced so that trunks do not obstruct the vision of motorists; 
C.  Polluted water: A swimming pool, pond or other body of water large enough in size to constitute a hazard to human health and safety, and which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted. "Polluted water" means water contained as a body of water, which includes, but is not limited to, bacterial growth, including algae, remains of insects, remains of deceased animals, rubbish, refuse, debris, papers, and any other foreign matter or material which because of its nature or location constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition; 
D.  Refuse and waste: Refuse and waste matter, which by reason of its outdoor location and substantive character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors, detrimentally affects property values in the surrounding neighborhood or community or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire or the obstruction of other public safety or emergency services upon real properties in the town. "Refuse and waste" means unused or discarded matter and material which consists of rubbish, refuse, debris and matter of any kind, including, but not limited to, rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, building materials, crates, cartons, mattresses, containers, boxes, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal and other pieces of metal, ferrous or nonferrous, furniture, inoperative vehicles and parts, cans, bottles and barrels; 
E.  Zoning ordinance: The violation of a provision of the land use regulations of the town as set forth in Title 17 of this code; 
F.  Septic systems: The violation of a provision of the septic system regulations of the town as set forth in Chapter 13.04 of this code or the provisions of the on-site manual; 
G.  Maintenance of commercial property: Any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any commercial property and maintaining such property in a manner such that any of the following conditions, but not limited thereto, are visible from public or other private property and exist thereon: 
1.  Buildings that are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, substantially deteriorated or left unreasonably in a state of partial construction without an active building permit. 
2.  Exterior wall and/or roof coverings that have become substantially deteriorated and do not provide adequate weather protection, unpainted, unmaintained and otherwise unprotected buildings, causing deterioration in the form of dry rot, warping, buckling, twisting, bowing and insect infestations of various kinds. 
3.  Buildings with broken or missing windows or doors, or buildings that are unsecured in such a manner that allows unauthorized entry. 
4.  Building exteriors, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls or other structures on the property which are broken, deteriorated or substantially defaced. 
5.  Graffiti that is not removed within five (5) calendar days after town's code enforcement officer has given property owner written notice to remove it. Graffiti shall include the writing, defacing, marring, marking, inscribing, scratching, painting, or affixing of markings on buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, signs, retaining walls, driveways, walkways, sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices, signs and utility boxes. 
6.  Abandoned and inoperative vehicles not in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 10.16. 
7.  Outdoor attractive nuisances including, but not limited to junk, wrecked and/or dismantled vehicles, vehicles precariously raised off the ground on a jack, jack stand, or similar device, or on wood, rocks, or blocks; open containers of oil, gasoline, other petroleum products, antifreeze, or other hazardous or flammable chemicals; power machinery; broken or discarded furniture, household appliances and equipment including refrigerators, freezers, washers and dryers; and hazardous pools, ponds, or excavations. 
8.  Maintenance of premises in such a condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, including large and precarious diseased, uprooted, dead or dying trees; open containers of oil, gasoline, other petroleum products, antifreeze, or other hazardous or flammable chemicals; or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by California Civil Code Section 3480. 
9.  Overgrown, diseased or dead accumulations of weeds or vegetation; 
H.  Maintenance of residential property: Any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any residential property and maintaining such property in a manner such that any of the following conditions, but not limited thereto, are visible form public or other private property and exist thereon: 
1.  Buildings that are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, substantially deteriorated or left unreasonably in a state of partial construction without an active building permit. 
2.  Buildings with broken or missing windows or doors that are unsecured in such a manner that allows unauthorized entry. 
3.  Graffiti that is not removed within five (5) calendar days after town's code enforcement officer has given property owner written notice to remove it. Graffiti shall include the writing, defacing, marring, marking, inscribing, scratching, painting, or affixing of markings on buildings or structures, including, but not limited to, walls, fences, signs retaining walls, driveways, walkways, sidewalks, curbs, traffic control devices, signs and utility boxes. 
4.  Abandoned and inoperative vehicles not in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 10.16. 
5.  Outdoor attractive nuisances, including but not limited to junk, wrecked and/or dismantled vehicles, vehicles precariously raised off the ground on a jack, jack stand, or similar device, or on wood, rocks, or blocks; open containers of oil, gasoline, other petroleum products, antifreeze, or other hazardous or flammable chemicals; power machinery; broken or discarded furniture, household appliances and equipment including refrigerators, freezers, washers and dryers; and hazardous pools, ponds, or excavations. 
6.  Maintenance of premises in such a condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, including large and precarious diseased, uprooted, dead or dying trees; open containers of oil, gasoline, other petroleum products, antifreeze, or other hazardous or flammable chemicals; or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by California Civil Code Section 3480; 
I.  Building and construction: violation of the building permit or construction requirements of Title 15 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 2, 3-10-2015; Ord. No. 527, § 1, 1-8-2013; Ord. No. 507, § 1, 10-12-2010; Ord. No. 401, §§ 6, 7, 8-26-2003; Ord. 290 §2(part), 1997)  
8.04.020 - Authority for adoption, application and purpose. 
The procedure set forth in this chapter for the abatement of a nuisance and the making of the cost of abatement of a nuisance which exists upon a parcel of land via a lien and a special assessment against that parcel is adopted under Government Code sections 38773 and 38773.5. The procedure set forth in this chapter for abatement applies to any nuisance which the town declares is a nuisance either by another provision of this code or other ordinance which the town may adopt. 
The procedure set forth in this chapter is not exclusive and is in addition to the procedure for abatement which is conferred upon the town by Civil Code section 3494, Code of Civil Procedure section 731, or other lawful authority. 
(Ord. 290 §2(part), 1997)  
8.04.020.1 - Civil violation—Injunctions and civil penalties. 
A.  In addition to any other remedy provided by this code, any provision of this chapter relating to the abatement of a public nuisance may be enforced by injunction issued by the superior court upon a suit brought in the name of the Town of Paradise. All remedies prescribed by this chapter are cumulative and the use of one (1) or more remedies by the town shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purposes of enforcing the provisions hereof or abating a public nuisance. 
B.  In addition to the penalties provided above, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of any ordinance of the town or provision of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as provided herein or in any other chapter of this code. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 2, 1-8-2013)  
8.04.020.2 - Judicial abatement. 
Pursuant to California Penal Code section 372, and California Code of Civil Procedure section 731, the town has the authority to abate public nuisances by filing criminal or civil nuisance actions. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 3, 1-8-2013)  
8.04.020.3 - Treble damages for subsequent abatement judgments. 
Pursuant to California Government Code section 38773.7, upon the entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period that finds an owner of property responsible for a condition that may be abated in accordance with California Government Code section 38773.5, a court may order the owner to pay treble the costs of the abatement. These costs shall not include costs incurred abating conditions pursuant to California Health and Safety Code section 17980. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 4, 1-8-2013)  
8.04.020.4 - Attorney's fees. 
The prevailing party in any judicial action and/or administrative proceeding to abate a nuisance and/or to enforce any provision of this code shall recover the incurred attorney's fees as follows: 
A.  The recovery of attorney's fees shall be limited to those individual judicial actions or administrative proceedings in which the town elects, at the initiation of that individual judicial action or administrative proceeding, to seek recovery of its own attorney's fees; and 
B.  In no judicial action or administrative proceeding shall an award of attorney's fees to a prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the town in the judicial action or administrative proceeding. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 5, 1-8-2013)  
8.04.030 - Mailing notice to abate nuisance. 
When the town council has declared that something constitutes a nuisance under this chapter, the town shall mail a notice to the owner of the property and the mortgagee or beneficiary under a recorded deed of trust. The notice shall state the conditions which constitute the public nuisance and shall order the abatement of the nuisance within thirty (30) days after the date of the notice. 
(Ord. 290 §2(part), 1997)  
8.04.040 - Posting of notice on property. 
In addition to the mailed notice under Section 8.04.030, the town shall post conspicuously at least one (1) copy of the notice upon the property where the nuisance exists. 
(Ord. 290 §2(part), 1997)  
8.04.050 - Effect of failure to receive notice. 
The fact that the owner or other person to whom notice is given of the nuisance abatement proceedings does not receive notice does not affect the validity of the proceedings. 
(Ord. 290 §2(part), 1997)  
8.04.060 - Effect of failure to abate. 
If the nuisance is not abated within the period given in the notice, the town council may determine to proceed with the abatement. When it determines to proceed, the town council shall give a second notice in the same manner as set forth in Sections 8.04.030 and 8.04.040. The second notice shall direct the person to appear before the town council at a stated time and place and show cause why the nuisance should not be abated. The notice shall be headed "notice to abate nuisance" in letters of not less than one (1) inch in height and shall be substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE TO ABATE NUISANCE 
_______ [name of person to whom notice is given] is notified to appear before the Town Council of the Town of Paradise at a meeting to be held on _______, 199___, at the hour of ___.m. at _______ [place of meeting], and show cause, if he or she has, why the nuisance should not be abated and the cost of abatement of the nuisance upon the parcel of land should not be made a special assessment against that parcel. 
Dated: 
Town Council of the Town of Paradise 
By: _____ 
(Ord. 290 §2(part), 1997)  
8.04.070 - Hearing. 
At the time fixed in the notice, the town council shall hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify respecting the condition constituting the nuisance, including the estimated cost of its abatement and any other matter which may be pertinent. At the conclusion of the hearing, the town council may, by resolution, declare its findings. If the town council so concludes, it may declare the condition existing to be a nuisance and direct the person owning the property upon which the nuisance exists to abate it within thirty (30) days after the date of posting on the premises of a notice of the adoption of the resolution. 
(Ord. 290 §2(part), 1997)  
8.04.080 - Extension of time. 
The town council may grant an extension of time to abate the nuisance if, in its opinion, good cause for an extension exists. 
(Ord. 290, § 2(part), 1997)  
8.04.090 - Abatement by town. 
If the person fails to abate the nuisance within the time set forth, the town may proceed to abate the nuisance. 
(Ord. 290, § 2(part), 1997)  
8.04.100 - Record of expenses. 
The town shall keep an itemized account of the expenses involved in abating the nuisance. The town shall post conspicuously on the property and shall also mail to the owner of the property a statement showing the expense of the abatement, together with a notice of the time and place when the statement will be submitted to the town council for approval and confirmation and at which time the town council shall consider objections or protests to the cost of the work. 
(Ord. 290, § 2(part), 1997)  
8.04.110 - Hearing on statement of expenses. 
At the time fixed for the hearing on the statement of expense, the town council shall consider the statement and protests or objections raised by the person liable to be assessed for the cost of the abatement. The town council may revise, correct or modify the statement as it considers just and thereafter shall confirm the statement by motion or resolution. 
(Ord. 290, § 2(part), 1997)  
8.04.120 - Expenses—A lien and a special assessment against the property. 
If the property owner does not pay the expense of abating the nuisance within five (5) days after the town council confirms the costs of abatement, the cost shall become a lien and a special assessment against the real property upon which the nuisance was abated. The lien and assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the rate of six (6) percent per year computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until paid. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this special assessment. 
(Ord. 290, § 2(part), 1997)  
8.04.130 - Notice of lien and special assessment. 
The town shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate substantially in the following form: 
NOTICE OF LIEN AND SPECIAL ASSESSMENT 
Under the authority of Government Code section 38773.5, and Chapter 8.04 of the Paradise Municipal Code _______, the Town did on _______, abate a nuisance upon the real property hereafter described and then on _______, did assess the cost of the abatement upon the real property. The Town of Paradise claims a lien and a special assessment on the real property for the expense of doing the work in the amount of $_____. This amount is a lien and a special assessment against the real property until it is paid, with interest at the rate of 6% a year from ___________ [insert date of confirmation of statement], and discharged of record. The real property referred to above, and upon which the lien and the special assessment is claimed is that certain parcel of land situated in the Town of Paradise, County of Butte, State of California, more particularly described as follows: ___________ 
_________________________________ 
Dated: 
Town of Paradise, Town Manager 
By: ___________ 
(Ord. No. 555, § 3, 3-10-2015; Ord. 290, § 2(part), 1997)  
8.04.140 - Procedure in case of emergency. 
When the conditions which constitute the nuisance pose an immediate threat to the public peace, health or safety, the town council may order the nuisance abated immediately or take steps itself to abate the nuisance after adoption of a resolution declaring the facts which constitute the emergency. The resolution to be effective shall be adopted by four-fifths ( 4/5 ) vote of the town council. 
(Ord. 290, § 2(part), 1997)  
8.04.150 - Cumulative remedies. 
The remedies set forth in this chapter include summary and administrative abatement, administrative citations, civil actions, criminal actions and all other remedies provided for by law. All remedies set forth in this chapter and in all town ordinances for the abatement or punishment of any violation thereof, are cumulative and may be pursued alternatively or in combination. Provisions of this code are to be supplementary and complementary to all of the town ordinances, the Paradise Municipal Code, state law, and any law under common law or in equity, and nothing herein shall be read, interpreted or construed in any manner so as to limit any existing right or power of the town to abate any and all nuisances and to enforce its ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 527, § 6, 1-8-2013)  
8.04.160 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to prosecution under the civil administration citation procedure set forth in Chapter 1.09 of this code. Each day that a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 555, § 4, 3-10-2015)  
Chapter 8.05 - UNLAWFUL DUMPING 
 
8.05.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
"Container" means any can, tank, receptacle or box used or intended to be used for the purpose of holding solid waste. 
"Enforcement officer" means a code enforcement officer pursuant to Section 1.08.150 of this code. 
"Person" means an individual, association, copartnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, firm, organization, partnership, joint venture or any other entity whatsoever. 
"Solid waste" means any and all putrescible and nonputrescible liquid, solid and/or semi-solid waste, whether hazardous or nonhazardous, and/or discarded property and items, including but not limited to refuse, garbage, rubbish, paper, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction waste, nuisance vehicles, dismantled vehicles or abandoned vehicles and/or parts thereof, discarded home, farm or industrial appliances, furniture or personal property, vegetable or animal solid and semi-solid wastes and other discarded liquid, solid and/or semisolid wastes. For purposes of this chapter "solid waste" shall include materials brought to a Butte County waste facility that may ultimately be diverted, reused or recycled by the county. 
"Waste facility" means: 
1.  A permitted facility used to receive, temporarily store, separate, convert or otherwise process the materials in solid waste or transfer solid waste directly form smaller to larger vehicles for transport; and 
2.  A permitted solid waste disposal site which is a Class III disposal site in accordance with the meaning prescribed by article 2, subchapter 15, chapter 3, title 23 of the California Code of Regulations (commencing with section 2510) as amended from time to time; and 
3.  A permitted household hazardous waste collection facility authorized to operate under permit by rule status pursuant to title 22, California Code of Regulations, section 66270.60; and 
4.  A permitted Class II disposal site; and 
5.  A permitted waste processor; and 
6.  A mono-fill waste disposal site; and 
7.  An exempt disposal facility or reclamation site. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 1, 2-26-2008)  
8.05.020 - Unlawful and unauthorized dumping. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Fail to arrange for the lawful disposal at a waste facility of solid waste generated on property which that person owns, occupies or manages; or 
2.  Cause or permit the deposit of solid waste on the right-of-way of any public highway, street, easement or thoroughfare, or upon any camping place or public grounds, or on any premises, or in any container without the permission of the owner thereof, or into any stream or dry watercourse, within the town; or 
3.  Cause, maintain or permit the accumulation of solid waste which creates an unsanitary condition or permits or encourages the accumulation or breeding of vectors. 
B.  Any person violating this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000). 
C.  Any condition that is a direct result of any of the acts/omissions set forth in subsection (A) of this section constitutes a public nuisance subject to the nuisance abatement procedures set forth in Chapter 8.04 of this code, as well as any other remedy provided by law. 
D.  In a criminal proceeding alleging a violation of subsection (A) of this section, upon a prima facie showing by the prosecution that a person's items, solid waste or property have been found in any location where it is unlawful to dispose of solid waste, under circumstances which would lead a reasonable trier of fact to conclude that the items had previously been discarded in that location, shall constitute a permissible inference that the person is guilty of a violation of subsection (A) of this section. The mental state required for conviction of a violation of subsection (A) of this section is strict liability, without regard to any element of mens rea, fault, negligence or other wrongdoing. 
E.  In the event of a conviction of a violation of subsection (A) of this section and under appropriate circumstances, the court shall order the defendant to pay restitution to any public entity and/or private party which and/or whom has incurred out-of-pocket expenses as a result of cleaning up an unlawful dump site, as a rehabilitative measure, in addition to any penalty imposed. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 1, 2-26-2008)  
8.05.030 - Enforcement actions. 
A.  Whenever he or she becomes aware that any act/omission constituting a violation of this chapter has occurred, the enforcement officer may: 
1.  Issue a criminal citation to the person or persons responsible for a violation; or 
2.  Issue an administrative citation under Chapter 1.09 of this code to the person or persons responsible for a violation; or 
3.  Issue a nuisance abatement notice directing the responsible person or persons to abate the violation of this Chapter as a nuisance pursuant to Chapter 8.04 of this code; or 
4.  Request a Paradise Police Officer to issue a citation to the responsible person or persons pursuant to Penal Code section 374.3 or 374.8, as appropriate, and to impound any vehicle used to violate such sections pursuant to Vehicle Code section 23112.7. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 1, 2-26-2008)  
8.05.040 - Nonexclusive remedy. 
This chapter does not exclusively regulate, enforce and/or penalize refuse disposal, unlawful dumping of refuse and the other, lesser included violations set forth above. It supplements and is in addition to other regulatory and enforcement codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the town, the State of California and/or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 479, § 1, 2-26-2008)  
Chapter 8.08 - SOLID WASTE COLLECTION 
 
8.08.010 - Title of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known, and may be cited, as the "solid waste collection and disposal ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.020 - Findings. 
The town council finds that the provisions of the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 require the town to develop a comprehensive program to reduce, recycle or otherwise divert the town's solid waste stream from landfill disposal by specific amounts on certain dates. 
The town council further finds that the public health, safety and welfare require that an exclusive franchise be awarded to a qualified enterprise for the collection, transportation, recycling, composting and disposal of all solid waste in the town. 
The town council also finds that the management of solid waste within the town subject to the provisions of this chapter is in accordance with the goals and policies of the Paradise general plan. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Establish the standards and procedures for complying with the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989; 
B.  Protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public by establishing appropriate standards governing the collection and disposal of solid waste; 
C.  Provide for resource conservation which will provide long-term economic, energy and natural resource benefits to society; 
D.  Extend the life of the Neal Road Landfill by diverting and recycling as much solid waste as possible; 
E.  Protect the environment by establishing proper collection and disposal programs. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.040 - Definitions. 
"Agreement" means a solid waste collection and disposal franchise agreement granted in accordance with the standards established in this chapter. 
"County" means the County of Butte, a political subdivision of the State of California. 
"Designated disposal site" means the disposal facility or site to which franchisee elects or is required to transport solid waste collected under the regulatory provisions of this chapter and the agreement for final disposal. 
"Franchise majeure" means acts of God, fire, landslides, lightning, storms, floods, freezing, earthquakes, epidemics, volcanic eruptions, civil disturbances, strikes, lockouts or other industrial disturbances, acts of the public enemy, wars, blockages, public riots, breakage, explosions or accident to machines, pipelines or materials, governmental restraint, unavailability of a disposal site and any other event which could not with reasonable diligence be controlled or prevented by the party affected by the event. 
"Franchise area" means the area within the town limits of the town on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, including any federal or state enclaves, and any areas annexed to the town or coming under the town's solid waste management or planning authority after that date. 
"Franchisee" means a firm who has been granted an exclusive franchise to collect solid waste within the town pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Franchisor" means the town which grants an exclusive franchise to collect solid waste within the town pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Generators" means individuals, businesses and other entities, including the town, that generate solid waste and/or recyclable materials in the franchise area and are customers of franchisee's services hereunder. 
"Gross receipts" means all money, cash, fees, revenues and gross sums received by franchisee in connection with the provision of services under an agreement, minus all sales taxes and excise taxes required by law to be collected by franchisee in connection with the provision of such services. There shall be no deduction from gross receipts for any overhead or costs or expenses of operation, such as, but without limitation to salaries, wages, costs of goods, interest, debt amortization, discount, collection charges, insurance and taxes, except as specifically provided herein; provided, that gross receipts shall not include federal, state, municipal or other taxes or fees collected from generators (regardless of whether the amount thereof is stated to the generator as a separate chart) and paid periodically by franchisee to a governmental agency, accompanied by a tax return or statement. The amount of such taxes or fees shall be shown on the books and records elsewhere herein required to be maintained. 
"Hazardous waste" means all solid waste defined or characterized as hazardous waste by the Federal Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended, including the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (42 U.S.C. Section 6901, et seq.) and all future amendments thereto, or regulations promulgated thereunder; all solid waste defined or characterized as hazardous waste by the principal agencies of the state (including without limitation the Department of Health Services and the California Integrated Waste Management Board) having jurisdiction over hazardous waste generated by facilities with the state, and pursuant to any applicable state or local law or ordinance, and all future amendments thereto, or regulations promulgated thereunder, including without limitation the California Integrated Solid Waste Management Act of 1989; radioactive wastes; any sewage sludge or other residue from wastewater treatment facilities; those substances or items which require special or extraordinary handling or disposal due to their hazardous, harmful, toxic or dangerous character or quality; and those substances and items which are not normally disposed of by generally accepted sanitary landfill disposal methods. 
"Recyclable materials" means reusable material, including but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic, and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. 
"Solid waste" means all residential, commercial, industrial and quasi-public putrescible and nonputrescible solid and semisolid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, vegetable, or animal solid or semisolid wastes, lawn and garden refuse, such as leaves, grass cuttings, weeds, and trimming from trees and shrubs, and all wastes capable of being recycled that are commingled with other waste. The term "solid waste" shall not include biomedical waste, hazardous waste, special waste, liquid-carried industrial wastes or sewage hauled as an incidental part of a septic tank or cesspool-cleaning service, whether combustible or noncombustible, liquid wastes or sewage sludge. 
"Special waste" means those solid wastes which consist of or contain pollutants which, under ambient environmental conditions at a sanitary landfill or other waste management unit could be released at concentrations in excess of applicable water quality objectives, or which could cause degradation of waters of the state, and which may only be discharged at waste management units that are designated either "Class I" or "Class II" by the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or successor agency. 
"State" means the State of California. 
"Town" means the Town of Paradise. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2 (part), 1995)  
8.08.050 - Franchises. 
A.  The maximum number of franchises to be awarded by the town council shall be one franchise for the collection, transportation, recycling, composting and disposal and waste diversion of solid waste within the town boundaries. The granting of the franchise shall be through an agreement between the town as the franchisor and the contractor as a franchisee. 
B.  A franchise shall be granted only to persons who possess all permits and licenses necessary to provide solid waste collection services in Butte County and the town. A franchise may be revoked upon the conviction of a franchisee for a violation of any crime involving moral turpitude or any federal, state, county or local statute relating to the collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 309, § 1, 1998; Ord. 265, § 1, 1995: Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.060 - Collection standards. 
All collection, transportation, recycling, composting and disposal of solid waste by the franchisee shall be conducted in accordance with the most recent town adopted Paradise General Plan for the town, including but not limited to, the town source reduction and recycling element (SRRE), the town household hazardous waste element (HHWE) and the Butte County/Town Hazardous Waste Management Plan. The detailed performance standards and conditions regulating the franchise shall be incorporated in the agreement between the town and the franchisee. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.070 - Solid waste reduction. 
In order to assist the town in meeting the required reduction of the amount of solid waste entering landfills pursuant to the provisions of Section 42901 of the California Public Resources Code in an efficient and cost-effective manner, the franchisee shall undertake and provide such collection, recycling, handling, marketing and/or processing programs or methods as the franchisee reasonably deems most efficient and/or cost-effective, including the use of a materials recovery facility (MRF) and/or curbside recycling, and provided such program or method is capable or achieving at least the fifty percent diversion requirement of Section 42901. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 314, § 1, 1998; Ord. 273, § 1, 1996: Ord. 265, § 2, 1995; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.080 - Ownership of solid waste—Flow control. 
Ownership and the right to possession of refuse, compostables, and recyclables, placed in containers, bins or roll-offs, or placed at curbside, shall transfer directly from the customer to the franchisee, by operation of law. Franchisee's arrangements with its customers will provide that, subject to the right of the customer to claim lost property, title and the right to possession, and liability for all recyclables and all solid waste, whether or not recyclable, which is set out for collection on the regularly scheduled collection day shall pass to franchisee at the time it is set out. Subject to the provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreement, franchisee shall have the right to retain any benefit profit resulting from its right to retain, recycle, compost, dispose of, or use the refuse, compostables, recyclables and construction debris which it collects. Refuse, compostables, recyclables and construction debris, or any part thereof which is disposed of at a disposal site or sites (whether landfill, transformation facility, compost facility or material recovery facility) shall become the property of the owner or operator of the disposal site or sites once deposited there by franchisee. 
However, franchisor, at its sole option, shall retain the right to require franchisee which transformation facility, compost facility, material recovery facility or landfill shall be used by franchisee to retain, recycle, compost, process and dispose of solid waste and construction debris generated within the franchise area to assure conformance with the California Integrated Waste Management Action of 1989. Nothing herein shall be construed as prohibiting a generator from recycling his, her or its own recyclable material through another program. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.090 - Universal collection. 
A.  The property owner of any residential, commercial, industrial, quasi-public or other land use in the town shall be responsible for contracting with the franchisee authorized by this chapter for the satisfactory collection and removal of all solid waste accumulated on the property. Solid waste shall not be allowed to accumulate more than seven consecutive days on a property in order to prevent the creation of a nuisance, a fire hazard, or the propagation or attraction of flies, insects, rodents, or other vectors. 
B.  To enable the town to determine if all households are participating in the universal collection program, the franchisee shall provide a list of their customers to the town on a quarterly or semi-annual basis until the town reduces the frequency of list submittal based on most households participating. 
(Ord. No. 502, § 1, 7-13-2010; Ord. No. 471, § 1, 11-13-2007; Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 265, § 3, 1995; Ord. 257, § 2 (part), 1995; Ord. 383, § 1, 2002) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 502, § 2, adopted July 13, 2010, provides that this ordinance shall take effect 30 days after the date of its passage.  
8.08.100 - Privacy. 
Franchisee shall strictly observe and protect the rights of privacy of customers. Information identifying individual customers or the composition or contents of a customer's waste stream shall not be revealed to any person, governmental unit, private agency or company, unless upon the authority of a court of law, by statute or upon valid authorization of the customer. This provision shall not be construed to preclude franchisee from preparing, participating in or assisting in the preparation of waste characterization studies or waste stream analyses which may be required by the Act. Franchisee shall not market or distribute, outside the normal course of its business, mailing lists with the names and addresses of customers. The rights accorded customers pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other privacy right accorded customers pursuant to federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.110 - Restriction on manner of collection. 
In order to comply with the provisions of the Act and to accurately account for and to report for the amount of solid waste collected within the town and disposed according to this chapter, each load of solid waste collected by franchisee shall not be commingled with any other solid waste collected by the franchisee from any other person or place located outside the town limits. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.120 - Vehicle standards. 
A.  Each vehicle used by franchisee shall at all times comply with all applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code, and shall be inspected, at least once a year, using the "critical item inspection" criteria as approved by the California Highway Patrol. The results of said inspections shall be made available to the town manager upon request. 
B.  Each vehicle used for the collection and transportation or transport of solid waste shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition both inside and out and shall be washed at least once every seven calendar days. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.130 - Indemnification. 
Franchisee shall indemnify the town in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 265, § 4, 1995: Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.140 - Faithful performance. 
Concurrent with the granting of the franchise pursuant to this chapter, the franchisee shall deposit with the town a cash deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or other such document evidencing an irrevocable cash deposit payable to the town, in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars, in a form approved by the town attorney, guaranteeing franchisee's faithful performance of the terms of its franchise agreement and shall promptly pay all just claims for any labor skill rendered or equipment or material used in the performance of this chapter. Such cash deposit or letter of credit shall be maintained in effect throughout the duration of the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.150 - Franchise transferrable. 
A.  The franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall not be transferred, sold, sublet or assigned, nor shall any of the rights or privileges herein be hypothecated, leased, assigned, sold, or transferred, either in whole or in part, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest, or property therein pass to or vest in any person, except the franchisee, either by act of the franchisee or by operation of law without the prior written consent of the town council expressed by a duly adopted resolution. Any attempt to assign this franchise without the consent of the town council shall be void. 
B.  The town may impose conditions of approval on the transfer of an agreement, including but not limited to, conditions requiring acceptance of the provisions of the Paradise Municipal Code, including this chapter, and the agreement. The town shall not be unreasonable in withholding its consent of the transfer. 
C.  Town consent is required for any change in the control of the franchisee. "Change in control" means any sale, transfer or acquisition of the franchisee. 
D.  Any change in control of the franchisee occurring without prior town approval shall constitute a material breach of the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.160 - Franchise fees. 
Beginning with the first full month following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the franchisee shall pay to franchisor on a quarterly basis, seven percent (7%) of all gross receipts collected by the franchisee as a franchise fee. Other than the fee established for the 2006-2007 fiscal year, this franchise fee shall be computed annually beginning on July 1st of each subsequent fiscal year with payments to the town being made no later than the twentieth (20th) day after any calendar quarter. 
(Ord. No. 477, § 1, 2-12-2008; Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.170 - Franchisee's books and records. 
A.  The franchisee shall maintain all records relating to the services provided hereunder, including, but not limited to, customer lists, billing records, customer complaints, accounts payable records, financial audits, maps and the Act compliance records, for a period of not less than three years, or any longer period required by law. The town shall have the right, upon five days advance written notice, to inspect all records which reasonably relate to the franchisee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the agreement. Such records shall be made available to the town at the franchisee's regular place of business, but in no event outside the County of Butte. 
B.  Should any examination or audit of franchisee's records reveal an underpayment of any fee required pursuant to this chapter or the franchise agreement, the amount of such underpayment shall become due and payable to town not later than fifteen days after written notice of such underpayment is sent to franchisee by the town. Should an underpayment of more than three percent be discovered, the franchisee shall bear the entire cost of an audit of franchise fees. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.180 - Compensation. 
A.  Franchisee Rate. On or before May 1, 2007, the franchisee shall provide the services described in this chapter and the franchise agreement in accordance with Exhibit "F" of the franchise agreement. 
B.  Modifications and Adjustments. The rates set forth in Exhibit "F" shall remain in effect until adjusted by the town based on Exhibit "E" of the franchise agreement. 
C.  All other terms and conditions of rates shall be as set forth in the franchise agreement. 
D.  All billing for services provided shall be made by the franchisee; and all charges shall become delinquent sixty days after billing date. 
E.  If the bill remains unpaid after the date of delinquency, the franchisee shall be entitled to a delinquency fee; and may discontinue service to the property after a thirty day written notice. However, said delinquency fee shall not be assessed until fifteen days after notification of the delinquency to the property owner and recipient of service. The form and content of the delinquency notice sent by the franchisee shall be approved by the town manager. Franchisee shall simultaneously file with the town manager a formal written notice stating the assessor's parcel number of the parcel to which service was rendered, that such delinquency notice has been sent to such recipient and property owner and the date and address to which notice was sent. Delinquency fees shall be set by the franchise agreement. 
F.  Should the bill remain unpaid at the expiration of the sixty (60) days, the franchisee may assign said bill to the town for lien proceedings. 
G.  Upon the town's receipt of the assignment from the franchisee and at the convenience of the town (i.e. once per year during the month of May); the town manager shall initiate proceedings complying with Government Code sections 38790.1 and 25831 to create a lien on the real property to which the waste collection has been rendered. 
H.  The lien shall be officially recorded in the Butte County recorder's office. The lien may carry such additional administrative charges as set forth by the resolution of the town council. The owner shall be notified by the town finance department that the delinquency charges and administrative charges are due the town and that said lien has been recorded. 
(Ord. No. 471, §§ 2, 3, 11-13-2007; Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. No. 446, §§ 1, 2, 2-28-06; Ord. 265, § 5, 1995; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.190 - Government liaison person. 
The franchisee shall designate a "government liaison person" who shall be responsible for working with the town manager or the town manager's designee to resolve consumer complaints. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.200 - General provisions. 
A.  Independent Contractor. The franchisee is an independent contractor and not an officer, agent, servant or employee of the town. The franchisee is solely responsible for the acts and omissions of their officers, agents, employees, contractors and subcontractors, if any. Nothing in this chapter or in the agreement shall be construed as creating a partnership or joint venture between town and franchisee. Neither franchisee nor its officers, employees, agents or subcontractors shall obtain any rights to retirement or other benefits which accrue to town employees. 
B.  Pavement Damage. Franchisee shall be responsible for any extraordinary damage to town's driving surfaces resulting from negligence in providing solid waste collection and transportation services. 
C.  Property Damage. Any physical damage caused by the negligent or willful acts or omissions of employees, contractors or subcontractors of the franchisee to private or public property shall be repaired or replaced. 
D.  Right of Entry. The franchisee shall have the right, until receipt of written notice revoking permission to pass is delivered to franchisee, to enter or drive upon any private street, court, place, easement, or other private property for the purpose of providing for the collection, transportation, recycling, composting and disposal of solid waste and construction debris pursuant to this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
E.  Prior Agreements and Amendments. This chapter and the franchise agreement are intended to carry out town's obligations to comply with the provisions of the California Integrated Waste Management Act as it from time to time may be amended, and as implemented by regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board ("Regulations"), as they from time to time may be amended. In the event that the Act or other state or federal laws or regulations are enacted after this chapter has been enacted and the franchise agreement entered into, prevent or preclude compliance with one or more provisions of this chapter and the franchise agreements, such provisions shall be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with such state or federal laws or regulations. No other amendment of the franchise agreements shall be valid unless in writing duly executed by the parties. 
F.  Service Requirements. Franchisee shall furnish all necessary personnel, labor, equipment, materials, billing, transportation, and related facilities required to perform its services under this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
G.  Laws and Licenses. The franchisee shall comply with all federal, state, county and town laws and ordinances, rules and regulations applicable to the performance of services hereunder, and shall obtain all licenses and permits necessary to perform the services hereunder and maintain the same in full force and effect. 
H.  Nondiscrimination. In performing the services hereunder, each franchisee shall not discriminate against any person on the ground of race, sex, age, creed, color, religion or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 257 § 2(part), 1995)  
8.08.210 - Unlawful action/penalty. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or generator in the town to do any of the following: 
1.  Dispose of or dump solid waste on public or private rights-of-way; 
2.  Dispose of toxic or hazardous materials in a manner that creates a public health, safety or environmental hazard; 
3.  Dispose of dead animals as part of normal collection of solid waste; 
4.  Utilize solid waste containers belonging to other individuals without prior written permission; 
5.  Fail to contract with the town's authorized solid waste collection franchisee to collect solid waste and recyclable materials from the generator unless granted an exemption from such required contracted service by action of the Town of Paradise. 
6.  Violate any provisions of the Paradise General Plan's "household hazardous waste element"; 
7.  Violate any provision of the Paradise General Plan's "source reduction and recycling element"; 
8.  Pick up recyclable material placed in a town-owned container or curbside by other property owners or tenants for collection by the town's authorized franchised solid waste collector; 
9.  Place and leave a solid waste/recyclable materials container within the front yard or at curbside or roadway collection point more than twenty-four (24) hours before the day of collection pickup or beyond twenty-four (24) hours after the day of collection pickup. 
10.  For anyone other than a person authorized by the property owner to remove or otherwise interfere with recyclable materials which have been placed in a waste disposal container. 
B.  Any person or generator violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code Section 36900. Any additional violation of this chapter within one (1) year of the first violation may be prosecuted by the town attorney as a misdemeanor with a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months in the county jail; and provided, however, the town attorney shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 549, § 1, 10-14-2014; Ord. No. 477, § 2, 2-12-2008; Ord. No. 471, § 4, 11-13-2007; Ord. No. 459, §§ 1, 2, 3-27-2007; Ord. 383, § 2, 2002; Ord. 257, § 2(part), 1995)  
Chapter 8.12 - FELLING, REMOVAL, DESTRUCTION, DAMAGING AND REPLACEMENT OF TREES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 482, §§ 1, 2, adopted May 27, 2008, repealed the former Ch. 8.12, §§ 8.12.010—8.12.160, and enacted a new Ch. 8.12, §§ 8.12.010—8.12.160, as set out herein. The former Ch. 8.12 pertained to similar subject matter. 
 
8.12.010 - Title of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Town of Paradise Tree Preservation Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.020 - Purpose of regulations controlling tree removal. 
A.  In enacting the following regulations, it is important to note that the town is situated in a scenic foothill forest area with a reputation as a restful urban forest. It is the responsibility of all residents and/or property owners of the town to maintain the aesthetic beauty of the town for the benefit of all residents and visitors to the town. 
B.  The residents of the town believe that trees are a valuable asset that make our environment a healthier and more beautiful place in which to live. It is, therefore, important that the following advantages be emphasized and recognized: 
1.  Trees enhance the habitat of desirable wildlife. 
2.  Trees aid in preventing erosion, storm damage and flood damage. 
3.  Trees reduce wind velocity by creating wind breaks. 
4.  Trees reduce traffic noise, provide shade and promote clean air by converting carbon dioxide to oxygen, and/or absorb pollutants and particulate matter. 
5.  Trees improve the aesthetics of the town. 
6.  Tree preservation enhances the environmental and economic values of property. 
7.  Trees protect stream corridor habitats. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter are intended: 
1.  To limit the indiscriminate felling, removal and destruction of healthy trees. 
2.  To preserve the natural beauty of the area. 
3.  To maintain a healthy, forested environment by promoting the felling and removal of trees significantly affected by pathogens or invasive insects. 
4.  To promote proper tree care and management through education. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 1, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.030 - Reserved. 
Ord. No. 538, § 2, adopted March 11, 2014, effective Apr. 10, 2014, repealed § 8.12.030, which pertained to tree advisory committee and derived from Ord. No. 482, § 2, adopted May 27, 2008.  
8.12.040 - Permit and permit fee required. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to fell a qualifying tree without a duly issued permit in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A permit shall be required for the felling of qualifying trees that measure either thirty-one (31) inches or greater in circumference or ten (10) inches or greater in diameter at breast height (dbh). All tree measurements shall be taken at breast height, defined as four (4) feet, six (6) inches above natural grade as measured on the uphill side of the tree. Any permit application filed with town officials proposing the felling of a total of nine (9) or more qualifying trees from a single legal parcel within a twelve (12) consecutive month period shall contain a written explanation by a tree expert under penalty of perjury that the qualifying tree or trees must be felled based on circumstances for felling and/or removal under Section 8.12.090 of this chapter. No person shall fell or remove a qualifying tree from real property prior to permit approval. 
B.  A permit fee for the felling of any qualifying tree shall be established by the town council. The permit fee and any cost charged for evaluation by a tree expert shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
C.  Except as provided in Section 8.12.090 of this chapter, tree felling permit applications shall be subject to review, approval or denial as follows: 
1.  Tree felling permit applications proposing to fell a total of nine (9) or more qualifying trees from a single legal parcel within a twelve (12) consecutive month period shall be subject to approval or denial by the planning commission or by the planning director based on which one has the approval authority for a related planning and/or land use entitlement application pursuant to town subdivision and zoning regulations. 
2.  Tree felling permit applications proposing the felling of nine (9) or more qualifying trees from a single legal parcel within a twelve (12) consecutive month period shall be subject to approval or denial by the planning director or the planning commission upon referral by the planning director, whenever the application is not related to a planning or land use entitlement. 
3.  Tree felling permit applications proposing the felling of eight (8) or fewer qualifying trees from a single legal parcel within a twelve (12) consecutive month period or the felling of any number of qualifying trees relating to a single-family residential land use shall be acted upon by the town manager, or his/her designee and may in the judgment of the town manager require an evaluation by a tree expert. 
4.  For purposes of creating a fire-safe environment for new single-family land uses, qualifying trees located within thirty (30) feet of new building foundations may be felled subject to the issuance of a tree felling permit issued administratively by the town manager or his/her designee. 
D.  A tree felling permit shall be valid for a period of ninety (90) days after the date of issuance. An extension of an unexpired permit for up to an additional forty-five (45) days may be granted by the town manager, or his/her designee if acts of nature prevent the felling of trees due to unusual and extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the permittee. 
E.  A minor modification to an approved, unexpired tree felling permit may be granted at the discretion of the town manager or his/her designee for up to three (3) additional, deleted or alternative qualifying trees, based upon a clear demonstration of the need for such a modification due to unforeseen circumstances. If any increase in the number of qualifying trees for an administratively approved tree felling permit results in a total of nine (9) or more qualifying trees proposed to be felled, a public hearing before the planning director or by the planning commission upon referral by the planning director shall be required (excepting single-family land uses). 
F.  In reviewing an application, the town council, planning commission, planning director or town manager may require a second opinion from a tree expert regarding the necessity to fell one or more qualifying trees. The cost for such a second opinion shall be at the sole expense of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 2, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.050 - Permit applications. 
Permit applications shall include the following information: 
A.  Name of legal landowner; 
B.  Address of property where qualifying trees are to be felled and/or removed; 
C.  Number, diameter or circumference (at dbh), tree species type and location of qualifying trees proposed for felling and/or removal; 
D.  Expected date of commencement of felling and/or removal; 
E.  The reason for the proposed tree felling and/or removal of each tree; 
F.  History of past tree felling permits of affected property, if applicable; and 
G.  A plot plan map if eight (8) trees or less; and a plot plan map drawn to scale if nine (9) trees or more. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 3, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.060 - Notice of public hearing. 
Written notice of the planning commission or planning director, as appropriate, public hearing on an application for a tree felling permit shall be provided by the town at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing date. The notice of public hearing shall include the location, time and date of the public hearing and shall be given by mail, using addresses from the latest equalized assessment roll, to all owners of property located within a minimum three hundred-foot distance of any boundary of the subject property. The applicant shall be responsible for costs incurred by the town for mailing the notice of public hearing. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.062 - Timing of tree permit hearing. 
Concurrently with the approval or conditional approval of any development project application involving tree felling activities that are subject to review under this chapter, a tree felling permit application for the project shall be reviewed and acted upon by the planning commission or planning director, as appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.065 - Posting of approved permit. 
Prior to the commencement of tree felling activity, a town approved tree felling permit shall be clearly posted by the applicant or his/her representative at the site of tree felling and/or removal activities. Once the permitted tree felling is completed, the permittee shall remove the permit and/or any other posted documentation within seven (7) days. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.075 - Permit revocation. 
The town manager and his/her designee shall have the authority to revoke any town approved tree felling permit if it is determined that the permittee has failed to comply with the conditions of the approved tree permit or the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.080 - Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to commit an act which is prohibited by this chapter. Any violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction. The felling, removal or damage of a tree in violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per tree. Any person found guilty of violating this chapter shall be fully responsible for all costs relating to enforcement, investigation and legal costs associated with an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.085 - Enforcement penalties and legal procedure. 
A.  All departments and employees of the town vested with the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this chapter and shall issue no permit for tree felling in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, and any such permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this chapter shall be null and void. 
B.  In addition to complying with the provisions of this chapter, no tree felling permit shall be issued if the activities described in the application would violate the zoning provisions of Title 17 of the Paradise Municipal Code. 
C.  The enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be vested with the town manager or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.087 - Investigations; penalties; enforcement. 
Investigations, penalties and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be conducted or applied as specified and regulated in this code. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.090 - Felling of trees. 
A.  The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter and shall not require the application and issuance of a tree felling permit: 
1.  Felling of trees that are less than thirty-one (31) inches in circumference or less than ten (10) inches in diameter measured at breast height (dbh). 
2.  Felling of any tree that is dead (a dead tree is defined as one in which one hundred (100) percent of the foliage-bearing crown is dead or fading in color from a normal green to yellow, sorrel or brown, excluding normal autumn coloration changes). 
3.  Felling of any tree that is diseased (a diseased tree is defined as one that, based upon certification by a tree expert or other substantial evidence, has a strong likelihood of dying within one year and infecting other trees in the area with pathogens or invasive insects). 
4.  Felling of any fruit or nut tree (fruit or nut trees are those tree species that are commonly grown in orchards for the production of food products and do not include trees indigenous to Paradise). 
5.  Felling of any tree that is directly causing visible damage to property improvements. 
6.  Felling of any tree by a public utility for the purpose of repairing, maintaining or installing service lines. 
7.  Tree(s) that must be felled to accommodate street maintenance activities or the establishment of a town-funded capital improvement project. 
B.  A tree felling permit shall be issued only if one or more of the circumstances listed in this subsection exist, based on substantial evidence. 
Circumstances: 
1.  The tree(s) are hazardous. 
2.  The tree(s) to be harvested are in an area zoned by the town for commercial timber harvesting as defined in Section 17.04.500 of the Paradise Municipal Code. 
3.  The tree(s) must be felled in order to maintain long-term forest stability; through a thinning plan or timber stand management plan prepared by a tree expert as defined in this chapter with consideration of the following: 
a.  The tree(s) are infested or infected by insects, pathogens or parasites that immediately threaten the viability of those trees or have the capacity of spreading to surrounding trees. 
b.  The tree(s) are not indigenous to the area and are considered noxious to indigenous plants. 
4.  The tree(s) must be felled for fire hazard reduction purposes based upon the following: 
a.  At least fifty (50) percent of the larger diameter trees within a given stand (overstory) shall remain. 
b.  Completion of fire hazard measures as required by the State Forest Practices Rules under Title 14 of the California Code of Regulations. 
5.  The tree(s) must be felled to reasonably accommodate the following activities: 
a.  The tree interferes with the construction and establishment of a town authorized structure or structure addition. 
b.  The tree interferes with the construction of a town authorized driveway, parking lot or area, walkway, patio, swimming pool or deck. 
c.  The tree is located within an area to be graded or filled as approved by the town. 
d.  The tree interferes with the repair or installation of a town authorized wastewater treatment and disposal system. 
e.  The tree interferes with the construction of private or public access and/or drainage improvements. 
f.  The tree interferes with the repair, safe operation or an essential function of a town authorized land use. 
g.  The tree prevents or interferes with the establishment or expansion of a town permitted accessory land use. 
h.  The tree interferes with the installation, repair or the safe operation of a private utility service. 
i.  The tree must be felled for a reason or reasons similar to the forgoing. 
C.  Reasonable conditions may be imposed upon the issuance of a tree felling permit. 
D.  The tree felling application requirement may be waived by the town manager or his/her designee upon notification and verification by a tree expert or the submittal of other substantial evidence that the qualifying tree(s) create an emergency/dangerous situation or create a significant risk of spreading pathogens or insect infestations to surrounding trees. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 4, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.100 - Damage to trees. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause damage to a qualifying tree as prohibited by this section. 
A.  No person shall willfully face-cut, girdle or otherwise fatally injure a qualifying tree unless the tree is included upon a valid tree felling permit issued by the town. 
B.  No person shall trench, excavate, alter the grade, place impervious surfacing or cause mechanical damage to the root zone within an area comprising more than fifty (50) percent of the drip line area of a tree prior to the issuance of a tree felling permit related thereto. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.110 - Protection of trees during construction. 
A.  All development projects shall be designed and construction activities executed in a manner which considers the retention and protection of existing trees. 
B.  No tree felling permit shall be issued to accommodate new commercial, community services, industrial or residential construction unless and until any required septic system construction permit has been issued and any required building permit applications have been filed with the town. Further, no tree felling permit shall be issued to accommodate the construction of road, drainage or site improvements unless and until any required improvement plans have been approved and signed by the town engineer, or his/her designee. 
C.  All trees that are not being removed shall be protected from damage by equipment used during construction in accordance with adopted town regulations and policies. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.112 - Designation of landmark trees. 
A.  A tree owner may submit an application to the town requesting that the town council establish by town adopted and recorded resolution the designation of a tree or group of trees located on his or her property as a landmark tree(s). Applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the town and shall not be subject to an application fee. The town council may also, on its own motion, commence the process of designating a landmark tree. The town shall notify the owner of the proposed landmark tree(s) by mail twenty (20) days prior to the meeting to consider the application. Once an application has been submitted, and prior to town council action, the tree or trees shall be afforded the same level of statutory protection as a designated landmark tree. 
B.  In order to designate a tree as a landmark tree, the town council must find that the tree is a significantly beneficial feature of the community because it possesses one or more of the following attributes: 
1.  The tree is an outstanding specimen of a desirable species; 
2.  The tree is one of the largest or oldest trees in Paradise; 
3.  The tree is of historical interest; or 
4.  The tree is of distinctive appearance. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.115 - Felling or alteration of landmark trees. 
A.  No person shall fell, remove, substantially encroach into the root zone, top or relocate any town designated landmark tree unless a valid tree permit has been reviewed and approved by the town planning commission or the planning director pursuant to the procedures outlined in this chapter. Provided, however, that in case of emergency when a tree is hazardous or dangerous to life or property it may be pruned or felled by order of the town manager or a majority of the town council. 
B.  No tree permit application proposing the felling or alteration of landmark trees shall be approved unless the application is accompanied by written certification from a tree expert that one of the following circumstances apply to the tree(s): 
1.  The location of the tree(s) would otherwise prevent reasonable development of the property in accordance with development permit(s) that have been submitted to the town and are under review. Existing development on similar sites in the same zone and having similar characteristic shall be considered when determining reasonable development of permitted land uses. 
2.  The condition of the tree(s), with respect to general health; disease; maturity; structural integrity; proximity to existing improvements is such that the tree constitutes a safety hazard that cannot be controlled or remedied through reasonable preservation procedures and practices. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.117 - Declassification of landmark trees. 
An owner of a landmark tree may submit an application to the town requesting that the town council declassify by resolution a tree or group of trees previously designated as a landmark tree(s). The town council may also, on its own motion commence the process of declassifying a landmark tree. The town shall notify the owner of the landmark tree(s) twenty (20) days prior to the town council meeting scheduled for the proposed action. The town council may declassify a landmark tree upon a finding that the tree(s) is no longer a significant community benefit because: (1) it has deteriorated in health or appearance; (2) it no longer has habitat value; or (3) it prevents reasonable use of the property. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.120 - Tree replacement/tree replacement fee. 
A.  For each qualifying tree felled to maintain or develop commercial, industrial, multiple-family, community service, or community facilities land uses, one five-gallon minimum size replacement tree of a tree species listed within subsection B of this section, except as provided within subsections C, D, E and F of this section, shall be planted by the permittee within twelve (12) months thereafter or within one year of occupancy, whichever occurs first. Replacement trees shall be planted on the site where the tree or trees were felled. Any exceptions to the aforementioned tree planting requirement involving tree felling permits shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission, the planning director or to the town manager, as applicable, at or before the time that the tree felling permit application is acted upon. For development projects requiring a town-approved landscape plan that includes a significant percentage of replacement trees required by this section, the planning director, based upon a written review provided by a tree expert or a licensed landscape architect, may grant an exception to the number of replacement trees. Property owners shall receive tree planting in lieu credit for evidence protected natural saplings with a diameter between one inch to three (3) inches and growing on the site for no more than fifty (50) percent of the total number of qualifying trees authorized to be felled. 
B.  The following is a list of suggested restocking species: 
1.  Conifer Species. 
a.  Ponderosa Pine, Pinus ponderosa . 
b.  Sugar Pine, Pinus lambertiana . 
c.  Douglas Fir, Psuedosuga menziezii . 
d.  White Fir, Abies concolor . 
e.  Incense Cedar, Calocedrus decurrens . 
f.  Coast Redwood, Sequoia sempervirens . 
g.  Sierra Redwood, Sequoiadendron giganteum . 
2.  Hardwood Species. 
a.  Black Oak, Quercus kellogii . 
b.  Canyon Live Oak, Quercus chrysolepis . 
c.  Blue Oak, Quercus douglasii . 
d.  California Valley Oak, Quercus lobata . 
e.  Scrub Oak, Quercus dumosa . 
f.  Big Leaf Maple, Acer macrophylum . 
g.  Western Dogwood, Cornus nuttallii . 
C.  There shall be established a tree replacement fund for the purpose of financing the replacement of felled trees. 
D.  Whenever a tree felling permit is issued for the felling of trees on property that cannot accommodate the planting of replacement trees, the permittee shall pay an in-lieu fee identified in the town master fee schedule resolution for each qualifying tree to be felled. 
E.  All fees collected pursuant to subsection D shall be deposited in the tree replacement fund and shall be used exclusively to plant and maintain trees on town- and/or publicly-owned property, or for the town to purchase, lease or otherwise acquire land or recorded rights for the planting and maintenance of trees. 
F.  Tree felling activities associated with the maintenance and development of single-family residential land uses or conducted pursuant to Section 8.12.090 B.4 shall be exempt from the requirements of this section relating to tree replacement requirements and the payment of an in-lieu fee. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 5, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.130 - Bark beetle brood material. 
Any slash less than six (6) inches in diameter resulting from the removal of pine species shall be treated or abated by the permittee no later than forty-five (45) days beyond the date of slash creation, by chipping, lopping to common firewood length, or burning. Removal of brood material from one property to another location does not constitute abatement unless the material is transported to a town approved facility. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.140 - Removal of slash and felled trees. 
All slash, downed trees or tree scraps except for wood that is cut, stacked and stored for firewood, shall be chipped, burned or removed from the property by the permittee within forty-five (45) days following the felling of any tree. Exceptions to this section shall be heard by the planning director or the town manager, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.145 - Education. 
It shall be the responsibility of the town through the tree permit process to promote and to make available educational information related to the preservation, protection and management of trees within our community. 
(Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.150 - Appeal. 
A.  Except as provided within subsection B of this section, appeals shall be allowed solely for felling permits of nine (9) trees or more and shall be limited to: (1) the permit applicant, or (2) an owner of real property that is located within three hundred (300) lineal feet of a legal parcel for which a tree felling permit has been approved authorizing the felling of fifty (50) percent or more of the qualifying trees on the parcel, or (3) any citizen of the town when a tree felling permit has been approved authorizing the felling of twenty (20) or more qualifying trees equaling fifty (50) percent or more of the qualifying trees on a single legal parcel. Any aforementioned eligible party may appeal a decision rendered under this chapter to the town council. The appeal to the town council must be filed within seven (7) calendar days of the decision date. All appeals shall be filed in writing with the town clerk along with the required appeal fee. The appeal shall state the reasons for the requested reversal or modification of the decision. 
B.  Tree felling permits authorizing the felling of any number of qualifying trees relating to a single family residential land use shall not be subject to appeal. 
C.  Public hearings concerning such appeals shall be conducted within forty-five (45) days after the receipt of a written appeal. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 6, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
8.12.160 - Definitions. 
"Appeals board" shall be the town council for the purpose of hearing appeals concerning decisions rendered under this chapter on behalf of the town pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Bark beetle brood material" is any residue less than six (6) inches in diameter resulting from pine species removal. 
"Building footprint" means the cumulative area within the outside walls of any building or structure authorized for construction by town issuance of a building permit. 
"Damage" means any intentional action or gross negligence which causes injury, death or disfigurement of a tree. 
"Dead tree" means a tree in which one hundred (100) percent of the foliage-bearing crown is dead or fading in color from a normal green to yellow, sorrel or brown, excluding normal autumn coloration changes. 
"Dbh" means diameter at breast height, specifically four (4) feet, six (6) inches above natural grade as measured on the uphill side. 
"Diseased tree" shall mean a tree that, based upon certification by a tree expert or other substantial evidence, has a strong likelihood of dying within one year and infecting other trees in the area with pathogens or invasive insects and/or becoming a hazard as a result of the disease. 
"Drip line" means the outermost line of the tree's canopy projected straight downward to the ground surface. As depicted in plain view, the drip line appears as an irregularly shaped circle. 
"Face cut" means the initial cut while felling a tree that removes a wedge-shaped piece of wood and determines the direction of fall. Also known as an undercut. 
"Girdle" means to encircle the stem of a living tree with cuts that completely sever all bark layers to kill the tree by preventing the passage of carbohydrates to the roots. 
"Hazardous" means presenting an imminent danger to people, existing structures or fenced animals. 
"Landmark tree" means a tree that has been designated by resolution of the town council to be of high value because of its species, size, age, appearance, historical significance, or other professional criteria. 
"Legal parcel" means an independent, lawfully created property that meets the minimum subdivision and zoning standards at the time the parcel was established. 
"Overstory" means that portion of a stand of trees forming the upper canopy or uppermost layer of leaves. 
"Permittee" means a property owner who has been issued a tree felling permit by the town. 
"Qualifying tree" means any living woody perennial plant characterized by having one or more main stems or trunks, one stem or trunk of which measures either thirty-one (31) inches or more in circumference or ten (10) inches or more in diameter at breast height (dbh). Trees shall be measured at a level that is located four (4), feet six (6) inches above natural grade as measured on the uphill side of the tree. 
"Town council" means the governing, legislative body of the town. 
"Town manager" means the town manager of the town, or his/her designee. 
"Tree advisory committee" The tree advisory committee is composed of up to five (5) individuals appointed by the town council. The committee is charged with duties designated and delegated by the town council on matters pertaining to the management of tree resources within the town. 
"Tree expert" means a California registered professional forester; or an arborist certified by the Western Chapter of the International Society of Arboriculture; or a state licensed contractor, with seven (7) years or more local tree service experience. 
"Tree felling permit" means a permit issued by the town authorizing a person to fell, top the crown, destroy or remove a tree pursuant to the authority of this chapter. 
"Tree maintenance activities" means physical actions performed by a person that are intended to sustain a tree. Such activities shall include, but are not limited to: tree felling and removal, tree transplanting, pruning and application of pesticides upon trees. 
(Ord. No. 565, § 7, 12-13-2016; Ord. No. 482, § 2, 5-27-2008)  
Chapter 8.16 - FRUIT AND NUT TREES 
 
8.16.010 - Standards for sale. 
Any and all fruit and nut trees offered or delivered for sale within the town shall be of good quality and condition and shall be free from twisted, crossed, frosted, broken or otherwise defective roots, broken grafts and other deformation or defects which will interfere with the normal and proper development of fruit or nut trees after planting. 
(Ord. 16, §§ 1(R)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code § 23-1)  
8.16.020 - Inspection—Rejection. 
The county agricultural commissioner shall inspect each and every lot, load or shipment of fruit or nut trees intended for sale or planting in the county and shall reject any or all fruit or nut trees that do not conform to the quality and condition of provisions of Section 8.16.010. Immediately after such inspection and rejection, the agricultural commissioner shall in writing notify the owner or agent in charge of the lot, load or shipment of fruit or nut trees of the number and varieties rejected and the reason therefor and shall order the owner or agent to destroy or ship the rejected trees out of the town within reasonable time. 
(Ord. 16, §§1 (R)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §23-2)  
Chapter 8.20 - DISEASED TREES 
 
8.20.010 - Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to knowingly maintain, cultivate or propagate any fruit or nut tree or other host plant infected with any serious virus disease within the town. (Ord. 16 §§1(R)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §23-6)  
8.20.020 - Serious virus disease defined. 
"Serious virus disease" specifically includes the virus diseases referred to as the yellow leaf roll of peach, the western x disease of peach (also known as the buckskin disease of cherries), the peach mosaic disease, the peach wart disease, yellow bud mosaic and others as specified by the county agricultural commissioner or the Director of Agriculture. (Ord. 16 §1(R)(part), 1980: county code §23-7)  
8.20.030 - Inspection—Tagging—Report to owner. 
The agricultural commissioner of the county shall, whenever he deems it necessary, cause an inspection to be made of fruit and nut trees for the presence of serious virus diseases and shall cause a suitable mark or tag to be placed on any plant found to be infected with any such serious virus disease and shall report the finding of such infection in writing to the owner or other person in charge of the property upon completion of a positive determination of the disease. (Ord. 16 §1(R)(part), 1980: county code §23-8)  
8.20.040 - Treatment or destruction by commissioner. 
If the infected plant has not been treated or destroyed within the seven-day notification period, it shall be the duty of the agricultural commissioner to treat or destroy the infected plant. (Ord. 16 §1(R)(part), 1980: county code §23-10)  
8.20.050 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person, firm, corporation or association of individuals who knowingly grows, maintains or propagates any fruit or nut trees or other host plant infected with any such serious virus disease for a period of more than seven days after written notification of such infection by the town agricultural commissioner is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by confinement in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 16 §1(R)(part), 1980: county code §23-9)  
Chapter 8.24 - CHRISTMAS TREES 
 
8.24.010 - Defined. 
"Christmas tree," when used in this chapter, means the top portion of any evergreen tree severed from the remainder of the tree with the intent that such top will be used for decorative purposes. (Ord. 16 §1(R)(part), 1980: county code §23-3)  
8.24.020 - Notice of intention to cut. 
It is unlawful for any person to cut any Christmas trees growing upon public land, or upon land not owned by him, in the town, from and including October 1st through December 31st of any year, without having previously filed in triplicate with the chief of police a notice of intention to cut Christmas trees, containing the following: 
A.  A statement of the approximate number of Christmas trees to be cut; 
B.  A description of the land upon which such Christmas trees are to be cut, and a description of the land upon which such Christmas trees are to be stored pending shipment; 
C.  The dates between which such Christmas trees are to be cut; 
D.  The signature of the person proposing to cut such Christmas trees; and 
E.  The written consent to such cutting dated and signed by the owner of the land upon which such Christmas trees are to be cut or by his duly authorized agent. (Ord. 75 §1(A)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(R)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §23-4)  
8.24.030 - Shipping permit. 
It is unlawful for any person to transport more than five Christmas trees over any public road in the town without having in his possession a Christmas tree shipping permit containing the following: 
A.  The approximate number of Christmas trees being transported; 
B.  The dates during which such transporting is authorized; 
C.  The license number and description of the vehicle upon which such Christmas trees are being transported; 
D.  The written consent to such transportation dated and signed by the person who cut such Christmas trees; and 
E.  The written authorization for such transportation of Christmas trees dated and signed by a federal forest officer, officer of the state Division of Forestry or peace officer having jurisdiction in the district from which such Christmas trees are to be shipped. (Ord. 16 §§1(R)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §23-5)  
Chapter 8.28 - SOLAR SHADE CONTROL ACT 
 
8.28.010 - Exemption. 
The town is exempt from the provisions of the Solar Shade Control Act, originally established by Chapter 1366 of the Laws of 1978 (the exemption is pursuant to the authority of Public Resources Code Section 25985). (Ord. 16 §§1(L)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §15-31)  
Chapter 8.32 - TRAILERS AND TRAILER PARKS  
Article I - STATE LAW ADOPTED 
 
8.32.010 - Adoption. 
The act pertaining to auto courts, resorts and motels, being Division 13, Part 2.1 of the state Health and Safety Code, excepting therefrom Section 18602 and Title 8, Chapter 9, Article 6 of the state Administrative Code, and the rules and regulations to implement, interpret and make more specific Health and Safety Code provisions, and as amended after the adoption of the ordinance partially codified in this chapter by the legislature or changed by the division of housing, are adopted as applying to all areas of the town. (Ord. 16 §§1(Q)(part), 2(C) (part), 1980: county code §22-1)  
8.32.020 - Fee schedule. 
In lieu of Section 18602 of the state Health and Safety Code setting forth fees, the following fee schedule is hereby adopted in the town, and such fees shall be submitted with the appropriate application for a permit: 
A.  Plan filing fee of ten dollars; 
B.  Total valuation: 
$1 through $4,000 	No fee; 
$4,001 through $10,000 	$5.00 per $1,000, less $20.00; 
$10,001 through $20,000 	$4.50 per $1,000, less $20.00; 
$20,001 through $30,000 	$4.00 per $1,000, less $20.00; 
$30,001 through $50,000 	$3.40 per $1,000, less $20.00; 
$50,001 through $75,000 	$2.94 per $1,000, less $20.00; 
$75,001 through $100,000 	$2.57 per $1,000, less $20.00; 
$100,001 through $250,000 	$1.63 per $1,000, less $20.00; 
$250,001 and up 	$1.44 per $1,000, less $20.00; 
 
C.  Permit to operate, fee of ten dollars; 
D.  Duplicate permit, fee of ten dollars; 
E.  Duplicate fees shall not be required, and any fees payable under the Riley Act shall not apply, providing the buildings and structures come within the provisions of this chapter; 
F.  The plumbing and electrical permit fees as designated in the state housing law, and provisions of the Administrative Code adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 16 §§1(Q) (part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §22-2)  
8.32.030 - Enforcement agency. 
Where the Division of Housing, in the act adopted by Section 8.32.010 and rules implementing the same, is designated as the enforcement agency, it shall mean the town. (Ord. 16 §§1(Q)(part), 2(B) (part), 1980: county code §22-3)  
Article II - PARKING ON PROPERTY NOT DESIGNATED AS TRAILER CAMP 
 
8.32.040 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Camp space" means any place temporarily maintained by one or more persons for living or sleeping purposes. 
B.  "Health officer" includes the health officer of the county, and all members of the department of health of the county. 
C.  "Police department" includes the chief of police of the town, and his duly authorized police officers. 
D.  "Trailer coach" means any camp car, trailer or other vehicle, with or without motive power and designed for or used for human habitation but excluding trailers or mobile homes in excess of eight feet in width. (Ord. 75 §1(A, B)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(Q)(part), 1980: county code §22-4)  
8.32.050 - Administration and enforcement. 
A.  The police department or health officer shall enforce all the provisions of this article and shall inspect all accommodations and installations subject to this article. 
B.  The health officer is authorized to issue or deny written permits required by this article. 
C.  Requests for permits shall be directed to the health officer, who may require proof that the applicant has the permission of the owner or person legally in charge of the real property upon which a permit is requested. 
D.  If the findings of the health officer are such that the issuance of a permit would be detrimental to the health of any person or adversely affect the sanitary conditions of the area, he shall deny the application and not grant the permit. Permits shall not be transferable and shall expire upon the date of expiration endorsed thereon. 
E.  The health officer shall, upon the issuance of any permit, forthwith transmit a copy thereof to the police department. (Ord. 75 §1(A)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(Q)(part), 1980: county code §22-5)  
8.32.060 - Permit for parking or occupying beyond five days. 
A.  No person shall park any trailer coach on public or private property within the town for a period in excess of five days in any consecutive thirty days without first having obtained a permit as provided in this article, except in an approved trailer camp or labor camp. 
B.  No person shall occupy any camp space on public or private property in the town for a period longer than five days after notification in any thirty consecutive days without first having obtained a permit as provided in this article. (Ord. 16 §§1(Q)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §22-6)  
8.32.070 - Revocation of permit. 
Any permit issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked for just cause by the health officer. Notice of revocation shall be made verbally to the valid holder of the permit and within forty-eight hours of service of notice an affidavit attesting to such service shall be filed with the town clerk and be made of record. The permit shall be considered revoked within five days of such service. (Ord. 75 §1(I)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(Q)(part), 1980: county code §22-7)  
8.32.080 - Exceptions. 
A.  The provisions of this article shall not be construed to apply to any trailer coach or camp site referred to in an act regulating auto and trailer parks, Division XIII, Part II, Health and Safety Code, nor in an act regulating camps where five or more persons are employed, Division II, Part IX, Chapter I of the Labor Code; nor shall this article be construed to apply to any supervised public park or public camp or picnic ground operated or maintained by the federal government, the state or any agency of the state nor by any political subdivision or municipality. 
B.  The provisions of this article do not apply to any trailer coach parked in dead storage and not used for living or sleeping purposes. (Ord. 16 §1(Q)(part), 1980: county code §22-8)  
Chapter 8.36 - WATER WELLS 
 
8.36.010 - Purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to provide minimum procedures for the proper construction of domestic water wells, for the proper destruction of abandoned wells and the proper construction of drainage wells in order to ensure that water obtained from wells within the town will be suitable for the purpose for which used and that wells constructed or abandoned pursuant to this chapter will not cause pollution or impairment of the quality of the groundwaters within the town. (Ord. 16 §§1(S)(part), 2(B) (part), 1980: county code §23B-1)  
8.36.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Abandoned well" means a well which is a public nuisance or which has not been used for a period of one year and is not being properly maintained. For purposes of this definition, proper maintenance shall include, but not be limited to (1) the prevention of conditions which could impair the quality of water in the well or in the waterbearing formations penetrated and (2) marking the well and keeping the surrounding area clear of brush and debris so that the well can be clearly seen. "Abandoned well" includes a well drilled to secure water but which is a "dry hole" and not to be used for water. 
B.  "Drainage well" means any hole or well dug, drilled, bored or otherwise constructed for the purpose of disposing of storm drainage water into subsurface strata. 
C.  "Individual domestic well" means a water well constructed or used to supply domestic water to a residence or residential premises or commercial establishment, except for those residential premises or commercial establishments referred to in subsection A of this section and including any irrigation well which is intended to be used also to supply domestic water to a premises. 
D.  "Public water supply well" means a water well constructed or used to supply water for domestic purposes in systems subject to Chapter 7, Part I of Division 5 of the California Health and Safety Code, including water wells used to supply water to any premises which contains or is proposed to contain a mobile home park, multifamily residential units in excess of four living units, public or private schools or restaurants, and shall include any well serving an average of at least twenty-five individuals at least sixty days out of the year. (Ord. 16 §1(S)(part), 1980: county code §23B-2)  
8.36.030 - Permit required. 
No person, firm, association, organization, partnership, joint venture, business trust, corporation, company or special district formed under the laws of the state shall, within the town, construct any water well within an area served by a public water system, or any water well on a premises served by a public water system, or construct a public water supply well, individual domestic well, drainage well, or destroy and abandoned well, unless a written permit has first been obtained from the health officer of Butte County as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 16 §§1(S)(part), 2(C)(part), 1980: county code §23B-3)  
8.36.040 - Application for permit. 
A.  Application for permits shall be made to the health officer of the county together with the appropriate fee specified in the resolution establishing well standards. Applications shall be made on forms provided by the health officer. Applications for permits to construct a well shall include the following information: 
1.  Location of the property and the assessor parcel number; 
2.  Name and address of the person who will construct the well; 
3.  The proposed minimum depth of the well; 
4.  Proposed use of the well; 
5.  An accurate plot plan which will show within a radius of two hundred feet the following: 
a.  Property lines and existing and proposed buildings, 
b.  Sewage disposal systems, sewer lines and any other works carrying or containing sewage, 
c.  All intermittent perennial, natural or artificial bodies of water or watercourses, 
d.  Other wells, 
e.  The approximate surface drainage pattern of the property and areas subject to flooding. 
B.  Applications for permits to destroy an abandoned well shall include such information as the health officer deems necessary but not more than that required by this section for permits to construct. (Ord. 16 §1(S)(part), 1980: county code §23B-4)  
8.36.050 - Standards. 
Standards for the construction of wells and for destroying abandoned wells shall be adopted by resolution of the town council and may be modified from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 16 §§1(S)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §23B-5)  
8.36.060 - Eligible persons. 
Permits shall be granted pursuant to this chapter only to the owner of the property in question, his authorized representative, or to a person holding a valid license as a general contractor or well or pump contractor. (Ord. 16 §1(S)(part), 1980: county code §23B-6)  
8.36.070 - Term of permit. 
Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid for one year and shall automatically become void one year from the date of issuance unless renewed prior to the expiration date. (Ord. 16 §1(S)(part), 1980: county code §23B-7)  
8.36.080 - Report of well driller. 
Upon completion of a well, the owner or licensed well driller shall file a copy of a well driller's report with the health officer. The report shall be filled out completely, signed by the well driller and shall include a well log and such other information as will enable the health officer to determine that the well was installed in compliance with the standards required by this chapter and the resolution establishing well standards. This provision shall not be deemed to release any person from compliance with the provisions of Article 3, Chapter 10, Division 7 of the Water Code of the state or any succession or amendment thereto. No work shall be deemed to have been completed until such well driller's report has been received by the health officer. (Ord. 16 §1(S)(part), 1980: county code §23B-8)  
8.36.090 - Inspections. 
A.  The health officer or his designated representatives are empowered to enter upon private property in order to make inspections for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. A final inspection of the work performed on any well pursuant to this chapter shall be made by the health officer unless such inspection is waived by him, and no permittee shall be deemed to have complied with this chapter or his permit until such inspection has been either made and the installation approved, or waived. 
B.  In lieu of an inspection of a drainage well, the health officer may accept a log of the drainage well from a licensed well driller or licensed engineer, which log shows the dry well to be in conformity with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 16 §1(S)(part), 1980: county code §23B-9)  
8.36.100 - Nonliability of town. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the town any liability or responsibility for damage resulting from defective construction, repair or reconstruction of any well or any destruction of any abandoned well. Further, neither the issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter, final inspection of work performed on any well pursuant to this chapter nor the waiver of such final inspection shall be, nor construed to be, a guarantee by the town that suitable water in sufficient quantity is available from any well. (Ord. 16 §§1(S)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §23B-11)  
8.36.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any construction, repair or reconstruction of any well or any destruction of any abandoned well in violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes a misdemeanor punishable as described in Chapter 1.08; provided, however, that nothing in this section shall be deemed to abrogate or annul the right to enjoin or abate such violations by civil action. (Ord. 16 §1(S)(part), 1980: county code §23B-10)  
Chapter 8.40 - SURFACE MINING AND RECLAMATION 
 
8.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of the town council to create and maintain an effective and comprehensive surface mining and reclamation policy with regulation of surface mining operations so as to assure that: 
A.  Adverse environmental effects are prevented or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternative land use; 
B.  The production and conservation of minerals are encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, watershed, wildlife, range and forage and aesthetic enjoyment; 
C.  Residual hazards to the public health and safety are eliminated; 
D.  The extraction of minerals is essential to the continued economic well-being of the town and to the needs of society, and that reclamation of mined lands is necessary to prevent or minimize adverse effects on the environment and to protect the public health and safety; 
E.  The reclamation of mined lands as provided in this chapter will permit the continued mining of minerals and will provide for the protection and subsequent beneficial use of the mined and reclaimed land; 
F.  Surface mining takes place in diverse areas where the geologic, topographic, climatic, biological and social conditions are significantly different and that reclamation operations and the specifications therefor may vary accordingly. (Ord. 16 §§1(G)(part), 2(A, B)(part), 1980: county code §13-101)  
8.40.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Exploration" or "prospecting" mean the search for minerals by geological, geophysical, geochemical or other techniques, including, but not limited to, sampling, assaying, drilling or any surface or underground works needed to determine the type, extent or quality of the mineral present. 
B.  "Mined lands" includes the surface, subsurface and groundwater of an area in which surface mining operations will be, are being, or have been conducted, including private ways and roads appurtenant to any such area, land excavations, workings, mining waste, and areas in which structures, facilities, equipment, machines, tools or other materials or property which result from, or are used in, surface mining operations, are located. 
C.  "Minerals" means any naturally occurring chemical element or compound, or groups of elements and compounds, formed from inorganic processes and organic substances, including, but not limited to, sand, gravel, aggregate, coal, peat and bituminous rock, but excluding geothermal resources, natural gas and petroleum. 
D.  "Mining waste" includes the residual of soil, rock, mineral, liquid, vegetation, equipment, machines, tools or other materials or property directly resulting from, or displaced by, surface mining operations. 
E.  "Operator" means any person who is engaged in surface mining operations, himself, or who contracts with others to conduct operations on his behalf, except a person who is engaged in surface mining operations as an employee with wages as his sole compensation. 
F.  "Overburden" means soil, rock or other materials that lie above a natural mineral deposit or in between deposits, before or after their removal by surface mining operations. 
G.  "Permit" means any authorization from, or approval by, the town, the absence of which would preclude surface mining operations. 
H.  "Person" means any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization or partnership, or any city, county, district or the state or any department or agency thereof. 
I.  "Reclamation" means the combined process of land treatment that minimizes water degradation, air pollution, damage to aquatic or wildlife habitat, flooding, erosion and other adverse effects from surface mining operations, including adverse surface effects incidental to underground mines, so that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily adaptable for alternate land uses and create no danger to public health or safety. The process may extend to affected lands surrounding mined lands, and may require backfilling, grading, resoiling, revegetation, soil compaction, stabilization or other measures. 
J.  "State board" means the State Mining and Geology Board, in the Department of Conservation, state of California. 
K.  "State Geologist" means the individual holding office as structured in Section 677 of Article 3, Chapter 2 of Division 1 of the Public Resources Code. 
L.  "Surface mining operations" means all, or any part of, the process involved in the mining of minerals on mined lands by removing overburden and mining directly from the mineral deposits, open-pit mining of minerals naturally exposed, mining by the auger method, dredging and quarrying, or surface work incident to an underground mine. Surface mining operations shall include, but are not limited to: 
1.  In-place distillation, restoring or leaching; 
2.  The production and disposal of mining waste; 
3.  Prospecting and exploratory activities. (Ord. 16 §§1(G)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §13-102)  
8.40.030 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the town, except national forest lands. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to: 
1.  Excavations or grading conducted for farming or on-site construction or for the purpose of restoring land following a flood or natural disaster; 
2.  Prospecting for, or the extraction of, minerals for commercial purposes or the removal of overburden in total amounts of less than one thousand cubic yards in any one location of one acre or less; 
3.  Surface mining operations that are required by federal law in order to protect a mining claim, if such operations are conducted solely for that purpose; 
4.  Such other mining operations that the town determines to be of an infrequent nature, and which involve only minor surface disturbances and are categorically identified by the State Board pursuant to Sections 2714(d) and 2758(c), California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. (Ord. 16 §§1(G)(part), 2(B, C)(part), 1980: county code §13-103)  
8.40.040 - Permit and reclamation plan required. 
A.  Requirements Generally. 
1.  Any person who proposes to engage in surface mining operations as defined in this chapter, shall, prior to the commencement of such operations, obtain (1) a permit to mine, and (2) approval of a reclamation plan, in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter and as further provided in Article 5, California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. An application fee as set forth in the town council adopted town of Paradise master fee schedule shall be paid to the town at the time of filing an application for a permit to mine or a reclamation plan with the community development department. 
2.  For existing operating mines, a reclamation plan shall be filed by May 1, 1978, for planning commission review and approval. The reclamation plan shall provide for the reclamation of the area disturbed by surface mining operations in those portions of the site mined after January 1, 1976. A fee as set forth in the town council adopted town of Paradise master fee schedule shall be paid to the town at the time of filing the reclamation plan with the community development department. 
3.  All applications for a reclamation plan for surface mining or land reclamation projects shall be made on forms provided by the community development department, and as provided for by Section 2772 of the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
B.  Vested Rights as of 1976. 
1.  No person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall be required to secure a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter as long as such vested right continues; provided, that no substantial change is made in that operation except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A person shall be deemed to have such vested rights, if, prior to January 1, 1976, he has, in good faith and in reliance upon a permit or other authorization, if such permit or other authorization was required, diligently commenced surface mining operations and incurred substantial liabilities for work and materials necessary therefor. Expenses incurred in obtaining the issuance of a permit shall not be deemed liabilities for work or materials. 
2.  A person who has obtained a vested right to conduct surface mining operations prior to January 1, 1976, shall submit to the planning commission by May 1, 1978, a reclamation plan for operations to be conducted after January 1, 1976, unless a reclamation plan was approved by the county of Butte prior to January 1, 1976, and the person submitting that plan has accepted responsibility for reclaiming the mined lands in accordance with that plan. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the filing of a reclamation plan for, or the reclamation of, mined lands on which surface mining operations were conducted prior to January 1, 1976. 
C.  Notice to State. The State Geologist shall be notified of the filing of all permit applications. 
D.  Review of Provisions. This chapter shall be reviewed annually and revised, as necessary, in order to ensure that it is in accordance with the state policy for mined lands reclamation and to encourage the mining industry of the town. (Ord. 216 §10, 1992: Ord. 75 §1(L) (part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(G)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §13-104)  
8.40.050 - Planning commission hearing and decision. 
A.  The planning commission shall, in the same manner as provided for in Section 17.45.200 of this code, schedule a public hearing within twenty days of the completion of the environmental review procedure and filing of all documents as required by town ordinances. 
B.  The planning commission, on the basis of evidence submitted at the hearing, may approve the reclamation plan and grant the permit to mine. 
C.  The determination of the planning commission shall be final unless a written appeal is filed in accordance with the appeals procedures established in Title 17 of this code. (Ord. 216 §11, 1992: Ord. 178 §3(D), 1988; Ord. 75 §1(L)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(G)(part), 1980: county code §13-105)  
8.40.060 - Bond or other security. 
Upon finding by the planning commission that a supplemental guarantee for the reclamation of the mined land is necessary and upon the determination by the town manager's office of the cost of the reclamation plan, a reasonable surety bond, lien on the property or a portion thereof, or other security guarantee conditional upon the faithful performance of the reclamation plan shall be filed with the town manager's office. Such surety shall be executed in favor of the town and reviewed and revised, as necessary, biannually. Such surety shall be maintained in an amount equal to the cost of completing the remaining reclamation of the site as prescribed in the approved or amended reclamation plan during the succeeding two-year period or other reasonable term. (Ord. 75 §1(L)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(G)(part), 2(B) (part), 1980: county code §13-106)  
8.40.070 - Public records—Proprietary information. 
Reclamation plans, reports, applications and other documents submitted pursuant to this chapter are public records, unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the town that the release of such information, or part thereof, would reveal production, reserves or rate of depletion entitled to protection as proprietary information. The applicant shall have the right to identify what, in his opinion, is proprietary information. The town shall identify proprietary information as a separate part of each application. A copy of all permits, reclamation plans, reports, applications and other documents submitted pursuant to this chapter, including proprietary information, shall be furnished to the State Geologist by the town. Proprietary information shall be made available to persons other than the State Geologist only when authorized by the mine operator and by the mine owner in accordance with Section 2778, California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. (Ord. 16 §§1(G)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §13-107)  
8.40.080 - Operational standards. 
Standards governing the operational aspects of the surface mining activity shall be as established by the town council by resolution. (Ord. 16 §§1(G)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §13-108)  
8.40.090 - Inspections. 
As a condition of approval for the permit or the reclamation plan, or both, periodic inspections of the site by the community development director or his designee shall be made to evaluate continuing compliance with the permit and the reclamation plan. (Ord. 216 §12, 1992: Ord. 75 §1(L)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(G)(part), 1980: county code §13-109)  
8.40.100 - Amendments to reclamation plan. 
Amendments to an approved reclamation plan may be submitted to the planning commission any time, detailing proposed changes from the original plan. Substantial deviations from the original plan shall not be undertaken until such amendment has been filed with and approved by the planning commission. The planning commission shall set a public hearing in the same manner as is provided for in Section 8.40.050. (Ord. 16 §1(G)(part), 1980: county code §13-110)  
8.40.120 - Enforcement—Permit suspension. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by the town manager or any authorized city employee. The town manager may suspend the permit for a period not to exceed fifteen days where continuation of the violation will adversely affect the public; provided, however, written notification shall have previously been sent to the operator. In the event of a suspension, or should the town manager request disciplinary action, the planning commission shall immediately set a hearing thereon with not less than five days' notice to the operator. The planning commission, after completion of the hearing, may suspend or revoke the permit, or modify the permit, or may place the operator on probation should the violation found to exist be of a serious nature, adversely affecting the health and welfare of the residents of the town. (Ord. 75 §1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(G)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §13-112)  
8.40.130 - Appeals. 
Any person aggrieved by an act or determination of the town manager or the planning commission in the exercise of the authority granted in this chapter shall have the right to appeal to the town council. Any appeal must be filed, on forms provided, within seven days after the rendition, in writing, of the decision, by the town manager or the planning commission. The appeal shall be processed and duly heard in the same manner as provided by the appeals procedures established in Title 17 of this code. (Ord. 216 §14, 1992: Ord. 75 §1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(G)(part), 1980: county code §13-113)  
8.40.140 - Transferability. 
Permits and reclamation plans issued under the provisions of this chapter are transferable and the successor shall be bound by the provisions of the approved reclamation plan or permit and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 16 §1(G)(part), 1980: county code §13-114)  
8.40.150 - Minor modifications. 
Minor plan modifications from an approved reclamation plan may be allowed upon request of the operator or applicant, and upon a finding by the town manager's office that each requested minor plan modification is necessary to achieve the prescribed or higher post-mining use of the reclaimed land. (Ord. 75 §1(L) (part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(G)(part), 1980: county code §13-115)  
Chapter 8.44 - FIREWORKS 
 
8.44.010 - Findings. 
The use and discharge of fireworks within the town presents a serious hazard to the health, welfare, and safety of residents of the town. This hazard is most pronounced during the Fourth of July seasonal celebration. 
Local fire hazard conditions and fire suppression problems require that the use and discharge of fireworks be prohibited within the town. In order to effectively prohibit the use and discharge of fireworks, it is necessary to prohibit the sale of fireworks. If fireworks are readily available within the town, any prohibition on the use of fireworks will be largely ineffective without a massive policing effort. The cost of such a policing effort is prohibitive. In addition, the fire suppression resources necessary to produce such a massive policing effort are largely unavailable during the Fourth of July seasonal celebration. (Ord. 119 §1(part), 1984)  
8.44.020 - Defined. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases, "fireworks," "dangerous fireworks," and "safe and sane fireworks," shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in Sections 12511, 12505, and 12529 of the Health and Safety Code of the state. (Ord. 119 §1(part), 1984)  
8.44.030 - Prohibitions. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no person, firm, corporation, or organization shall sell, possess, discharge, or display any fireworks, dangerous fireworks, or safe and sane fireworks within the town. (Ord. 119 §1(part), 1984)  
8.44.040 - Exceptions. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting the use of torpedoes, flares or fuses by railroads or other transportation agencies for signal purposes of illumination; or the sale or use of blank cartridges for ceremonial purposes, athletic, or sports events or military ceremonials or demonstrations; or the discharge or display of fireworks by permittees having a permit as provided in this chapter; or the sale, use, or discharge of emergency signaling devices, as defined in Section 12506 of the Health and Safety Code of the state, by any person in an emergency situation; or the use and display of fireworks of whatever nature by any person engaged in the production of motion pictures, theatricals, or operas when such use and display is a necessary part of such production; or the transportation of fireworks through the town in regular course, and in original packages or containers from any point outside of the town to any other point outside of the town. (Ord. 119 §1(part), 1984)  
8.44.050 - Public display of fireworks—Permit required. 
A.  Any person desiring to hold a public display of fireworks within the town shall submit an application for permit at least ten days in advance of the display. After such privilege shall be granted, possession, use, and distribution of fireworks for such display shall be lawful for that purpose only. No permit granted under this chapter shall be transferable. 
B.  The town manager or his designee shall have the power to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for granting of permits for supervised public displays of fireworks. Every such use or display shall be handled by a competent operator approved by the town manager or his designee and shall be of such character and so located, discharged, or fired as, in the opinion of the town manager or his designee, shall not be hazardous to persons or property. 
C.  The permittee shall furnish a bond or certificate of insurance in an amount deemed adequate by the town manager or his designee for the payment of all damages which may be caused to a person or persons or to property by means of the permitted display, and arising from any acts of the permittee, his agents, employees or subcontractors. 
D.  All fireworks that remain unfired after the display is concluded shall be immediately disposed of in an approved manner for the particular type of fireworks remaining. (Ord. 119 §1(part), 1984)  
8.44.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Whenever any act is prohibited by this chapter, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, nevertheless, that any such aforesaid violation or offense may be deemed an infraction as defined by Section 19C of the California Penal Code and charged as such in the discretion and at the election of the town prosecuting attorney, in which event the punishment therefor shall not be imprisonment but a fine not to exceed the amounts specified by Government Code Section 36900 as then in effect. Every day any violation of any provision of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 119 §1(part), 1984)  
Chapter 8.46 - PROTECTION OF AN INDIVIDUAL'S RIGHT TO BREATHE FRESH AIR THROUGH REGULATION OF SMOKING IN DESIGNATED ENCLOSED PUBLIC PLACES AND WORKPLACES 
 
8.46.010 - Purpose and findings. 
The town council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution; and 
B.  Breathing second-hand smoke is a cause of disease, including lung cancer, in nonsmokers; and 
C.  At special risk are elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics, and those with obstructive airway disease; and 
D.  Health hazards induced by breathing second-hand smoke include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance, decreased respiratory function, bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm; and 
E.  The smoking of tobacco or any other weed or plant is a hazard to the health of the general public. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Section 25946 of the Health and Safety Code for the purpose of restricting and prohibiting smoking in all enclosed areas open to the public in order to reduce the hazards which smoking causes to those involuntarily exposed thereto, and to restrict and otherwise prohibit smoking within workplaces for the protection of employees who are involuntarily exposed to second-hand smoke. 
(Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section unless it shall be apparent from the context that they have a different meaning: 
A.  "Bar" means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages and which is enclosed and separated from areas dedicated primarily to dining and the service of food. Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not include the restaurant dining area. 
B.  "Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit-making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
C.  "Dining area" means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which meals are served. 
D.  "Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in the consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profits, and any person who volunteers his or her time or service for a nonprofit entity. 
E.  "Employer" means any person, partnership, corporation, including municipal corporation, or nonprofit entity, who employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
F.  "Enclosed area" means all space between a floor and ceiling which is enclosed on all sides by solid walls or windows (exclusive of doors or passageways) which extend from the floor to the ceiling, including all space therein screened by partitions which do not extend to the ceiling or are not solid, "office landscaping" or similar structures. 
G.  "Nonprofit entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association, or other entity created for charitable, philanthropic, educational, character-building, political, social or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. A public agency is not a "nonprofit entity" within the meaning of this section. 
H.  "Place of employment" means any enclosed area under the operation or control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment including, but not limited to, work areas, individual and group offices, employee lounges and restrooms, conference and classrooms, employee cafeterias and hallways. For purposes of this chapter, "place of employment" shall not include those places "where smoking is not regulated" as set forth in Section 8.46.060. 
I.  "Public place" means any enclosed or unenclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, educational facilities, health facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters and waiting room, including the area within twenty (20) feet of the entrance, exit or operable windows of a building. A private residence is not a "public place." 
J.  "Restaurant" means any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private and public school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests or employees, as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering facilities. 
K.  "Retail tobacco store" means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 
L.  "Service line" means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or are receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service involves the exchange of money. 
M.  "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, hookah pipe, pipe or a functioning electronic-operated device creating vapors or smoke from tobacco, nicotine, marijuana, any weed or plant or other substance in any manner or any form. 
N.  "Sports arena" means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys, pool halls and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports events. 
(Ord. No. 554, § 1, 2-10-2015; (Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.030 - Regulation of smoking in town-owned facilities. 
All enclosed facilities owned by the town shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.040 - Prohibitions of smoking in public places. 
A.  Smoking shall be prohibited in all public places within the town, including but not limited to the following places, and with the following exceptions: 
1.  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including but not limited to attorneys' offices and other offices, banks, hotels and motels; 
2.  Any facility which is primarily used for exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except when smoking is part of a stage production and in this event the only smoking permitted in such a facility will be that smoking that is part of and incident to the performance; 
3.  Bars; 
4.  Buses, shuttle buses, taxi cabs and other means of public transit sponsored by or subject to the authority of the town, and ticket, boarding and waiting areas of public transit depots; 
5.  Common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, retirement facilities, nursing homes and adult day care facilities; 
6.  Elevators; 
7.  Every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, including joint committees, or agencies of the town or any political subdivision of the state of California during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent the same is subject to the jurisdiction of the town; 
8.  Polling places; 
9.  Public areas of galleries, libraries, and museums when open to the public; 
10.  Public parks; 
11.  Restaurants; 
12.  Restrooms; 
13.  Retail stores; 
14.  Service lines; 
15.  Sports arenas and convention halls; 
16.  Waiting rooms, hallways, wards and semi-private rooms of health facilities, including but not limited to hospitals, clinics, physical therapy facilities, doctors' offices and dentists' offices. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment or facility may declare that entire establishment or facility as a nonsmoking establishment or facility. 
(Ord. No. 554, § 1, 2-10-2015; Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.050 - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide a smoke-free workplace for all employees, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications. 
B.  Within ninety days of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, each employer and each place of employment located within the town shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy which shall contain at a minimum the following requirements: 
"Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed facilities within a place of employment without exception. This includes common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities." 
C.  The smoking policy as set forth above shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption. All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy upon request to any existing or prospective employees. 
(Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.060 - Where smoking is not regulated. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter: 
1.  Private residences, unless such residence is used as a child care or health care facility; 
2.  Retail stores that deal exclusively in the sale of tobacco and smoking paraphernalia; 
3.  Restaurants, hotel and motel conference meeting rooms and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. No. 554, § 1, 2-10-2015; Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.070 - Posting requirements. 
"No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of the pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it), shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is controlled by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control over the place. Every restaurant regulated by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited in said establishment. 
(Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.080 - Administration and implementation. 
A.  Administration of this chapter shall be by the Butte County health department and/or the town manager or their designees. Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may request the Butte County health department and/or the town manager or their designees to consider enforcement by either of the following actions: 
1.  Serving notice on the health department or the town manager requiring the correction of any violation of this chapter; 
2.  Calling upon the district attorney and/or the town attorney to maintain an action for injunction to enforce the provisions of this chapter, to cause the correction of any such violation, and for assessment and recovery of the penalty of such violation. 
B.  Any owner, manager, operator or employer of any establishment controlled by this chapter shall have the right to inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
C.  The fire department or the health department shall require, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, a "self-certification" from the owner, manager, operator or other person having control of such establishment that all requirements of this section have been complied with. For purposes of this chapter, said "self-certification" shall be sworn under penalty of perjury. 
D.  No Liability for Nonenforcement. In undertaking the enforcement of this chapter, the town is assuming an undertaking only to promote the general welfare. It is not assuming, nor is it imposing on its officers and employees, an obligation for breach of which it is liable in money damages to any person who claims that such breach proximately caused injury. 
E.  When the provisions of this chapter are not remedied by county officials, town officials or any other public employee with authority to remedy any violations of this chapter, civil action against Butte County and/or the town is denied and the county and town are absolved of any responsibility to enforce and/or of any liability for failure to enforce any provision of this chapter. 
F.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.090 - Violation—Penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with any of its provisions. 
B.  It is unlawful or any person to smoke in any area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Any person/business who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by: 
1.  A fine, not exceeding one hundred dollars, for a first violation; 
2.  A fine, not exceeding two hundred dollars, for a second violation of this chapter within any consecutive twelve-month period; 
3.  A fine, not exceeding five hundred dollars, for each additional violation of this chapter within any consecutive twelve-month period. (Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.100 - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. 
(Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
8.46.110 - Other applicable laws. 
A.  This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
B.  If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other ordinance provisions or clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision or clause, or application, and to this end the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
C.  Other Agency Cooperation. Federal, state, county, school and all district officials are urged to enact and enforce provisions similar to the provisions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 205 §1(part), 1991: Ord. 150 §1(part), 1986)  
Chapter 8.47 - VENDING MACHINE SALES OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 206 
 
Article I - VENDING MACHINE SALES 
 
8.47.010 - Purpose and findings. 
A.  The town council finds and declares as follows: 
1.  Smoking is the greatest preventable cause of death in our nation, killing more than three hundred ninety thousand Americans each year; and 
2.  That laws have been enacted prohibiting the sale of tobacco products to minors; and 
3.  These laws have not been effectively enforced when tobacco products are offered for sale in vending machines. 
B.  The town council therefore concludes that prohibiting vending machine sales of tobacco products is essential to curtailing the illegal sale of tobacco products to minors and to promoting smoke-free environments throughout the town. (Ord. 210 §1(part), 1991)  
8.47.020 - Vending machine sales prohibited. 
No cigarette or other tobacco product may be sold, offered for sale or distributed by or from a vending machine or appliance or any other device designed or used for vending purposes. (Ord. 210 §1(part), 1991)  
8.47.030 - Exception. 
The provisions of the chapter shall not apply to "bars" as defined in Section 8.46.020 of this code. (Ord. 210 §1(part), 1991)  
8.47.040 - Enforcement. 
Violations of this chapter are subject to a fine of one thousand dollars per day for each violation, with each day that the violation continues considered a separate and distinct violation of the chapter. The town manager and/or the Butte County health department director, and the district attorney's office, the town attorney's office and/or the police department may enforce this chapter. (Ord. 210 §1(part), 1991)  
8.47.050 - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence or other paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. Furthermore, in the event that any provision of this chapter is determined to be invalid and the town is duly notified of that invalidity, the town attorney, on behalf of the town, shall take whatever action necessary to see that those provisions rendered invalid are no longer enforced and that this chapter is amended to reflect the deletion of those provisions invalidated. (Ord. 210 §1(part), 1991)  
Article II - TOBACCO SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS 
 
8.47.060 - Purpose and findings. 
The town council of the town of Paradise finds and declares as follows: 
A.  Whereas, smoking is the greatest preventable cause of death in our nation, killing more than three hundred ninety thousand Americans each year; and 
B.  Whereas, California State Penal Code Sections 308(a) and 308(b) prohibit the purchase and possession of tobacco products and paraphernalia by minors; and 
C.  Whereas, over twenty-nine million packs of cigarettes are illegally sold to California minors annually; and 
D.  Whereas, nearly ninety percent of all tobacco users start well before the age of eighteen; and 
E.  Whereas, shoplifting of cigarettes from tobacco self-displays is one means by which minors access tobacco products; and 
F.  Whereas, the town of Paradise has already enacted an ordinance prohibiting the sale of tobacco products from vending machines; 
G.  Therefore, the town council finds it in the public interest to promote the welfare of Paradise residents under eighteen years of age by further restricting youth access to tobacco products with the prohibition of tobacco self-displays in our community. (Ord. 333 §1, 1999)  
8.47.070 - Self-service tobacco displays prohibited. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer within the incorporated town of Paradise to sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale or display for sale any tobacco product by means of self-service display, rack or shelf that allows self-service sales or smaller counter-top displays for any tobacco product that allow other than vendor-assisted sales. 
B.  All tobacco products shall be offered for sale exclusively by means of vendor/employee assistance, with tobacco products in a case requiring employee assistance to retrieve the tobacco products. (Ord. 333 §2, 1999)  
8.47.080 - Enforcement. 
Violation of Section 8.47.070 is a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars per day for each violation, with each day that the violation continues considered a separate and distinct violation of Section 8.47.070. The town manager and/or the Butte County health department director, the district attorney's office, the town attorney's office and/or the police department may enforce this chapter. (Ord. 333 §3, 1999)  
8.47.090 - Severability. 
If any provision, clause, sentence or other paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any persons or circumstances shall be held invalid, such validity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared severable. Furthermore, in the event that any provision of this chapter is determined to be invalid and the town is duly notified of that invalidity, the town attorney, on behalf of the town shall take whatever action necessary to see that those provisions rendered invalid are no longer enforced and that this chapter is amended to reflect the deletion of those provisions invalidated. (Ord. 333 §4, 1999)  
Chapter 8.48 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE WARNING SIGNS 
 
8.48.010 - Legislative findings. 
The town council finds that: 
A.  The consumption of alcoholic beverages by women during pregnancy, especially in the early months, can harm the fetus. 
B.  In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the declared purpose of this chapter is to educate the public by requiring that warning signs be placed at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold to the public. (Ord. 176, § 1(part), 1988)  
8.48.020 - Duty to post warning signs. 
Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents a premises offering wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverage for sale, or dispensing for consideration, to the public, shall cause a sign or notice to be posted on the premises as provided in this section. The sign or notice shall read as follows: 
WARNING: DRINKING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, INCLUDING BEER AND WINE, DURING PREGNANCY CAN CAUSE BIRTH DEFECTS 
The sign or notice as required in this section shall not be smaller than ten inches wide by ten inches long, nor shall any lettering thereon be less than one inch in height. (Ord. 176, § 1(part), 1988)  
8.48.030 - Placement of notice. 
The required sign or notice shall be placed as follows: 
A.  Where the sale or dispensing of wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages, to the public is primarily intended for consumption off the premises, at least one sign shall be so placed as to assure that it is readable from all locations at which said sale or dispensing occurs. 
B.  Where the sale of wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily provided through over-the-counter service, at least one sign shall be placed to assure that it is readable from all counter locations available to the public. 
C.  Where the sale or dispensing of wine, beer, or other alcoholic beverages to the public is primarily provided for consumption on the premises at tables served by food or beverage-service persons, at least one sign shall be placed to assure it is readable by the public entering the premises. (Ord. 176, § 1(part), 1988)  
8.48.040 - Violation and penalties. 
Anyone subject to the provision of Section 8.48.020 of this chapter knowingly failing to post the required warning, is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 176, § 1(part), 1988)  
Chapter 8.55 - DEVELOPMENT OF LAND AREAS PRONE TO FLOOD HAZARD 
 
8.55.010 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Protect human life and health; 
B.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
C.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
D.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
E.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
F.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
G.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
H.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. 298, § 1(part), 1997)  
8.55.020 - Urgency declaration. 
For the past three months, the United States National Weather Service has been predicting that the state of California will experience unusually severe rain storms beginning in or about November 1997. Based upon such predictions, the town council reasonably believes that there is a serious threat of flooding within the town. 
Presently the citizens of the town are ineligible for flood insurance. To be eligible for flood insurance, the town council must first adopt this chapter. In addition, the council finds that it is necessary for the preservation of the public peace, health and safety to have this chapter take effect immediately upon its adoption by the town council with a four-fifths vote. 
(Ord. 298, § 1(part), 1997)  
8.55.030 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
"Area of special flood hazard" means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
"Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood"). "Base flood" is the term used throughout this chapter. 
"Building," see "Structure." 
"Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
"Flood" or "flooding" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current; 
2.  The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition. 
"Floodplain" or "flood-prone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See "Flooding." 
"Floodplain administrator" means the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
"Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
"Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood-prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
"Governing body" means the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. 
"Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs. 
"Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
"Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
"New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
"One-hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood," see "Base flood." 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
"Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The "actual start" means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
"Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
"Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
"Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
1.  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
2.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
(Ord. 298, §1 (part), 1997)  
8.55.035 - Special Permit Zones Adoption. 
For purposes of supplementing the administration of the provisions of this chapter the "Special Permit Zones" established within the 1980 Town of Paradise Master Storm Drainage Study and Facilities Plan is hereby adopted. 
(Ord. No. 394, § 1, 2003)  
8.55.040 - General Provisions. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to all areas identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of the town. 
B.  The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the town. This data will be on file at the Paradise Town Hall building, Department of Public Works, located at 5555 Skyway, Paradise, California. 
C.  No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the town from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
D.  This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
E.  In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
1.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
2.  Liberally construed in favor of the town; and 
3.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
F.  The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the town, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
G.  This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. 298, § 1(part), 1997)  
8.55.050 - Administration. 
A.  A development permit shall be obtained for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such construction or other development is within flood-prone areas. 
B.  The town manager or designee is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
C.  The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
l.  Permit Review. Review all development permit applications to determine that: 
a.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
b.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and 
c.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding relative to the Town adopted "Special Permit Zones" and/or other source of Base relative Flood Data. 
2.  Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agency or other source. 
(Ord. 298, § 1(part), 1997; Ord. No. 394, § 2, 2003)  
8.55.060 - Provisions for flood hazard reduction. 
A.  If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall: 
1.  Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
2.  Be constructed: 
a.  With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage, 
b.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage, and 
c.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
B.  If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that: 
1.  All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area; 
2.  All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
3.  Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
C.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems, and discharge from the systems into floodwaters. 
D.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. 298, § 1(part), 1997)  
Chapter 8.56 - STORMWATER QUALITY MANAGEMENT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 548, § 1, adopted Sept. 9, 2014, has an effective date of 30 days after the date of its passage. 
 
8.56.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the "Stormwater Quality Management Ordinance" of the town of Paradise. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the town and to protect and enhance the water quality, beneficial uses, habitats and ecosystems in receiving waters by reducing pollution and pollutant loads discharged in urban runoff from areas within the town's jurisdiction by the maximum extent practicable, and by prohibiting non-stormwater discharges to municipal storm drain systems. This chapter is intended to assist in protection and enhancement of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and both compliant and consistent with the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and Phase II Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer (MS4) permit, as such laws and permits are amended and/or renewed. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.030 - Definitions. 
The terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
"Best management practices(s) (BMP(s))" means a schedule of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other pollution control practices to infiltrate or retain increased flows generated on developed lands in urban areas or to prevent the discharge of pollution directly or indirectly into stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. 
BMPs include, but are not limited to: treatment practices and facilities; operating and facility management procedures and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage; erosion and sediment control practices; and the prohibition of specific activities, practices, and procedures and such other provisions as the town determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
BMPs shall be consistent with the California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA) Best Management Practices Handbooks or equivalent. 
"Town manager" means the Town Manager of the town of Paradise or his or her designee. 
"Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
"Commercial activity" means any public or private activity involved in the storage, transportation, distribution, exchange or sale of goods and/or commodities or providing professional and/or non-professional services. "Commercial activity" includes all commercial land uses. 
"Construction sites" are sites where activities, including, but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, demolition, new construction, reconstruction, additions or remodeling of any structure or property are being performed. 
"Contamination" is as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(k). 
"Discharge" means any release, threatened release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid or solid substance to the storm drain system. 
"Discharger" means any person who discharges or causes to discharge, either directly or indirectly, stormwater or any other material into municipal storm drain systems or to natural surface waters. 
"Hazardous materials" means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed (49 CFR 105). 
"Illicit discharge" or "illegal discharge" means any of the following: 
A.  Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the storm drain system, except as exempted in Section 8.56.070B of this chapter; or 
B.  Any direct discharge to the storm drain system from an illicit connection; or 
C.  Any discharge to a storm drain system or surface water that is prohibited under local, regional, state, or federal statues, or which causes or contributes to a violation of any water quality standard or objective in the Phase II Small MS4 permit, including the introduction of pollution into the storm drain system. 
"Illicit connection" means an illicit connection is defined as either of the following: 
A.  Any drain or conveyance, either surface or subsurface, which allows or may allow an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or 
B.  Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by the town. 
"Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14). 
"Maximum extent practicable" is a standard for implementation of best management practices to reduce pollutants in stormwater. It is the maximum extent possible taking into account equitable consideration and competing facts, including, but not limited to: the seriousness of the problem, public health risk, environmental benefits, pollutant removal effectiveness, regulatory compliance, ability to implement, cost and technical feasibility. 
"National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permits" means general, group, and individual stormwater discharge permits which regulate facilities defined in federal NPDES regulations pursuant to the Clean Water Act. The California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region (hereinafter, regional board) and the state water resources control board have adopted general stormwater discharge permits, including but not limited to the general construction activity and general industrial activity permits. 
"Natural surface water" means creeks, natural ponds or lakes, wetlands, and shall include any waters of the United States contained within the jurisdictional boundaries of the town. "Natural surface water" does not mean any wet or dry detention or infiltration basin, constructed wetland, stormwater treatment facility, artificial lake or pond or other man-made body of water. 
"Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
"Nuisance" means any "nuisance" established by California Water Code Section 13050(m) or the Paradise Municipal Code. 
"Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: sediment discharged from lands lacking effective BMPs due to runoff from impermeable surfaces or runoff from unpaved surfaces impacted by vehicle use; paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete rinsates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
"Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects the waters for beneficial uses or the facilities which serve these beneficial uses (California Water Code Section 13050(l)(1)). 
"Porter-Cologne Act" means the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act and as amended (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.). 
"Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
"Remediation" means the abatement or removal of pollution or contaminants from land or water (including sediments in waterways) for the general protection of human health and the environment. 
"Storm drain system" means publicly-owned facilities operated by the town or Caltrans, by which stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and human-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures which are within the town and are not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR 403.3(q). 
"Stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
"Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" means a document which describes the best management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, storm drain systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable. 
"Super-chlorinated water" means water with chlorine concentrations above four (4) mg/l, often associated with disinfection of new or repaired potable water lines and shock treatment of swimming pools. 
"Waters of the state" means any surface water or groundwater (California Water Code Section 13050(e)), including all natural waterways and definite channels and depressions in the earth that may carry water, even though such waterways may only carry water during rains and storms and may not carry stormwater at and during all times and seasons. This definition is broader than "Waters of the United States" as defined at 40 CFR 122.2. 
Any terms defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, or defined in the regulations for the NPDES program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not specifically defined above, shall have the same meaning as set forth in said act or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.040 - Applicability. 
This chapter, including any amendments or revisions thereto, shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated on or flowing over any developed and undeveloped land lying within the town, unless explicitly exempted in writing by the town manager based on the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.050 - Responsibility for administration. 
The town manager or his or her designee shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.060 - Regulatory consistency. 
This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Clean Water Act and Porter-Cologne Act and any amendments thereto, or any applicable implementing regulations. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.070 - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to discharge or cause to be discharged into the storm drain system or waters of the state any non-stormwater discharges, except as exempted below in this section, or any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. Wastes deposited in proper waste receptacles for the purposes of collection and disposal are exempted from this prohibition. 
A.  Illegal discharges from industrial and/or commercial sources into the storm drain system or waters of the state include, but are not limited to, the following and are prohibited, unless the discharge is permitted under a separate NPDES permit other than the town of Paradise Small MS4 permit: 
1.  Water from the cleaning of gas stations, vehicle service garages, or other types of vehicle service facilities; 
2.  Water, cleansers, or solvents from the cleaning of vehicles, machinery or equipment, and other such commercial and industrial activities; 
3.  Water from the washing or rinsing of vehicles containing soap, detergents, solvents, or other cleaners; 
4.  Water from the washing or rinsing of vehicles, with or without soap, from auto body repair shops; 
5.  Water from the cleaning or rinsing of vehicle engine, undercarriage, or auto parts cleaning; 
6.  Vehicle fluids; 
7.  Mat wash and hood cleaning water from food service facilities; 
8.  Food and kitchen cleaning water from food service facilities; 
9.  Leakage from dumpsters or trash containers; 
10.  Water from the cleaning or rinsing of garbage dumpster areas and areas where garbage is stored or contained; 
11.  Water from pressure washing, steam cleaning, and hand scrubbing of sidewalks, gutters, plazas, alleyways, outdoor eating areas, steps, building exteriors, walls, driveways, and other outdoor surfaces; 
12.  Deposition of sediment from landscaping activities, such as blowing, sweeping, or washing waste materials into the storm drain system; 
13.  Wastewater or cleaning fluids from carpet cleaning; 
14.  Swimming pool and spa water; 
15.  Wash out from concrete trucks; 
16.  Runoff from areas where hazardous substances, including diesel fuel, gasoline and motor oil care stored, except as allowed by Section 8.56.070B of this chapter. 
17.  Super-chlorinated water normally associated with the disinfection of potable water systems and swimming pools; 
18.  Construction debris, such as, but not limited to, paint, dirt, and wash water; or 
19.  Sewage or other forms of pollutants from recreational activities including boating and camping, and from recreational vehicles and boats. 
B.  Exemptions to prohibited discharges. 
1.  Discharges from the following activities shall not be prohibited, as long as such activities are properly managed, and except as otherwise provided by this chapter: 
a.  Potable water line flushing or other potable water sources; 
b.  Landscape irrigation and lawn watering not containing pollutants such as sediment, pesticides, or fertilizers; 
c.  Pumped groundwater not containing pollutants; 
d.  Rising groundwater; diverted stream flows, springs and flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; 
e.  Groundwater infiltration not containing pollutants; 
f.  Foundation and footing drains and water from crawl space pumps not containing pollutants; 
g.  Air conditioning condensation; 
h.  Non-industrial roof drains not containing pollutants; 
i.  Flows from firefighting activities and flushing and testing of fire hydrants; and 
j.  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted by the town for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
2.  With written concurrence of the regional board, the town may exempt in writing other non-stormwater discharges which are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system or waters of the state. 
3.  If the regional board or the town manager determines based on substantial evidence that a discharge which is otherwise exempt from the prohibitions on discharges causes or significantly contributes to a violation of any receiving water limitation or result in the conveyance of significant quantities of pollutants to surface waters, or is otherwise a danger to public health or safety, the town manager may give written notice to the owner or operator of the facility that the discharge exception shall not apply. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.080 - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
A.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the storm drain system is prohibited. 
B.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.090 - Discharges in violation of industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit. 
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the town manager prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, or development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.100 - Requirement to prevent, control, and reduce stormwater pollutants. 
A.  Authorization to Adopt and Impose Best Management Practices. The town may adopt requirements identifying BMPs for any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state. Where BMP requirements are promulgated by the town or any federal, state of California, or regional agency for any activity, operation, or facility which would otherwise cause the discharge of pollutants to the storm drain system or water[s] of the U.S., every person undertaking such activity or operation, or owning or operating such facility shall comply with such requirements. The town manager will periodically report to the town council on the status of implementation of BMPs, the development of new and effectiveness of existing BMPs, and area-wide BMPs which may be included in BMP guidance documents promulgated by the town or other regional or state agencies. 
B.  New Development and Redevelopment. The town may require any owner or person developing real property to identify appropriate BMPs to control the volume, rate, and potential pollutant load of stormwater runoff from new development and redevelopment projects as may be appropriate to minimize the generation, transport and discharge of pollutants. The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of any land use entitlements and building permits which require such BMPs. These BMP requirements may include a combination of structural and non-structural BMPs, and shall include requirements to ensure the proper long-term operation and maintenance of these BMPs. 
C.  Construction Sites. Temporary and permanent BMPs to reduce pollutants in any stormwater runoff activities shall be incorporated in any land use entitlement and grading, encroachment, construction or building-related permit (see PMC Title 15.02.300 Section J104.2 amended). The owner and developer shall comply with the terms, provisions, and conditions of such land use entitlements, building, grading, encroachment, or demolition permits as required by the town. 
D.  Responsibility to Implement Best Management Practices. Notwithstanding the presence or absence of requirements promulgated pursuant to subsections A, B and C above, any person or entity engaged in activities or operations, or owning facilities or property which will or may result in pollutants or non-stormwater discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the state shall implement, operate and maintain BMPs to the extent they are technologically achievable to prevent and reduce such pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system or waters of the state. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes shall be provided and maintained at the owner or operator's expense. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.110 - Requirement to eliminate illegal discharges. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of Sections 8.56.150, 8.56.160 and 8.56.170, the town manager may require by written notice that a person or entity responsible for an illegal discharge immediately, or by a specified date, discontinue the discharge and, if necessary, take measures to eliminate the source of the discharge to prevent the occurrence of future illegal discharges. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.120 - Requirement to eliminate or secure approval for illicit connections. 
A.  The town manager may require by written notice that a person or entity responsible for an illicit connection to the storm drain system comply with the requirements of this chapter to eliminate or secure approval for the illicit connection by a specified date, regardless of whether the connection or discharges had been established or approved prior to the effective date of this chapter. 
B.  If, subsequent to eliminating a connection found to be in violation of this chapter, the responsible person or entity can demonstrate that an illegal discharge will no longer occur, said person or entity may request town approval to reconnect. The reconnection or reinstallation of the connection shall be at the responsible party's expense. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.130 - Watercourse protection. 
Every person or entity owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such owner's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property reasonably free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. The owner or lessee shall not remove healthy bank vegetation beyond that actually necessary for maintenance, or remove said vegetation in such a manner as to increase the vulnerability of the watercourse to erosion. The property owner or such owner's lessee, shall be responsible for maintaining and stabilizing that portion of the watercourse that is within their property lines in order to protect against erosion and degradation of the watercourse originating or contributed from their property. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.140 - Notification of spills. 
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or water[s] of the state from said facility, said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. Said person shall also identify, implement, and keep records of BMPs utilized to prevent further spills, dumping, or material disposals that resulted in illegal discharges. In the event of such a release of a hazardous material, said person shall immediately notify emergency response officials of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services (911). In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the town public works department in person or by phone or email no later than 5:00 p.m. of the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the town's public works department, within three (3) business days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.150 - Authority to inspect. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this chapter, or whenever the town manager has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, in or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the town manager may enter such premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to stormwater compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the town is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1822.50—1822.60. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.160 - Authority to sample, establish sampling devices, and test. 
During any inspection as provided herein, the town manager, or designee, may take any samples and perform any testing deemed necessary to aid in the pursuit of the inquiry or to record site activities. Upon determination of a violation, the town manager may continue sampling and testing by the town, and seek reimbursement of costs per Section 8.56.210 and of this chapter, or may request that the person or entity engaged in any activity and/or owning or operating any facility in violation, undertake at such person's or entity's expense such monitoring and analyses and furnish such reports to the town as deemed necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.170 - Authority to inspect property and request records. 
Whenever the town manager has reasonable cause to believe that there exists on any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the town manager, or designee, is empowered to request owner or occupant provides records, such as but not limited to, site plans, connection agreements, operations and maintenance records, documentation of waste disposal, as necessary to determine stormwater compliance. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.180 - Enforcement and administration. 
Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall be subject to administrative, civil, or criminal liability as provided by law, in this chapter, and in Chapter 1.09 of this code. When relying on Chapter 1.09 of this code, the town shall adhere to all procedures set forth therein, including, but not limited to, the procedures for notice, service requirements, hearings, appeals and issuance of citations and fines. 
Any person violating a provision of this chapter shall, in addition to administrative civil penalties provided in Chapter 1.09 of this code, be subject to nuisance abatement procedures as provided by law, in this chapter, and in Chapter 8.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.190 - Primary authority. 
The town manager is empowered to use any of the provisions of this chapter and the provisions found in Chapter 8.04 of this code to correct violations of, and secure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.200 - Nuisance abatement. 
Violation of any provision of this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. The town may, in addition to other authorized procedures set forth in this chapter, take action to abate any nuisance in accordance with the procedures found in Chapter 8.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.210 - Civil actions. 
In addition to any other remedies provided in this section, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the town. In any such action, the town may seek, as appropriate and allowed by law, any or all of the following remedies: 
A.  A temporary restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction; 
B.  Reimbursement of costs of any investigation, inspection or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing action under this chapter; 
C.  Costs incurred in removing, correcting, or terminating the adverse effect(s) resulting from the violation; 
D.  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction of water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life. Costs and damages under this subsection shall be paid to the town and shall be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.220 - Criminal actions. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code Section 36900. Any additional violation of this chapter within one year of the first violation shall be prosecuted by the town attorney as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months in the county jail; and provided, however, the town attorney shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
8.56.230 - Non-exclusive remedies. 
Each and every remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be non-exclusive and it is within the discretion of the town to seek cumulative remedies. Moreover, the remedies available to the town pursuant to this chapter shall not limit the right of the town to seek any other remedy that may be available at law and in equity. 
(Ord. No. 548, § 1, 9-9-2014)  
Chapter 8.57 - REGULATION OF BUTANE RESALE 
 
8.57.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Butane" means iso-butane, n-butane, and refined butane of any power. 
B.  "Canister" means a single container designed or used for the storage of butane under pressure. 
C.  "Code" means the Town of Paradise Municipal Code. 
D.  "Count" means the number of canisters of butane. 
E.  "Customer" means any person who is sold or acquires during a transaction products from any retail store. 
F.  "Day" means calendar day. 
G.  "Person" means a corporation, co-partnership, or association as well as a natural person. 
H.  "Reseller" means any business, company, corporation, person, employee or associate selling products to any customer within the Town of Paradise. It does not include any wholesaler engaged in a wholesale transaction. 
I.  "Sell" means to furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender, distribute or supply, whether for monetary gain or other consideration. 
J.  "Transaction" means a purchase, sale, trade, loan, pledge, investment, gift, transfer, transmission, delivery, deposit, withdrawal, payment, exchange of currency, extension of credit, purchase or sale of any monetary instrument, or an electronic, magnetic or manual transfer between accounts or any other acquisition or disposition of property by whatever means effected. 
K.  "Wholesaler" means a person whose business is the selling of goods in gross to retail stores for purposes of resale. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 7-12-2016)  
8.57.020 - Unlawful sale, purchase and handling of butane. 
A.  It is unlawful for any reseller or other person to sell, offer to sell, or otherwise provide to a customer any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage of six hundred (600) ml of butane during any single transaction. 
B.  It is unlawful for any customer to purchase or acquire any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage capacity of six hundred (600) ml of butane during any thirty-day period. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to have in their possession, custody, or control any number of butane canisters that exceed a combined total storage capacity of six hundred (600) ml of butane at any one time. The limitation in this subsection shall not apply to the following: 
1.  Butane canisters possessed by wholesalers or resellers solely for the purposes of resale; or 
2.  Butane canisters possessed by persons solely for the purposes of furthering their ongoing, lawful, commercial operations which require butane quantities greater than six hundred (600) ml. 
3.  Butane canisters containing a sulfur-containing odorant, such as ethyl mercaptan. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 7-12-2016)  
8.57.030 - Tracking of butane sales. 
A.  For every sale of butane, the reseller shall prepare a bill of sale that identifies the date of sale, quantity of butane purchased, and the purchaser's identification. "Purchaser's identification" as used herein shall mean a person's first and last name as verified from a valid driver's license or other official and valid state-issued identification that contains a photograph of the purchaser and a residential or mailing address. Reseller shall retain a copy of the bill of sale in readable form for a period of two years. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any reseller to sell butane to any customer without complying with Section 8.57.030(A) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 7-12-2016)  
8.57.040 - Penalties, strict liability, and nuisance. 
A.  Any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and subject to a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) penalty and/or six (6) months in the county jail; provided, however, the town shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. A separate offense shall exist for every single violation of this chapter. The criminal prosecution of any violation of this chapter does not preclude the town from the further initiation of any other civil or administrative proceeding which may be available as a remedy for such violation in accordance with this code. 
B.  This chapter is a regulatory provision necessary for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter, it is not necessary to prove knowledge or criminal intent. 
C.  A violation of any provision of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 7-12-2016)  
8.57.050 - Cumulative remedy. 
Nothing herein is intended to limit the Town of Paradise from pursuing any other remedy available at law or in equity against any person or entity maintaining, committing, or causing a public nuisance or any other violation of the code or state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 562, § 3, 7-12-2016)  
Chapter 8.59 - REMOVAL OF FIRE DAMAGED DEBRIS FROM PRIVATE PROPERTY FOLLOWING THE CAMP FIRE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 577, §§ 1-11, adopted March 12, 2019, amended Ch. 8.59 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 8.59, §§ 8-59.010—8.59.100, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 572, § 10, 12-11-2018. 
 
8.59.010 - Emergency findings. 
[The] urgency ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] is adopted pursuant to California Government Code § 36934 and shall take effect immediately upon its approval by at least a four-fifths vote of the town council. The council finds that this chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety, based upon the following facts: 
A.  Conditions of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the town were caused by the Camp Fire, commencing on the 8th day of November, 2018, at which time the town council was not in session. 
B.  California Government Code § 8630 et seq. empowers the director of emergency services to proclaim the existence of a local emergency when the town is affected or likely to be affected by a public calamity, subject to ratification by the town council at the earliest practicable time. 
C.  On November 8, 2018, the director of emergency services of the town proclaimed the existence of a local emergency within the town due to the Camp Fire. 
D.  On November 8, 2018, the Acting Governor of the State of California proclaimed a State of Emergency for Butte County and on November 14, 2018, the Governor issued Executive Order B-57-18 concerning the Camp Fire. 
E.  On November 12, 2018, the President of the United States declared the existence of a major disaster in the State of California, providing assistance from many federal agencies, including the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
F.  On November 13, 2018, the town council adopted Resolution No. 18-42 ratifying the director of emergency services' proclamation of the existence of a local emergency in the town. 
G.  The Camp Fire to date has consumed one hundred fifty-three thousand three hundred thirty-six (153,336) acres and has led to the destruction of thirteen thousand six hundred ninety-six (13,696) residences, damage to four hundred sixty-two (462) residences, the destruction of two hundred seventy-six (276) multiple family residences, the destruction of five hundred twenty-eight (528) commercial buildings, damage to one hundred two (102) commercial buildings, the destruction of four thousand two hundred ninety-three (4,293) other minor structures, and resulted in the evacuation of over fifty thousand (50,000) people. As a result, the Camp Fire has created an enormous amount of debris. 
H.  The potential for widespread toxic exposures and threats to public health and the environment exists in the aftermath of a major wildfire disaster. Debris and ash from residential and commercial structure fires can contain hazardous substances and the health effects of hazardous substances releases after a wildfire are well-documented. 
I.  The combustion of building materials such as siding, roofing tiles, and insulation can result in dangerous ash that contains asbestos, heavy metals and other hazardous materials. Household hazardous waste such as paint, gasoline, cleaning products, pesticides, compressed gas cylinders, and chemicals may have been stored in homes, garages, or sheds that may have also burned in the fire, also producing hazardous materials. 
J.  Exposure to hazardous materials may lead to acute and chronic health effects and may cause long-term public health and environmental impacts. Uncontrolled hazardous materials and debris pose significant threats to public health through inhalation of dust particles and contamination of drinking water supplies. Improper handling can expose residents and workers to toxic materials, and improper transport and disposal of fire debris can spread hazardous substances throughout the community. 
K.  Standards and removal procedures are needed immediately to protect the public health and environment, and to facilitate coordinated and effective mitigation of the risks to the public health and environment from the health hazards generated in the Camp Fire disaster. 
L.  It is essential that this chapter become immediately effective to mitigate the harm that could be caused to the public health and safety and to the environment from the improper disturbance, removal and/or disposal of debris containing hazardous materials, and to facilitate the orderly response to the Camp Fire disaster. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 1, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.020 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
A.  "Director" means the town manager. 
B.  "OES program" means the fire damage debris clearance program operated by the [California] Office of Emergency Services for the Camp Fire in conjunction with other state and federal agencies. 
C.  "Alternative program" means the requirements for inspections, clean up and disposal for property owners that opt out of or are ineligible for the OES Program. 
D.  "Private action" means the removal of fire debris from private property damaged by the Camp Fire by persons not eligible for or opting out of the OES Program. 
E.  "Removal of fire debris" as used in this chapter includes all cleanup of fire debris from structures resulting from the Camp Fire, including removal, transport and disposal of fire debris, but it does not include the removal of personal property from residential sites unless such removal of personal property involves cleanup and the removal of ash from the property. 
F.  "Right of Entry Permit" means the debris removal right-of-entry permit (for providing debris removal on private property) approved by the California Office of Emergency Services for use in the cleanup after the Camp Fire. 
G.  "Council" means the town council. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 2, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.030 - Effective period. 
This chapter shall take effect immediately upon adoption and shall remain in effect until the cleanup of fire debris has been completed on all properties within the town damaged by the Camp Fire. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 3, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.040 - Prohibition on removal of fire debris from private property. 
No fire debris from structures shall be removed from private property without a hazardous materials inspection conducted either by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or California Department of Toxic Substance Control through the [California] Office of Emergency Services' fire debris clearance program, or by an entity approved through the alternative program. This chapter shall apply to properties that contained a qualifying structure under the OES Program. This chapter shall not apply to properties that only contained non-qualifying structures, including but not limited to sheds, canopies, carports, well houses, greenhouses, chicken coops or fencing. Whether fire debris derived from a qualifying or non-qualifying structure shall be determined by the director, or her designee, in consultation with CalOES. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 4, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.050 - Removal of fire debris through the OES program. 
A.  Effect of the Right of Entry Permit. The right of entry permit shall function as the sole permit and authorization for participation in the OES Program. 
B.  Notwithstanding any contrary provision in Paradise Municipal Code, no town approvals or permits for fire debris removal are required for properties participating in the OES program, other than the right of entry agreement, which will be administered by the Butte County Department Environmental Health. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 5, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.060 - Removal of fire debris through the alternative program. 
A.  The Butte County Department of Environment Health shall adopt and administer the alternative program on behalf of the town. The county shall utilize the state and federal standards and cleanup goals of the OES program as the standards for the alternative program. 
B.  For those persons who are not eligible for the OES program, or who opt out of the OES program, private action to remove fire debris from fire-damaged properties is prohibited unless and until a hazardous materials inspection has been performed and authorization from the director has been provided pursuant to the alternative program. 
C.  The alternative program shall require an application that identifies the appropriate licensed contractors who will perform the work and the submission of plans that demonstrate that the standards established in the alternative program will be met. Work shall not begin until the Butte County Department of Environmental Health approves the application. 
D.  Upon completion of the work described in the approved plans, the alternative program shall require an application for certification of successful completion of the work required by the alternative program. The alternative program will require that: (1) the debris removal and clean-up work on the property meets or exceeds the standards set by the State of California for debris removal; and (2) the owner completely remove and dispose of the foundation or submit a letter from a licensed civil or structural engineer certifying that the foundation is acceptable for rebuild. The letter shall certify structural reasons for the decision and include the process and procedure used to reach the conclusion. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 6, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.070 - Temporary uses associated with removal of fire damaged debris. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of the Paradise Municipal Code, during the duration of [the] urgency ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] the director or his/her designee is empowered to grant a temporary use permit to authorize or conditionally authorize the following temporary land use within all zones except for the agricultural-residential, rural-residential, and town-residential zones when directly associated with fire debris removal programs: 
1.  General vehicle/equipment storage as defined in Paradise Municipal Code Section 17.04.500. 
B.  The director or his/her designee may authorize such temporary storage use based on substantial evidence that: 
1.  The temporary storage use shall not adversely impact the public health, safety, or convenience or create undue traffic hazards or congestion. 
2.  The temporary storage use shall not adversely interfere with the permitted use of other land uses and activities on the site or in the general vicinity. 
3.  The temporary storage use shall be conducted in a manner compatible with the land uses in the general vicinity. 
C.  The director may establish such additional conditions as necessary to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential negative impacts, including but not limited to hours and frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and circulation, requirements for screening or enclosure, and guarantees for site restoration and cleanup following the temporary storage use. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 7, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.080 - Hold on building permits. 
Any issued town building permit to repair or reconstruct a fire damaged structure or private infrastructure shall be held in abeyance and not acted upon until fire debris cleanup is completed on the affected property and completion is confirmed to the town building official, either through the OES program or through the alternative program. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 8, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.090 - Deadlines and enforcement. 
A.  The town may set deadlines for filing either an acceptable right of entry permit in the OES program or an acceptable application for the alternative program by resolution. 
B.  Properties that have fire ash and debris from the Camp Fire and that have neither an approved right of entry permit for the OES program nor an approved application for the alternative program by the deadline set by the council may be declared a nuisance and health hazard and such property may be abated pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  The town may set deadlines for the completion of work in the alternative program by resolution. Properties that have fire ash and debris from the Camp Fire after that deadline may be declared a nuisance and health hazard. 
D.  The town's intent is to facilitate orderly remediation of a large-scale disaster. Nothing in these deadlines shall limit the authority of the town to abate hazards more quickly where required by exigent circumstances. Nothing in this chapter or in these deadlines shall limit the authority of the director to require preventive measures as defined in California Health and Safety Code § 101040. 
E.  Enforcement and Abatement. 
1.  General Enforcement Action. When the director determines that an activity is being performed in violation of this chapter, the director may initiate an enforcement action using the process set forth in the Paradise Municipal Code and may seek the imposition of costs and civil penalties pursuant to the Paradise Municipal Code. Nothing in this provision is intended to prevent alternate enforcement mechanisms, including but not limited to, health officer orders pursuant to California Health and Safety Code § 101040. 
2.  Summary Abatement. Pursuant to the authority of Cal. Const., art. XI, Section 7; California Health and Safety Code § 101040, California Government Code § 38773, and the Paradise Municipal Code, if the Director determines that a violation of this chapter has created an emergency condition which seriously endangers the public health or safety, the town may abate the condition within the town. The costs shall be charged to the property owners(s) and the town may, at its option, recover the same in an administrative or civil action. Such charges shall be in addition to any penalty for a violation of this chapter. 
a.  Pre-Abatement Notice. Unless emergency conditions preclude doing so, the director shall issue a summary abatement notice and order with reasonable notice. The notice and order shall be mailed to the property owner(s) as listed on the last equalized tax roll. A summary of the notice and order shall be posted in a conspicuous location on the property to be abated at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the summary abatement action. 
b.  Appeal and Waiver. The property owner(s) or any person or entity having a legal interest in the property may submit a written appeal of the director's order to the town council no later than ten (10) calendar days from the date of mailing of the notice and order. The written appeal shall state the basis for the appeal. The appeal shall be heard by a town-appointed hearing officer regarding the appeal and shall issue a written decision (the "Decision") no later than ten (10) calendar days after receipt. The decision shall uphold, rescind or modify the determination of the notice and order. The decision on the appeal shall be final. Failure to appeal within the time prescribed shall constitute a waiver of the right to contest the summary abatement. 
c.  Post Abatement Notice. After the summary abatement is completed, the director shall serve the property owner(s) with a post abatement notice that sets forth: (a) the actions taken by the town; (b) the reasons for the actions; (c) a statement of the costs, expenses and attorney's fees, if any, of the abatement and notice of the town's intent to collect those costs; and (d) right to appeal the costs determination within ten (10) calendar days of the notice. If the property owner is responsible for any costs, expenses or attorney's fees, such costs shall become a lien against the property and a notice of abatement lien may be recorded with the Butte County Recorder. 
d.  Post Abatement Costs Appeal. If the property owner(s) or anyone with a legal interest in the property submits a timely costs appeal, the town shall schedule an administrative hearing on the matter and provide the appeal party with reasonable notice of the hearing. The hearing officer shall conduct an administrative hearing where each party shall have the opportunity to present evidence and the town shall have the obligation to establish that the costs, including expenses and attorney's fees, if any, incurred for the summary abatement were necessary by a preponderance of the evidence. After the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision and order that shall be served upon the appealing party within thirty (30) calendar days of the hearing unless extended by agreement of the parties. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 9, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.100 - Judicial enforcement action. 
The town attorney is authorized to initiate judicial enforcement as to a violation of any provision of this chapter without further town council approval. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 10, 3-12-2019)  
8.59.110 - Remedies not exclusive. 
The remedies identified are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 577, § 11, 3-12-2019)  
Chapter 8.61 - INTERIM HOUSING AND ACCESSORY BUILDING(S) INSIDE THE CAMP FIRE AREA[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 578, §§ 1—15, adopted May 22, 2019, repealed the former Ch. 8.61, §§ 8.61.010—8.61.100, and enacted a new Ch. 8.61 as set out herein. The former Ch. 8.61 pertained to Camp Fire disaster recovery temporary housing and derived from Ord. No. 575, § 2, 2-4-2019. Furthermore, § 15 of Ord. No. 578, adopted May 22, 2019, states that the ordinance shall expire on Dec. 31, 2020. 
 
8.61.010 - Emergency findings. 
This urgency ordinance [from which is this chapter is derived] is adopted pursuant to California Government Code Section 36934 and shall take effect immediately upon its approval by at least a four-fifths (?) vote of the town council. The council, based on determinations of the Butte County Local Health Officer, finds that this chapter is necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health and safety, based upon facts set forth in Section 8.61.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 2, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.020 - Facts. 
A.  Conditions of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the Town of Paradise were caused by the Camp Fire, commencing on the 8th day of November, 2018, at which time the town council was not in session. 
B.  California Government Code Section 8630 empowers the town director of emergency services (director) to proclaim the existence of a local emergency when the town is affected or likely to be affected by a public calamity, subject to ratification by the town council at the earliest practicable time. 
C.  On November 8, 2018, the director proclaimed the existence of a local emergency within the town due to the Camp Fire. 
D.  On November 8, 2018, the Acting Governor of the State of California proclaimed a State of Emergency for Butte County pursuant to the California Emergency Services Act, commencing with Section 8550 of the Government Code, and on November 14, 2018, the governor issued Executive Order B-57-18 concerning the Camp Fire. 
E.  On November 9, 2018, the Camp Fire was still burning through the town and despite firefighters' best efforts, the wildfire was not contained. Evacuation orders were in place and numerous severe public health and safety hazards were present in the Camp Fire area, including many blocked roads from fallen power lines, burned trees and vehicles, numerous burned vehicles were left throughout the Camp Fire area due to survivors fleeing their vehicles in efforts to survive the wildfire, no available utilities, no available public services and the presence of human remains and animal carcasses. At the time, the town estimated that two thousand (2,000) structures had burned in the Camp Fire. 
F.  On November 9, 2018, Dr. Andrew Miller, Butte County's Local Health Officer, issued a Declaration of Health Emergency pursuant to California Health and Safety Code section 101080. Dr. Miller's declaration stated that the local health emergency was a consequence of the debris resulting from the Camp Fire that contains hazardous material in the ash of the burned qualifying structures. The purpose of the declaration was to address the immediate threat to the public health and the imminent and proximate threat of the introduction of contagious, infectious or communicable disease, chemical agents, non-communicable biologic agents, toxins and/or radioactive agents present at the time in the Camp Fire area. The threats included: 
1.  The enormous amount of fire debris present in the Camp Fire area, including ash and debris containing hazardous materials and probable radioactive materials present in ash and debris from qualifying structures; 
2.  The threat of infectious or communicable disease and/or non-communicable biologic agents due to animal carcasses, radioactive waste and perishable foods; 
3.  The potential contamination or destruction of the residential and commercial water supply in the Camp Fire area; and 
4.  The potential pollution of the drinking water downstream from the Camp Fire area if weather conditions caused the spread of the hazardous materials in the ash and debris of burned qualifying structures. 
G.  On November 12, 2018, the President of the United States declared the existence of a major disaster in the State of California, providing assistance from many federal agencies, including the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
H.  On November 13, 2018, the Butte County Board of Supervisors ratified Dr. Miller's Declaration of Health Emergency. 
I.  On November 21, 2018, the status of the Camp Fire area was as follows: firefighters had contained the Camp Fire; the sheriff had lifted evacuation orders; work crews had removed fallen power lines, burned vehicles and trees blocking the roads; utilities including electric power, gas and non-potable water had become available; no local businesses were open to serve the public; and no public services were available. Further, preliminary actions had been taken to mitigate the risk from animal carcasses, radioactive waste and perishable foods in the Camp Fire area, however, concerns regarding the threats remained. The public health hazards present in the Camp Fire area included: 
1.  The public health hazards from the enormous amount of fire debris; 
2.  The public health hazard from the hazardous materials and probable radioactive materials present in the ash and debris from destroyed qualifying structures; 
3.  The threat of infectious or communicable disease and/or non-communicable biologic agent due to the presence of animal carcasses, perishable foods and radioactive waste; and 
4.  The potential pollution of the drinking water downstream from the Camp Fire area if weather conditions caused the spread of the hazardous materials in the ash and debris of burned qualifying structures. At the time, the Camp Fire had destroyed thousands of structures. 
J.  On November 21, 2018, Dr. Miller issued a Hazard Advisory strongly suggesting residents should not reside on property with qualifying structures damaged or destroyed by the Camp Fire until the property had been cleared of hazardous waste, ash and debris and certified clean by the county department of public health, environmental health division. The county department of public health provided residents with re-entry packets which included personal protective equipment and information on the dangerous conditions and toxic materials present in the Camp Fire area. The re-entry packets were intended to improve the safety of the residents who chose to visit their properties to collect valuables and not intended to encourage long-term visitation or habitation. The purpose of the hazard advisory was to address the public health hazards present at the time in the Camp Fire area, including: 
1.  The enormous amount of fire debris present in the Camp Fire area; 
2.  The hazardous materials and probable radioactive materials present in ash and debris from qualifying structures; 
3.  The lessened but still present threat of infectious or communicable disease and/or non-communicable biologic agents due to animal carcasses, radioactive waste and perishable foods; 
4.  The potential contamination or destruction of the residential and commercial water supply in the Camp Fire area; and 
5.  The potential pollution of the drinking water downstream from the Camp Fire area if weather conditions caused the spread of the hazardous materials in the ash and debris of burned qualifying structures. 
K.  The Camp Fire to date has consumed one hundred fifty-three thousand three hundred thirty-six (153,336) acres and has led to the destruction of thirteen thousand six hundred ninety-six (13,696) residences, damage to four hundred sixty-two (462) residences, the destruction of two hundred seventy-six (276) multiple family residences, the destruction of five hundred twenty-eight (528) commercial buildings, damage to one hundred two (102) commercial buildings, the destruction of four thousand two hundred ninety-three (4,293) other minor structures, and resulted in the evacuation of over fifty thousand (50,000) people. As a result, the Camp Fire has created an enormous amount of debris. 
L.  There exists the potential for widespread toxic exposures and threats to public health and the environment in the aftermath of a major wildfire disaster, and debris and ash from residential and commercial structure fires contain hazardous materials and the harmful health effects of hazardous materials produced by a wildfire are well-documented. 
M.  The combustion of building materials such as siding, roofing tiles, and insulation results in dangerous ash that may contain asbestos, heavy metals and other hazardous materials. Household hazardous waste such as paint, gasoline, cleaning products, pesticides, compressed gas cylinders, and chemicals may have been stored in homes, garages, or sheds that may have burned in the fire, also producing hazardous materials. 
N.  Exposure to hazardous materials may lead to acute and chronic health effects and may cause long-term public health and environmental impacts. Uncontrolled hazardous materials and debris pose significant threats to public health through inhalation of dust particles and contamination of drinking water supplies. Improper handling can expose residents and workers to toxic materials, and improper transport and disposal of fire debris can spread hazardous substances throughout the community. 
O.  Standards and removal procedures are needed immediately to protect the public health and environment, and to facilitate coordinated and effective mitigation of the risks to the public health and environment from the health hazards generated by the Camp Fire disaster. 
P.  The Camp Fire has created hazardous waste conditions in the Town of Paradise in the form of contaminated debris from household hazardous waste/materials and structural debris resulting from the destruction of thousands of structures. This hazardous waste debris poses a substantial present or potential hazard to human health and the environment until the property is certified clean. The accumulated exposure to hazardous waste debris over an extended period of time poses a severe hazard to human health. 
Q.  The Town of Paradise previously approved Ordinance No. 572, Ordinance No. 573, and Ordinance No. 575 as urgency measures relating to the Camp Fire disaster recovery on December 12, 2018, The actions addressed the need for the regulation of debris removal to alleviate the public health, safety and welfare concerns associated with the ash and debris of qualifying structures and temporary emergency housing options. 
R.  As of February 4, 2019, the status of the Camp Fire disaster recovery was as follows: (1) Phase I cleanup by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the California Department of Toxic Substances Control is complete, which has reduced the public health concerns relating to the most hazardous materials present in the Camp Fire area, (2) Phase II of the cleanup pursuant to the Government (CalOES) Program and the Alternative Program has commenced, (3) utilities are available (except for potable water), (4) numerous businesses have opened to serve the public, (5) public services are available, including a FEMA and CalOES jointly-operated Disaster Recovery Center in Paradise, California. Current threats include: (1) the enormous amount of fire debris present in the Camp Fire area, (2) hazardous materials and probable radioactive materials present in ash and debris from qualifying structures, (3) the potential pollution of the drinking water downstream from the Camp Fire area if weather conditions caused the spread of the hazardous materials in the ash and debris of burned qualifying structures. The purpose of this chapter is to allow residents to live on properties in the Camp Fire area that do not contain fire ash and debris from a qualifying structure destroyed or damaged by the Camp Fire. 
S.  The Debris Removal Operations Plan for the Camp Fire prepared by the CalOES/CalRecycle Incident Management Team provides that the DTSC has issued reports regarding the assessment of burn debris from wildfires in the past. The studies of burned residential homes and structures from large scale wildland fires indicated that the resulting ash and debris can contain asbestos and toxic concentrated amounts of heavy metals such as antimony, arsenic, cadmium, copper, lead, and zinc (qualifying structures). Additionally, the ash and debris may contain higher concentrations of lead if the home was built prior 1978 when lead was banned from household paint in the United States. The reports indicated that the residual ash of burned residential homes and structures has high concentrations of heavy metals that can be toxic and can have significant impact to individual properties, local communities, and watersheds if the ash and debris is not removed safely and promptly. The plan also indicates that the purpose of the structural debris removal program is to remove debris that poses a risk to health and/or the environment. Debris from structures smaller than one hundred twenty (120) square feet are not included in the program. 
T.  The Butte County Local Health Officer Dr. Miller has indicated that the Phase II cleanup of the properties containing ash and debris from a qualifying structure mitigates the public health hazards of the Camp Fire. Further, failing to clean properties containing ash and debris from a qualifying structure can have severely negative long term consequences to the public health and environment. Therefore, the focus must be on accomplishment of the Phase II cleanup to address the public health hazards. The standard for determining when a property is clean from ash and debris from a qualifying structure is when the Phase II cleanup work is complete and the property is certified clean by the county department of public health, environmental health division. Ash and debris of qualifying structures is the focus of the Phase II cleanup work. The significance of the public health risks is higher on properties with ash and debris from a qualifying structure. Given the progress the Camp Fire disaster recovery has made with respect to the hazards identified in the findings above, the remaining significant public health hazard is the ash and debris from qualifying structures. Based on the foregoing properties that contain ash and debris from qualifying structures constitute a significant public health risk. Therefore, those properties should be ineligible for temporary emergency housing until Phase II cleanup work is completed on the property and is certified clean by the department of public health, environmental health division. Properties that do not contain ash and debris from a qualifying structure do not pose a significant public health risk and should be eligible for temporary emergency housing. 
U.  Due to the magnitude of the destruction, there is a need to provide for sufficient housing options both inside and outside of the Camp Fire affected area. Thus, on February 4, 2019, the Town of Paradise adopted Ordinance No. 575 that repealed Ordinance No. 573 and established an ordinance that temporarily relaxes some building and zoning regulations to allow for additional interim housing both inside and outside of the Camp Fire affected area for displaced persons. 
V.  There exists an immediate need to provide accessory buildings to accommodate storage of personal property of persons displaced by the Camp Fire who own eligible property that has been certified clean pursuant to Phase II requirements by the county department of public health, environmental health division. This chapter temporarily relaxes some town zoning regulations to allow for establishment of an accessory building on property both inside and outside of the Camp Fire affected area for the displaced persons for the storage of essential equipment necessary to the recovery from the damages caused by the Camp Fire. Due to the magnitude of the destruction and its related and significant impacts on properties, there is a need to provide displaced property owners with the option of constructing accessory buildings both inside and outside of the Camp Fire affected area without first obtaining building permits for primary residences on their properties. 
W.  It is essential that this chapter become immediately effective: 
1.  To mitigate the harm that could be caused to the public health and safety and to the environment from the improper disturbance, removal and/or disposal of debris containing hazardous materials, and to facilitate the orderly response to the Camp Fire disaster; 
2.  To allow the fastest possible transition of homeless and displaced residents to interim and long-term shelter; and 
3.  To allow displaced persons who own eligible property certified clean pursuant to Phase II requirements an option to establish an accessory building on their property to better facilitate and further expedite their property maintenance and storage of essential equipment required to allow for the property rebuild process. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 3, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.030 - Purpose. 
Thirteen thousand six hundred ninety-six (13,696) homes were destroyed by the Camp Fire in the Town of Paradise and surrounding unincorporated areas. This disaster has created a need for housing on a scale that cannot be accommodated through the existing available housing in the town. To meet the immediate need for housing, the town relaxed some building and zoning regulations in a prior ordinance to allow for additional temporary housing. However, this additional temporary housing may not be sufficient to meet the large and immediate need. This [chapter] relaxes some building and zoning regulations to allow for additional temporary housing inside the Camp Fire affected area. Persons moving back to the area do so at their own risk and should make themselves aware of the health hazards of doing so. The chapter allows persons to place temporary housing on an eligible property. This chapter also provides an option for affected property owners to establish an accessory building on their eligible property without first obtaining a building permit for a primary residence. The purpose of this chapter is to develop reasonable standards that allow persons to move back into the Camp Fire affected area while a massive debris removal program is implemented and, at the same time, provide interim shelter as well as an option of an accessory building for property maintenance equipment and rebuild materials storage for town residents on private property during this housing crisis. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 4, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.040 - Definitions. 
Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
"Accessory building" means any structure having a permanent foundation and a roof supported by columns or walls designed, intended and/or used for the protection and storage of personal property associated with a permitted or conditionally permitted principal use on the same site. 
"Camp Fire" means a 153,336-acre wildfire that started near the community of Pulga on November 8, 2018, destroying over eighteen thousand (18,000) structures, which forced the evacuation of the Town of Paradise, Berry Creek, Butte Creek Canyon, Butte Valley, Centerville, Cherokee, Concow, Durham, Forest Ranch, Magalia, Pulga, Stirling City, and Yankee Hill, and other areas near the Cities of Chico and Oroville, and proclaimed by the town council under Resolution 18-42, as a local emergency, and also proclaimed by then Acting Governor Gavin Newsom as a state of emergency. CAL FIRE maintains a map showing the final boundaries of the Camp Fire and the Camp Fire affected area, as of November 25, 2018 at one hundred (100) percent containment. 
"Cargo storage container" means a single metal box made of steel or other similar material, which is designed for securing and protecting items for temporary storage, not exceeding three hundred twenty (320) square feet in size, without utilities, and not used for human habitation. 
"Director" means the Town of Paradise Director of Emergency services or his or her authorized representative. 
"Displaced person(s)" means a town resident or residents whose residential dwelling has been destroyed or damaged by the Camp Fire, such that the resident(s) cannot occupy the dwelling. Displaced person(s) may be required to provide verification to the county to substantiate their eligibility for uses, permits and/or approvals described in this article. Evidence may consist of verification by Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) registration or damage assessment, and/or a driver's license or other government-issued identification card or utility bill, etc. with a physical address showing the resident resided on a property impacted by the Camp Fire, as determined by the town. Such determination may be made by the director or other town personnel. 
"Effective date" means the date of the town council adoption of this chapter. 
"Eligible property" means a property that does not contain fire debris or hazardous materials from a qualifying structure that was damaged or destroyed by the Camp Fire. Eligible property shall include (1) parcels with no resulting damage or fire debris from the Camp Fire (2) parcels with fire debris from a structure that was not a qualifying structure that was damaged or destroyed by the Camp Fire and (3) parcels with fire debris or hazardous materials from a qualifying structure that was damaged or destroyed by the Camp Fire, only upon the issuance of a certificate that the parcel has been cleaned pursuant to Phase II requirements by the county department of public health, environmental health division. Temporary housing and/or establishment of an accessory building pursuant to this chapter shall be permitted as reflected in the table below: 
	Property not damaged by Camp Fire 	Property with a non-qualifying structure damaged or destroyed by Camp Fire 	Property with a qualifying structure damaged or destroyed by Camp Fire 
Prior to completion of Phase II cleanup 	Temporary housing allowed 	Temporary housing allowed 	Temporary housing prohibited 
Following completion of Phase II cleanup (property certified clean by the department of public health, environmental health division) 	Temporary housing allowed 
Accessory building allowed 	Temporary housing allowed 
Accessory building allowed 	Temporary housing allowed 
Accessory building allowed 
 
"FEMA" means the Federal Emergency Management Agency or successor agency. 
"Fire debris and hazardous materials" mean debris, ash, metals, and completely or partially incinerated substances from structures that are located on properties that qualify under the CalOES Debris Removal Program or the Butte County's Alternative Debris Removal Program. 
"Movable tiny house" means, for the purposes of this chapter, a movable tiny house is a structure utilized as living quarters by one (1) household that is licensed by and registered with the California Department of Motor Vehicles, meets the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) 119.5 or ANSI 119.2 (NFPA 1192) requirements and is certified by a qualified third party inspector for ANSI compliance, cannot move under its own power, is not longer than allowed by state law for movement on public highways, has a total floor area of not less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet, and has no more than four hundred thirty (430) square feet of habitable living space. 
"Phase I" means the hazardous waste cleanup as defined and discussed in [Section 8.61.020], debris removal, above. 
"Phase II" means the hazardous waste, fire debris and ash cleanup as defined in [Section 8.61.020], debris removal, above. 
"Qualifying structure" means a qualifying structure as defined and discussed in [Section 8.61.020], debris removal, above. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper or camping trailer that is: 
1.  Self-contained with potable water and sewage tanks and designed for human habitation for recreational or emergency occupancy; 
2.  Self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on California roadways; and 
3.  A California Department of Motor Vehicles licensed vehicle, or a similar vehicle or structure as determined by the director. 
"Recreational vehicle park" means commercial use providing space for the accommodation of more than two (2) recreational vehicles for recreational or emergency housing, or for transient employee lodging purposes. 
"Temporary dwelling" means temporary dwelling includes a recreational vehicle and a movable tiny house. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 5, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.050 - Initial use of temporary dwellings. 
Residential use and occupancy of up to two (2) temporary dwellings on any eligible property that permits a residential use shall be allowed for an initial term of one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of this chapter was enacted subject to the applicable requirements set forth under Section [8.61.070], standards. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 6, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.060 - Temporary dwellings with utility hook-ups. 
Residential use and occupancy of up to two (2) temporary dwellings, including any temporary dwellings allowed under section [8.61.050], utilizing hook-ups for water, sewage disposal, and/or electricity on an eligible property shall be allowed during the effective period of this chapter subject to a temporary use permit, and subject to the applicable requirements set forth in Section [8.61.070], standards. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 7, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.070 - Standards. 
All residential use of temporary dwellings and storage use of cargo storage containers shall meet the following standards. 
A.  At all times, the property owner or the property owner's authorized agent shall obtain all town permits for all temporary dwellings that are hooked-up to utilities. Written consent of the property owner is required in all cases. 
B.  At all times, residential use of temporary dwellings is limited to recreational vehicles and movable tiny houses not on a permanent foundation and used to house persons displaced by the Camp Fire during the effective period of this chapter. 
C.  Use of temporary dwellings is contingent on proof of a damaged or destroyed residence as verified by the director based on prior final building permit or assessor's records, or other documentation satisfactory to the director. 
D.  At all times, temporary dwellings and cargo storage containers shall be located outside the boundaries of any recorded easements, roads, driveways, designated flood hazard locations, or areas prone to landslide or debris flow. 
E.  At all times, use of a cargo storage container shall be only for storage of personal and household belongings for each temporary dwelling. 
F.  For water hook-ups, the temporary dwelling shall be connected to an approved source of water meeting one (1) of the following criteria: 
1.  Public water supply; 
2.  Existing well provided that it has been approved by the department of public health, environmental health division as safe for domestic consumption; or 
3.  Other water source approved by the town. 
G.  For sewage disposal hook-ups, the temporary dwelling shall be connected to an approved sewage disposal system meeting one (1) of the following criteria: 
1.  Public sewer system; 
2.  A new or existing on-site sewage disposal system that has been approved by the town to be intact, adequately sized, and functioning correctly; 
3.  Temporary holding tank with a contract with a pumping company for regular pumping. A copy of the contract shall be provided to the town and department of public health, environmental health division; or 
4.  Other method of sewage disposal approved by the town and the department of public health, environmental health division. 
H.  For electricity hook-ups, the temporary dwelling shall be connected to an approved source of electricity meeting one (1) of the following criteria: 
1.  Permitted electrical service hook-up; or 
2.  Other power source approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 8, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.080 - Use of accessory residential structures for temporary habitation. 
For the effective period of this chapter, accessory residential structures on an eligible property, which also meets Residential Group R occupancies as established by the California Residential Code adopted by the town, may be used as interim housing for persons displaced by the Camp Fire. During this period, said use shall not be subject to the provisions of existing deed restrictions required by Butte County, but shall remain subject to all other existing regulations and limitations. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 9, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.090 - Use of accommodations, farmstays, bed and breakfast inns, resorts, retreats, camps or other similar uses. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provision in the Paradise Municipal Code or any use permit conditions, use of existing promotional or marketing accommodations, farmstays, bed and breakfast inns, resorts, retreats, camps or other similar visitor serving uses shall be allowed on an eligible property as interim housing for persons displaced by the Camp Fire. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 10, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.100 - Waiver of town use permit requirement for relocation of damaged child care and educational facilities. 
Notwithstanding any contrary provision in the Paradise Municipal Code, any existing small or large child day care facility or child care center, elementary school, junior high school, high school or institution of higher education that was housed in premises made uninhabitable by the Camp Fire may be temporarily relocated to existing buildings on an eligible property in the eligible property, subject to a temporary use permit and any existing applicable standards, and subject to a building permit if any renovations are required. Nothing in this chapter waives or affects any state law requirements applicable to such facilities. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 11, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.110 - Accessory building standards. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of Paradise Municipal Code Title 17, while this chapter is in effect, an accessory building may be established as a permitted land use prior to the issuance of a building permit for construction of a residence upon an eligible property located within all agricultural residential, rural residential, town residential, and multi-family zoning districts and shall meet the following standards: 
A.  The accessory building shall not exceed a building coverage area of ten (10) percent of the lot size of the affected property located in any of the agricultural-residential, rural residential, one-ace minimum [RR-1] and rural residential two-third acre minimum [RR-2/3] zoning districts. 
B.  The accessory building shall not exceed a building coverage area of five (5) percent of the lot size of the affected property located in any of the town residential, rural residential, one-half acre minimum [RR-1/2], and multiple-family residential [MF] zoning districts. 
C.  At all times, the accessory building shall be located outside the boundaries of any recorded easements, roads, driveways, designated flood hazard locations, areas prone to landslide or debris flow, and required front, rear and side yard setback areas. 
D.  The accessory building shall be designed and constructed to comply with Wildland Urban Interface (WUI) standards. 
E.  Whenever the accessory building is to exceed a floor area of one hundred twenty (120) square feet and/or to be connected to utilities the property owner or the property owner's authorized agent shall obtain all town permits for subject accessory building(s). Written consent of the property owner is required in all cases. 
F.  Town permit applications for establishment of an accessory building shall include submittal of a subject property plot plan: 
1.  Drawn to a common scale; 
2.  Designed in compliance with the town's "minimum plan standards" for residential rebuild; and 
3.  Including either a concurrent or future residential dwelling. 
G.  Before the expiration of this chapter, all owners of accessory buildings constructed under this chapter shall have applied for building permits to construct a primary residence on the owners' property. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 12, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.120 - CEQA exemption. 
Adoption of this chapter is exempt from the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) pursuant to California Public Resources Code Section 21080(b)(3) regarding projects to maintain, repair, restore, or replace property or facilities damaged or destroyed as a result of a declared disaster and Section 21080(b)(4) regarding actions to mitigate or prevent an emergency, and CEQA Guidelines Section 15269(a) regarding maintaining, repairing, restoring, demolishing, or replacing property or facilities damaged or destroyed as a result of a disaster stricken area in which a state of emergency has been proclaimed by the Governor pursuant to the California Emergency Services Act, commencing with Section 8550 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 13, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.130 - Severability. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, or phrase of this chapter is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portion of this chapter. The town council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter and every section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional or invalid. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 14, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.140 - Effective date and publication. 
[The] ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] shall be and the same is hereby declared to be in full force and effect immediately upon its passage by a four-fifths (?) or greater vote. The Town Clerk of the Town of Paradise is authorized and directed to publish a summary of [the] ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] before the expiration of fifteen (15) days after its passage. [The] ordinance [from which this chapter is derived] shall be published once, with the names of the members of the town council members voting for and against it, in the Paradise Post, a newspaper of general circulation published in the Town of Paradise, State of California. A complete copy of this chapter is on file with the town clerk of the town council and is available for public inspection and copying during regular business hours in the office of the town clerk. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 15, 5-22-2019)  
8.61.150 - Expiration of chapter. 
This [chapter] shall expire on December 31, 2020. 
(Ord. No. 578, § 15, 5-22-2019)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.04.010 - Seditious language. 
It is unlawful for any person to utter, publish or use any seditious language, words, remarks or epithets, or to address to another any such language, words, remarks or epithets, which create or provoke, or tend to create or provoke, a breach of peace. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-26)  
Chapter 9.08 - DRUG PARAPHERNALIA 
Sections: 
 
9.08.010 - Findings. 
The illegal use of controlled substances within the incorporated area of the town creates serious social, medical and law enforcement problems. The illegal use of such substances by persons under eighteen years of age has reached crisis dimensions. It is causing serious physical and psychological damage to the youth of this community, an impairment of educational achievement and of the efficiency of the educational system, increases in non-drug related crime, and a threat to the ability of the community to ensure future generations of responsible and productive adults, all to the detriment of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the town. 
The proliferation of the display of drug paraphernalia in retail stores within the town, and the distribution of such paraphernalia would intensify and otherwise compound the problem of illegal use of controlled substances within this community. 
A ban only upon the display and distribution of drug paraphernalia to persons under eighteen years of age would not be practical. The person who displays or distributes would have difficulty determining who could lawfully view or receive drug paraphernalia. The already thinly staffed law enforcement agencies would be subjected to intolerable added enforcement burdens by adding age of a person who views or receives paraphernalia as an element of a prohibition upon display and distribution. A significant number of high school students are eighteen years of age or older. It would be lawful to distribute paraphernalia to some students attending the same school in which the distribution to other students would be prohibited. Permitted display and distribution to adults within the community would symbolize a public tolerance of illegal drug use, making it difficult to explain the rationale of programs directed against similar abuse by youth. The problem of illegal consumption of controlled substances by adults within this community is significant and substantial, necessitating a cessation of the encouragement to drug abuse which the display and distribution of drug paraphernalia creates. 
This chapter is a measure which is necessary in order to discourage the illegal use of controlled substances within the incorporated area of the town. 
(Ord. 42 § 1, 1981)  
9.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Business" means a fixed location, whether indoors or outdoors, at which merchandise is offered for sale at retail. 
B.  "Controlled substance" means those controlled substances set forth in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 and 11058 of the California Health and Safety Code, identified as Schedules I through V, inclusive, as the sections exist as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or may thereafter be amended. 
C.  "Display" means to show to a patron or place in a manner so as to be available for viewing or inspection by a patron. 
D.  "Distribute" means to transfer ownership or a possessory interest to another, whether for consideration or as a gratuity. "Distribute" includes both sales and gifts. 
E.  "Drug paraphernalia" means all equipment, products and materials of any kind which are intended by a person charged with a violation of this chapter for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repacking, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state. "Drug paraphernalia" includes, but is not limited to, all of the following: 
1.  Kits intended for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived; 
2.  Kits intended for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing controlled substances; 
3.  Isomerization devices intended for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance; 
4.  Testing equipment intended for use in identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of controlled substances; 
5.  Scales and balances intended for use in weighing or measuring controlled substances; 
6.  Dilutants and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, intended for use in cutting controlled substances; 
7.  Separation gins and sifters intended for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining, marijuana; 
8.  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices intended for use in compounding controlled substances; 
9.  Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers intended for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances; 
10.  Containers and other objects intended for use in storing or concealing controlled substances; and 
11.  Objects intended for use in injecting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body, such as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls, 
b.  Water pipes, 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices, 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks, 
e.  Roach clips, meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand, 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials, 
g.  Chamber pipes, 
h.  Carburetor pipes, 
i.  Air-driven pipes, and 
j.  Bongs. 
In determining whether an object is "drug paraphernalia," a court or other authority may consider, in addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following: 
1.  Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object concerning its use; 
2.  The proximity of the object to controlled substances; 
3.  The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object; 
4.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver to persons whom he knows intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of the laws of the state relating to controlled substances; 
5.  Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning its use; 
6.  Descriptive materials, accompanying the object, which explain or depict its use; 
7.  National and local advertising concerning its use; 
8.  The manner in which the object is displayed for sale; 
9.  Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the object or objects to the total sales of the business enterprise; 
10.  The existence or scope of legitimate uses for the object in the community; and 
11.  Expert testimony concerning its use. 
F.  "Patron" means a person who enters a business for the purpose of purchasing or viewing as a shopper merchandise offered for sale at the business. 
G.  "Person" means a natural person or any firm, partnership, association, corporation or cooperative association. (Ord. 42 §2, 1981)  
9.08.030 - Display. 
A.  Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully maintain or operate any business knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know that drug paraphernalia is displayed at such business. 
B.  Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person who is the owner of a business, an employee thereof or who works at such business as an agent of the owner, to wilfully display drug paraphernalia at such business. (Ord. 42 §3, 1981)  
9.08.040 - Distribution. 
Except as authorized by law, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully distribute to another person drug paraphernalia, knowing or under circumstances where one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of any law of the state. (Ord. 42 §4, 1981)  
9.08.050 - Exceptions. 
No provision of this chapter shall be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to authorize any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the state or require any act which is otherwise prohibited by any law of the state, nor shall any provision of this chapter be deemed, whether directly or indirectly, to prohibit any act or acts which are prohibited by any law of the state. (Ord. 42 §5, 1981)  
9.08.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Whenever any act is prohibited by this chapter, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, nevertheless, that any such aforesaid violation or offense may be deemed an infraction as defined by Section 19C of the California Penal Code and charged as such in the discretion and at the election of the town prosecuting attorney, in which event the punishment therefor shall not be imprisonment, but a fine not to exceed the amounts specified by Government Code Section 36900 as then in effect. Every day any violation of any provision of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 76 §6, 1982: Ord. 42 §7, 1981)  
Chapter 9.12 - TOPLESS DANCING 
Sections: 
 
9.12.010 - Authority. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 318.5 and 318.6 as added by Chapters 1534 and 1535, Statutes 1969, respectively. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-100)  
9.12.020 - Theater and concert hall defined. 
As used in this chapter, "theater" and "concert hall" mean any building, playhouse, room, hall or other place having a permanent stage upon which movable scenery and theatrical or vaudeville or similar performances are given, permanently affixed or temporarily installed seating devices so arranged that a body of spectators can have an unobstructed view of the stage and whose primary or intended function is to give such performances. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-101)  
9.12.030 - Exposure of female breasts. 
Every female person who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to public view or place open to the public, or every female person who, while acting as a waitress, hostess or entertainer, whether or not the owner or person in charge of the establishment in which the activity is performed employs or pays any compensation to such person to perform such activity, in any establishment which serves food, beverages or food and beverages, including but not limited to alcoholic beverages, for consumption on the premises of such establishment: 
A.  Exposes any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that either or both nipples and all portions of either or both breasts which have a pigmentation or similar coloration different than that of the surrounding main portion of the breasts are below such straight line; or 
B.  Employs any device, covering or facsimile which is designed or intended to simulate such portion of the breast; or 
C.  Wears any type of clothing or device so that any portion of such part of the breast can or may be observed; 
is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in the county jail not exceeding six months, or fined not exceeding five hundred dollars, or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-102)  
9.12.040 - Exposure of pubic area or buttocks. 
Every person who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host, hostess or entertainer, whether or not the owner or person in charge of the establishment in which the activity is performed employs or pays any compensation to such person to perform such activity, in an establishment which serves food, beverages or food and beverages, for consumption on the premises of such establishment: 
A.  Exposes his or her genitals, pubic area or buttocks; or 
B.  Employs any device, covering or facsimile which is designed or intended to simulate the genitals or pubic area; or 
C.  Wears any type of clothing or device so that any portion of the genitals, pubic area or buttocks can or may be observed; 
is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be confined in the county jail not exceeding six months, or fined not exceeding five hundred dollars, or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-103)  
9.12.050 - Accessories to violations. 
Any person who permits, counsels, procures or assists any person to expose himself as regulated in this chapter or to employ any prohibited device or to wear any type of prohibited clothing or device, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be confined in the county jail not exceeding six months, or fined not exceeding five hundred dollars, or be punished by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-104)  
9.12.060 - Exceptions. 
This chapter does not apply to any bona fide theater or concert hall, as defined in Section 9.12.020. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-105)  
Chapter 9.14 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS 
Sections: 
 
9.14.010 - Purpose. 
A.  It has been demonstrated that various forms of adult businesses, as defined in Section 9.14.020, possess certain objectionable operational characteristics which can have a deleterious effect upon neighboring land uses and on areas in close proximity thereto. 
B.  It has also been demonstrated that locating certain adult entertainment businesses in the vicinity of facilities frequented by minors, exposes minors to adult materials, which because of the minors' immaturity may adversely affect them. 
C.  In addition, it is recognized that certain adult entertainment facilities can be detrimental to residential neighborhood areas and can, if not properly controlled and regulated, result in the deterioration of existing businesses in commercial areas that are the subject of current revitalization efforts, will adversely affect such efforts by discouraging new businesses from locating in such areas and will, in addition, adversely affect the rehabilitation of existing commercial business within those areas. 
D.  Regulation, therefore, of adult businesses is necessary from a land use standpoint to insure that the adverse effects of such uses will not contribute to the blighting, deterioration or the downgrading of surrounding neighborhoods or the efforts to revitalize existing commercial areas within the incorporated area of the town. 
E.  The purpose and intent of the town council by enacting this chapter to prohibit the establishment of any use which qualifies as an adult entertainment business, as defined in Section 9.14.020, in the incorporated area of the town, except within the established I-S industrial service district. 
F.  It is the objective of the town council, by this chapter, to prohibit any such adult entertainment business from being established which may be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 178 §3(E), 1988; Ord. 100 §1, 1983)  
9.14.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided, or required by the context, the following terms have the meanings set forth in this section for the purposes of this chapter. 
A.  "Adult entertainment businesses" are defined as follows: 
1.  "Adult bookstore" is an establishment having as a substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines and other periodicals which are distinguished or characteristic by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of such materials. 
2.  "Adult hotel or motel" means a hotel or motel wherein material is regularly presented which has as its dominant or predominant theme the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical activities." 
3.  "Adult mini-motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty persons used for presenting a preponderance of films whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
4.  "Adult motion picture arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the preponderance of images displayed have as their dominant or predominant theme the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
5.  "Adult motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty or more persons used for presenting a preponderance of films whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
6.  "Cabaret" means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performance by topless and/or bottomless dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where the dominant or predominant character or theme of such performances is the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
7.  "Massage parlor" means any place where for any form of consideration of gratuity, massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of the human body occurs as part of or in connection with "specified sexual activities" or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation or service related thereto exposes "specified anatomical areas." 
8.  "Model studio" means any business where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display "specified anatomical areas" are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by persons paying the consideration or gratuity. 
9.  "Other adult entertainment businesses" means any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment whose dominant or predominant character and theme is the performance of "specified sexual activities" or depiction of "specified anatomical areas." 
10.  "Sexual encounter center" means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where three or more persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate, assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in "specified sexual activities" or exposing "specified anatomical areas." 
B.  "Specified anatomical areas" means: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered: 
a.  Human genitals, pubic region, 
b.  Buttocks, and 
c.  Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
C.  "Specified sexual activities" means: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation and intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship, and any of the following depicted sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
3.  Use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or 
4.  Fondling or touching nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
5.  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
6.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or 
7.  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. (Ord. 100 §§2, 3, 4, 1983)  
9.14.030 - Permitted where. 
A.  The location of any adult entertainment business as defined in subsection A of Section 9.14.020, is permitted only in the I-S industrial service district, as defined in Chapter 17.23. 
B.  No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any adult entertainment business as defined in subsection A of Section 9.14.020, at any place within the incorporated area of the town except in those areas defined in subsection A of this section. (Ord. 178 §3(F), 1988: Ord. 100 §§5, 6(part), 1983)  
9.14.040 - Establishment includes opening, relocation or conversion. 
The establishment of an adult entertainment business includes the opening of the business as a new business, the relocation of the business or the conversion of an existing business location to any of the uses defined in subsection A of Section 9.14.020. (Ord. 100 §6(part), 1983)  
9.14.050 - Certain signs prohibited. 
Adult entertainment businesses as described in subsection A of Section 9.14.020, shall not erect any sign or display or exhibit any material depicting any specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas which exposes the material to the view of persons outside the building in which the adult entertainment business is located. The only sign permitted with respect to the operation of any such business is a single unlighted sign no larger than six square feet. (Ord. 100 §8, 1983)  
9.14.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the county jail or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 100 §7, 1983)  
Chapter 9.16 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
Sections: 
 
9.16.010 - Loitering. 
A.  Public Property. No person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, shall loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any public street, sidewalk, curb, crosswalk, walkway area or mall so as to wilfully and maliciously hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon; nor shall any person block, obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance of any building open to the public. 
B.  Private Property Open to the Public. No person, after first being warned by a law enforcement officer, or where a sign or signs have been posted in accordance with this section, shall loiter, stand, sit or lie in or upon any portion of private property utilized for public use, so as to wilfully and maliciously hinder or obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles thereon; nor shall any person wilfully and maliciously block, obstruct, or prevent the free access to the entrance of any building open to the public. 
C.  Signs posted as provided in this section shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Each sign shall not be less than twenty-two inches by thirty inches; 
2.  Colors of such signs shall be optional; 
3.  All signs shall be clearly visible to persons in restricted locations; 
4.  Signs shall have the word "WARNING" not less than two inches in height, and all other lettering shall be at least five-eighths inches in height; 
5.  Signs shall be posted every one hundred feet; and 
6.  The following wording shall appear on each sign: 
WARNING 
Unreasonable obstruction of pedestrian traffic in this area by persons loitering, standing, sitting, or lying is prohibited and punishable as a misdemeanor. PMC 9.16.010 
D.  Definition. As used in this chapter, "loiter" means entering and remaining on any premises, public or private, under such circumstances that a reasonable person would conclude that the person who has entered and remained on such premises: 
1.  Does not have a purpose legitimately connected with the business or activity or the legal occupant of the premises; and 
2.  Does not have a bona fide intent to exercise a constitutional right. 
E.  Penalty. The first violation of this section shall constitute an infraction. Any subsequent violation of this section, or a refusal to leave the premises after having been cited by any peace officer for a violation of this section, shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 121 §1, 1984)  
Chapter 9.18 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections:  
Article I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
9.18.010 - Purpose. 
In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise in the town, it is the public policy of the town to regulate such noise generated from or by all sources as specified in this chapter. The town council finds and determines that certain types of noises are detrimental to the public health, welfare and safety, and are contrary to public interest. Therefore, the town council ordains that creating, maintaining, causing or allowing to be created, caused or maintained, any noise in a manner prohibited by or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is unlawful and a public nuisance. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.020 - Regulations. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any person to wilfully or negligently make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes any discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
Article II - DEFINITIONS 
 
9.18.030 - Generally. 
For purposes of the terminology used in this chapter certain words and phrases set out in this section shall be defined as follows: 
"Agricultural zoned property" is as defined in the town zoning ordinance regulations in Paradise Municipal Code Title 17. 
"Commercial zoned area" is as defined in the town zoning ordinance regulations in Paradise Municipal Code Title 17. 
"Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structure, utilities or similar property. 
"Demolition" means any dismantling, intentional destruction or removal of structures, utilities, public or private right-of-way surfaces, or similar property. 
"Emergency work" means any work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
"Gross vehicle weight rating" means the value specified by the manufacture as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combining weight rating, which is the value specified by the manufacture as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
"Industrial zoned area" is as defined in the town zoning ordinance regulations in Paradise Municipal Code Title 17. 
"Licensed" means the possession of a formal license or permit issued by the appropriate jurisdictional authority; or, where no permits or licenses are issued, the sanctioning of the activity by the jurisdiction as noted in public record. 
"Mobile noise source" means any noise source other than a fixed noise source. 
"Motorboat" means any vessel propelled by machinery, whether or not such machinery is the principal source of propulsion, but does not include a vessel which has a valid marine documents issued by the Bureau of Customs of the United States government or any federal agency successor thereto (Section 651(d), Harbors and navigation Code). 
"Motor vehicle" includes any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Motor Vehicle Code, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under the code, and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under the code. 
"Muffler or sound dissipative device" means a device consisting of a series of chambers or baffles plates, or other mechanical design, for the purpose of receiving exhaust as from an internal combustion engine, and effective in reducing noise. 
"Noise control office (NCO)" means the municipal agency or department having lead responsibility for administration of this chapter. 
"Noise clearly audible" is any sound which, as judged by the noise control office: 
1.  Can be heard by reasonable persons of normal sensitivities; or 
2.  Endangers or injures personal or real property. 
"Person" means any individual, association, partnership, corporation, club or entity. 
"Powered model vehicle" means any self-propelled, airborne, waterborne or landborne plane, vessel or vehicle, which is not designed to carry persons, including but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
"Public right-of-way" means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk or alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
"Public space" means any real property or structures thereon which are owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
"Real property boundary" means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person. 
"Residential zoned area" is as defined in the town zoning ordinance regulations in Paradise Municipal Code Title 17. 
"Sound amplifying equipment" means any device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound, excluding standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the radio is installed and, as used in the chapter, warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
"Sound truck" means any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifying equipment. 
"Weekday" means any day, Monday through Saturday, which is not a legal holiday. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
Article III - ADMINISTRATION OF NOISE CONTROL OFFICE 
 
9.18.040 - Police department and the community development department. 
The town police department and the community development department are established as the "noise control office" and shall administer the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.050 - Powers. 
In order to implement and enforce this chapter, and for the general purpose of noise abatement and control, the community development department shall have the additional authority to: 
A.  Prepare recommendations to be approved by the town council, for designation of noise sensitive zones which contain noise sensitive activities; 
B.  Zoning Changes. Prior to town approval of any zoning change the community development department may: 
1.  Review the noise impact of the zoning change by identifying existing and projected noise sources and the associated sound levels and/or 
2.  Require usage of adequate control measures on noise sources identified in subsection (B)(1) of this section which will be in violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.060 - Procedure. 
A.  Upon receiving a complaint from a citizen, either the code enforcement officer assigned to the community development department or a member of the police department will respond to the complaint and conduct an investigation to determine if a violation of this chapter has occurred. 
B.  If a violation has occurred the investigating officer may take any of the following action: 
1.  Contact the person responsible and request the noise causing activity to stop; 
2.  Issue a citation to the person responsible for the noise causing activity; 
3.  File a complaint with the town attorney. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
Article IV - NOISE LIMITS 
 
9.18.070 - Motor vehicle—On right-of-way. 
Motor vehicles noise limits on a public right-of-way are regulated as set forth in the California Vehicle Code, Sections 23130 and 23130.5. Equipment violations which create noise problems are covered under Sections 27150 and 271151. Any peace officer of any jurisdiction in California may enforce these provisions. Therefore, it is the policy of the town to enforce these sections of the California Motor Vehicle Code. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
Article V - PROHIBITED ACTS 
 
9.18.100 - Generally. 
No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued, any noise described in Sections 9.18.110 through 9.18.190, and the causing and permitting thereof, are unlawful and in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.110 - Radios, television sets, musical instruments and similar devices. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to operate, play or permit to operate or playing of any radio, television, computer, compact disc player, musical instrument or a device that produces or reproduces sound: 
A.  Between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner that creates noise clearly audible across a residential or commercial zoned real property boundary. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.120 - Loudspeakers. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to use or operate for any purpose any loudspeaker, loudspeaker system or similar device between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m., such that the sound therefrom creates noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or a commercial zoned real property boundary. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.130 - Street sales. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to offer for sale, sell anything or advertise by shouting or outcry within any residential zoned or commercial zoned area or noise sensitive zone of the town. The provisions of this section shall not prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses or other similar public entertainment events. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.140 - Loading and unloading. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to load, unload, open, close or otherwise handle boxes, crates, containers, building materials, garbage cans or similar objects between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. in such a manner that creates noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or a commercial zoned real property boundary. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.150 - Parking lot sweeping units. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to operate an air system sweeping device, a truck-mounted parking lot sweeping unit or similar device between the hours of ten p.m. and five a.m. in such a manner that creates noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or a commercial zoned real property boundary. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.160 - Construction or demolition—Generally. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to operate or cause the operation of any tools equipment used in construction, drilling, repair, alteration, or demolition work between the hours seven p.m. and six a.m. on weekdays or at any time on Sundays or holidays, in such a manner that creates noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or a commercial zoned real property boundary, except for emergency work being performed by a public agency or a public utility. (This section does not apply to domestic power tools as specified in Section 9.18.185.) (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.165 - Manufacturing and cement mixing. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to operate or cause the operation of any tools or equipment used in the mixing of cement or concrete or manufacturing between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. on weekdays, or at any time on Sundays or holidays, in such a manner that creates noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or a commercial zoned real property boundary. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.170 - Powered model vehicles. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to operate or permit to operate a powered model vehicle between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner that creates noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or commercial zoned real property boundary. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.175 - Stationary nonemergency signaling devices. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to sound or permit the sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle or similar device, intended primarily for nonemergency purposes, from any place, for more than ten seconds in any hourly period. Houses of religious worship are exempt from this section. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.180 - Emergency signaling devices. 
The following are unlawful and in violation of this chapter. 
A.  The intentional sounding or permitting the sounding of any fire, burglar or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling devices, except for emergency purposes or for testing, as provided in subsection B of this section. 
B.  1. Testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur before seven a.m. or after seven p.m. Any such testing shall use only a minimum cycle test time. 
2. Testing of a complete emergency signaling system, including the functioning of the signaling device, and the personnel response to the signaling device, shall not occur more than once in each calendar month. Such testing shall not occur before seven a.m. or after ten p.m. 
C.  Sounding or permitting the sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm unless the alarm is terminated within fifteen minutes after activation. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.185 - Domestic power tools and machinery. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to: 
A.  Operate or permit the operation of any mechanically powered hammer, fastening tool, saw, sander, drill, grinder, lawn or garden tool, or similar tool, between ten p.m. and seven a.m., in such a manner that creates noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or commercial zoned real property boundary; 
B.  Any motor, machinery, pump, such as a swimming pool equipment, etc., shall be sufficiently enclosed or muffled and maintained so as not to create a noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or a commercial zoned real property boundary. (Ord. 361 §1, 2001: Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.190 - Off-road unregistered motor vehicles. 
It is unlawful and in violation of this chapter for any person to operate any off-road or unregistered motor vehicle between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner that creates noise clearly audible across a residential zoned or a commercial zoned real property boundary. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
Article VI - EXEMPTIONS 
 
9.18.200 - Emergencies. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following emergencies: 
A.  The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting person to the existence of an emergency; or 
B.  The emission of sound in the performance of emergency work. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.210 - Warning devices. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to warning devices necessary for the protection of public safety. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.230 - Agricultural operations. 
All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment associated with agricultural operations conducted on agricultural zoned property are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, except in the vicinity of residential land uses, in which case a variance permit shall be required in accordance with this chapter to operate noise producing devices, with the following stipulations: 
A.  Operations do not take place between eight p.m. and six a.m.; or 
B.  Such operations and equipment are associated with protection or salvage of agricultural crops during periods of potential or actual frost damage or other adverse weather conditions; or 
C.  Such operations and equipment are associated with agricultural pest control through pesticide application, provided the application is made in accordance with permits issued by or regulations enforced by the county office of agriculture; or 
D.  Such devices utilized for pest control which incorporate stationary or mobile noise sources (electromechanical bird scare devices, etc.) are operated only by permit issued by the noise control office. The allowable hours and days of operations of these devices will be specified in the permit; 
E.  All equipment and machinery powered by internal combustion engines shall be equipped with a proper muffler and air intake silencer in good working order. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.240 - Federal or state preempted activities. 
Any other activity is exempt from this chapter to the extent regulations thereof has been preempted by state or federal law. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.250 - Franchisee solid waste collection. 
Section 9.18.140 shall not apply to the solid waste and recycled materials collection services performed by the town franchisee under Chapter 8.08 of this Code at the following locations except between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.: 
• Skyway; 
• Clark Road; 
• Pearson Road between the intersections of Clark Road and Skyway; 
• Schools and any other locations so designated by a town council adopted resolution. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 1, 10-14-2008)  
Article VII - VARIANCES 
 
9.18.300 - Authority of NCO. 
The NCO is authorized to grant or deny variance applications for exception from any provision of this chapter, subject to limitations as to area, noise levels, time limits and other terms and conditions as the NCO determines are appropriate to protect the public health, safety and welfare from the noise emanating therefrom. This section shall in no way affect the duty to obtain any permit of license required by law for such activities. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.310 - Application. 
A.  Any person seeking a variance pursuant to this chapter shall file an application with the NCO. The application shall contain information which demonstrates that bringing the noise source into compliance with this chapter would constitute an unreasonable hardship on the applicant, on the community, or on other persons. 
B.  The application shall be accompanied by a fee set by resolution of the town council. 
C.  A separate application shall be filed for each noise source; provided, however, that several mobile sources under common ownership, or several fixed sources on a single property, may be combined in one application. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.320 - Granting or denial. 
A.  The NCO is empowered to administratively grant or deny any application for a variance not exceeding a forty-eight-hour period due to an emergency or extenuating circumstances. 
B.  In determining whether to grant or deny any application for a variance exceeding forty-eight (48) hours, the NCO shall hold a public hearing after giving a ten-day written notice to all property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed variance site. 
C.  When acting on the application(s) for a variance exceeding forty-eight (48) hours, the NCO shall balance the hardship on the applicant, community and other persons of granting or denying the variance against the adverse impact on the health, safety and welfare of persons affected, the adverse impact on property affected, and any other adverse impacts of granting or denying the variance. 
(Ord. No. 488, § 2, 10-14-2008; Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.330 - Notice. 
A.  Variances shall be granted by notice to the applicant containing all necessary conditions, including a time limit of the permitted activity. 
B.  The variance shall not become effective until the applicant agrees to all conditions. 
C.  Noncompliance with any conditions of the variance shall terminate the variance and require the person to comply with all provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.340 - Time limit. 
A variance shall not exceed one hundred twenty days from the date on which it is granted. Application for extension of time limits specified in a variance or for modifications or other substantial conditions shall be treated like applications for initial variances under Section 9.18.300. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
Article VIII - ENFORCEMENT 
 
9.18.400 - Enforcement. 
The police department and the code enforcement officer assigned to the community development department are authorized to issue citations and to request complaints for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.410 - Additional remedies. 
As an additional remedy, any violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and the town attorney is authorized to file an action to abate such nuisance in a court of appropriate jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.415 - Administrative fee. 
There shall be an administrative fee charged for the cost to the police department to respond to violations of this chapter in accordance with the master fee schedule resolution adopted by the town council. 
(Ord. No. 529, § 1, 6-11-2013)  
9.18.420 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code Section 36900. A second violation of this chapter within one year shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or six months in the county jail. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
B.  Each day a violation continues shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
9.18.430 - Appeal. 
Any person aggrieved by the decision of any administrative officer empowered to administer the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to appeal the decision of any such officer to the town council within ten days after the decision. The decision of the town council shall be final. (Ord. 316 §2(part), 1999)  
Chapter 9.20 - PICKETING 
Sections: 
 
9.20.010 - To prevent employment. 
It is unlawful for any person to beset or picket the premises of another or any approach thereto, where any person is employed or seeks employment or any place to approach thereto where such employee or person seeking employment lodges or resides, for the purpose of inducing such employee or person seeking employment, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence or fear, to quit his or her employment or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-16)  
9.20.020 - To prevent patronage. 
It is unlawful for any person to beset or picket the premises of another or any approach thereto, for the purpose of inducing others, by means or compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence or fear, to refrain from entering such premises or to refrain from patronizing, negotiating with or transacting business with the owner or occupant of such premises. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-17)  
9.20.030 - Assembling to prevent employment. 
It is unlawful for any person, in association or agreement with one or more persons, to assemble, congregate or meet together in the vicinity of any premises where other persons are employed or seek employment or upon the streets, highways, approaches or places adjacent thereto, for the purpose of inducing such employees, or persons seeking employment, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence or fear, to quit his or her employment or to refrain from seeking or freely entering into employment. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-18)  
9.20.040 - Assembling to prevent patronage. 
It is unlawful for any person, in association or agreement with one or more persons, to assemble, congregate or meet together in the vicinity of the premises of another or upon the streets, highways or approaches thereto, for the purpose of inducing others, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence or fear, to refrain from entering such premises or to refrain from patronizing, negotiating with or transacting business with the owner or occupant of such premises. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-19)  
9.20.050 - Prohibited language, tone and gestures. 
It is unlawful for any person to utter to or, within the hearing of, another, any derogatory, indecent, opprobrious epithets or language or to make any loud or unusual noise or to speak in a loud or unusual tone or to cry out or proclaim or to use any gestures for the purpose of inducing any persons, by means of compulsion, coercion, intimidation, threats, acts of violence or fear, to quit his or her employment or to refrain from patronizing, negotiating with or transacting business with any other person. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-20)  
9.20.060 - Signs and banners provoking breach of peace. 
It is unlawful for any person to display signs, banners or inscriptions on automobiles or other vehicles or bulletin boards, with any words, phrases or signs intending to incite riots or disorder or which inscriptions are seditious or which in anywise tend to create or provoke or do create or provoke a breach of peace. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-21)  
9.20.070 - Peaceful picketing. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or held to prohibit peaceful picketing, nor to prohibit labor from attempting to accomplish its aims in trade disputes by other peaceable means, including collective bargaining. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-22)  
Chapter 9.24 - AIR GUNS AND SLINGSHOTS 
Sections: 
 
9.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter: 
A.  "Air gun" means any device which propels a BB shot or pellet by means of one or more compressed springs, or any compressed air, carbon dioxide or other gas. Such devices are commonly known as BB guns or pellet guns. 
B.  "Slingshot" means a hand-held device which utilizes elastic material to propel a missile. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-30)  
9.24.020 - Carrying. 
It is unlawful to carry upon any public road or highway any device described in Section 9.24.010 when it contains its shot. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-30.1)  
9.24.030 - Discharge. 
It is unlawful to discharge any air gun or slingshot: 
A.  From, onto or across a public road or highway; 
B.  Onto or while upon the private property of another without the owner's consent. (Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-30.2)  
9.24.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Anyone violating the provisions of Sections 9.24.020 or 9.24.030 shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, nevertheless, that any such aforesaid violation or offense may be deemed an infraction as defined by Section 19C of the California Penal Code and charged as such in the discretion and at the election of the town prosecuting attorney, in which event the punishment therefor shall not be imprisonment but a fine not to exceed the amounts specified by Government Code Section 36900 as then in effect. Every day any violation of any provision of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 76 §7, 1982: Ord. 16 §1(L)(part), 1980: county code §15-30.3)  
Chapter 9.28 - FIREARMS 
Sections: 
 
9.28.010 - Discharge in town. 
It is unlawful for any person to fire or discharge or cause to be fired or discharged, in the town, any firearms of any kind whatsoever without first obtaining permission of the chief of police to do so except: 
A.  Policemen lawfully acting within the scope of their official duties; 
B.  Persons lawfully using any pistol or rifle range which is operated pursuant to a license agreement with the town; 
C.  Where the discharge of such firearm is necessary for the protection or preservation of one's life or property of that of another and is otherwise lawful under the laws of the state. (Ord. 35 §1, 1980)  
9.28.020 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a fine of not less than five dollars nor more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for not less than one day nor more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 35 §2, 1980)  
Chapter 9.32 - REWARDS 
Sections: 
 
9.32.010 - Information on deposit of offensive matter. 
The town offers a reward of fifty dollars for the giving of information leading to the arrest and conviction of any person for a violation of Section 374b of the Penal Code of the state, relating to the deposit of offensive matter, etc., on roads or on private property. Such reward shall be paid upon the order of the town council upon and after recommendation for such payment by the town attorney. (Ord. 75 §1(G)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(L)(part), 2(A, B)(part), 1980: county code §15-25)  
9.32.020 - Information on theft or damage to town property. 
The town offers a reward of two hundred fifty dollars for the giving of information leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person or persons for the theft of or the wilful and malicious destruction of or damage to any town property including, but not limited to, roads, signs, equipment or buildings. Such reward shall be paid upon order of the town council upon and after recommendations for such payment by the town attorney, and the town council shall be the sole judge of the party or parties entitled to receive any reward. (Ord. 75 §1(G)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(L)(part), 2(A, B)(part), 1980: county code §15-28)  
9.32.030 - Information on littering. 
The town offers a reward of two hundred fifty dollars for the giving of information leading to the apprehension and conviction of any person or persons placing, depositing or dumping, or causing to be placed, deposited or dumped, any garbage, swill, cans, bottles, papers, ashes, refuse, carcass of any dead animal, offal, trash or rubbish, or any noisome, nauseating or offensive matter, or any rocks or dirt, in or upon any public or private highway or road, including any portion of any right-of-way thereof, or in or upon any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or license, or upon any private property without the consent of the owner, or in or upon any public park or other public property other than property designated or set aside for such purpose by the governing board or body having charge thereof, or any private property, or into any bay, lagoon, channel, river, creek, slough, canal, lake or reservoir, or other stream or body of water, or upon a bank, beach or shore within one hundred fifty feet of the highwater mark of any such water. Such reward shall be paid upon order of the town council upon and after recommendations for such payment by the town attorney, and the town council shall be the sole judge of the party or parties entitled to receive any reward. (Ord. 75 §1(G)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(L)(part), 2(A, B)(part), 1980: county code §15-29)  
Chapter 9.36 - FALSE STATEMENTS AND WRITINGS 
Sections: 
 
9.36.010 - False statements and misrepresentations—Concealing facts. 
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to falsify or conceal any fact or make any false or fraudulent statement or misrepresentation in any matter or proceeding within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the town. (Ord. 132 (part), 1985)  
9.36.020 - False writings. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly use any false or misleading writing or document in any matter or proceeding within the jurisdiction of any department or agency of the town. (Ord. 132 (part), 1985)  
9.36.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 132 (part), 1985)  
Chapter 9.40 - TRESPASS UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
9.40.010 - Trespass upon private property prohibited. 
A.  No person shall remain upon a private property, business premises, or private property open to the public after being notified by the owner, lessee, or other person in charge thereof to remove therefrom. 
B.  No person, without permission, express or implied, of the owner, lessee, or other person in charge of private property or business premises or private property otherwise open to the public, shall enter upon the private property or business premises or private property open to the public after having been notified by the owner, lessee, or other person in charge thereof to keep off or keep away therefrom. 
C.  No person, without permission, express or implied, of the owner, lessee, or other person in charge of private property or business premises or private property open to the public shall enter upon the private property or business premises or private property open to the public where a sign has been posted as provided in this section. 
D.  Signs posted shall conform to the following requirements: 
1.  Each sign shall be not less then twenty-two inches by thirty inches; 
2.  Colors of each sign shall be optional; 
3.  All signs shall be clearly visible to persons in restricted locations; 
4.  Signs shall have the word "warning" not less than two inches in height and all other lettering shall be at least five-eighths inches in height; 
5.  Signs shall be posted in conspicuous places; 
6.  The owner, lessee, or other person in charge of the private property, business premises, or private property open to the public use may regulate the hours during which persons shall keep off or keep away from the subject property; 
7.  The following wording shall appear on each sign: 
WARNING 
No person shall enter upon and/or remain on these premises during the hours of _______ and _______ without the permission of the owner, lessee, or other person in charge of these premises. Persons found on these premises during such hours shall be subject to prosecution. PMC §9.40.010 
E.  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or remain upon any posted property during those hours prohibited by the signs posted thereon without the express permission of the owner, lessee, tenant, or occupant in legal possession or control thereof. 
F.  Exceptions. This section shall not apply in any of the following instances: 
1.  Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by the Unruh Civil Rights Act or any other provision of law relating to prohibited discrimination against any person on account of color, race, religion, creed, ancestry or national origin; 
2.  Where its application results in or is coupled with an act prohibited by Section 365 of the California Penal Code or any other provision of law relating to duties of innkeepers and common carriers; 
3.  Where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of peaceful labor picketing or other lawful labor activities; 
4.  Where its application would result in interference with or inhibition of any other exercise of a constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech such as, but not limited to, peaceful expressions of political or religious opinions, not involving offensive personal conduct; or 
5.  Where the person who is upon another's private property or business premises, or private property open to the public is there under any claim or color of legal right. This exception is applicable, but not limited to, the following types of situations involving disputes wherein the participants have available to them practical and effective civil remedies; marital and postmarital disputes, disputes regarding title or rights in real property, landlord-tenant disputes, disputes between members of the same family or between persons residing upon the property concerned up until the time of the dispute, employer-employee disputes, business-type disputes such as those between partners, debtor-creditor disputes, and instances wherein the person claims rights to be present pursuant to order, decree or process of a court. (Ord. 120 §1(part), 1984)  
9.40.020 - Penalty. 
Whenever any act is prohibited by this chapter, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, nevertheless, that any such aforesaid violation or offense may be deemed an infraction as defined by Section 19C of the California Penal Code and charged as such in the discretion and at the election of the town prosecuting attorney, in which event the punishment therefor shall not be imprisonment, but a fine not to exceed the amounts specified by Government Code Section 36900 as then in effect. Every day any violation of any provision of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 120 §1(part), 1984)  
Chapter 9.50 - CURFEW 
Sections: 
 
9.50.010 - Curfew rules. 
It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen years who is unaccompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having legal care or custody of the minor, to loiter, idle, wander or remain on the following property or places between the hours of ten p.m. (Pacific Standard Time) or eleven p.m. (Pacific Daylight Savings Time, whichever is in effect) of any day and five a.m. (Pacific Standard Time or Pacific Daylight Time, whichever is in effect) of the following day: 
A.  Any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, park or other public place, except where such minor is performing an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having legal care and custody of the minor, is required to be in or upon a public place incidental to his or her lawful employment, or is directly and actively proceeding to his or her place of residence or to or from a public meeting or place of business, worship, education, entertainment or recreational activity; 
B.  Any private property used for a commercial purpose, unless such minor is lawfully employed on such private property, actively engaged in patronizing a business located on such private property, or is present on such private property with the express consent of the owner. Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 258 § 1(part), 1995)  
9.50.020 - Violation—Application of juveniles court law to minor. 
Any minor violating section. 9.50.010 shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of the law of the state. 
(Ord. 258 § 1(part), 1995)  
9.50.030 - Application to parent or guardian. 
It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having legal care and custody of a minor under the age of eighteen years, to permit or allow such minor to loiter, idle, wander or remain on the following property or places between the hours of ten p.m. (Pacific Standard Time) or eleven p.m. (Pacific Daylight Savings Time, whichever is in effect) of any day and five a.m. (Pacific Standard Time or Pacific Daylight Savings Time, whichever is in effect) of the following day: 
A.  Any public street, sidewalk, parking lot, park or other public place, except where such minor is performing an emergency errand directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having legal care and custody of the minor, is required to be in or upon a public place incidental to his or her employment, or is directly and actively proceeding to his or her place of residence or to or from a public meeting or place of business, worship, education, entertainment or recreational activity; 
B.  Any private property used for a commercial purpose, unless such minor is employed on such private property, actively engaged in patronizing a business located on such private property, or is present on such private property with the express consent of the owner. 
Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 258 § 1(part), 1995)  
9.50.040 - Violation punished as an infraction. 
A violation of Section 9.50.030 shall constitute an infraction. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. 258 § 1(part), 1995)  
Chapter 9.60 - ALARM SYSTEMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 532, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 8, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 9.60, §§ 9.60.010—9.60.120, and enacted a new Ch. 9.60 as set out herein. The former chapter pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 410, § 1, 1-27-2004. 
 
9.60.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a permit and registration system with appropriate regulations to facilitate the reduction of false alarms, provide police response and administration, and to advance the proper use of alarm systems by alarm users. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Alarm user" means the owner, occupant, or person in control of premises where a security or medical alarm is maintained within the Town of Paradise, excluding public schools. 
B.  "Alarm provider" means any person or other entity, whose business, purpose, or function is to install, service, or monitor security or medical alarms. 
C.  "Alarm system" means a device or assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of a condition such as (1) a robbery, (2) a burglary, home or business invasion, or (3) a medical emergency which is intended to summon an emergency police response and/or emergency medical service. An alarm connected to equipment that alerts an alarm system at a premise is included within this definition. In this section, the term "alarm system" shall include but is not limited to the following: "automatic hold-up alarm system", "burglar alarm system", "intrusion alarm system", "hold-up alarm system", "panic alarm system", and "personal emergency response system". Excluded from this definition and regulation from this section are persons who use alarm systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm system is located, of an attempted, unauthorized intrusion or hold-up attempt. If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds, flashing lights, smoke or beacon designed to signal persons outside of the premises; such a system shall be within the definition of "alarm system" and shall be regulated by this section. 
D.  "False alarm" means any alarm that is activated intentionally or accidentally, or by system malfunction when there is no intrusion, fire, smoke, or medical emergency. The town shall have full authority and discretion to determine those situations and/or circumstances that may constitute a false alarm based on the following: 
1.  Error or mistake: Any action by any person or other entity owning or operating any dwelling, building, or place, or any action of an agent or employee thereof, which results in the activation of any alarm system when no emergency exists. 
2.  Malfunction: Any unintentional activation of any alarm system caused by a mechanical malfunction, flaw in design, installation or maintenance of the system. Any activation caused by extraordinary violent conditions of nature, such as tornados, floods, or earthquakes, shall not be considered a malfunction. 
3.  Intentional misuse: Any intentional activation of an alarm system when no burglary, robbery, fire, or other emergency exists or is in progress. 
4.  Alarms that are cancelled by the alarm company prior to a police officer being dispatched shall not be classified as a false alarm. 
E.  "Principal" means the person or other entity whose premises are or will be protected by an alarm system. If the premise is leased, the principal shall be the person in possession or control of the protected premises, unless more than one (1) tenant is served by a single alarm system, in which event, "principal", shall mean the owner of the protected premises. 
F.  "Protected premises" shall mean the area, which is or will be covered by an alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.030 - Alarm system permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or other entity to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in control of a premise wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained without having first obtained an alarm system permit from the Town of Paradise as provided in this chapter. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person or other entity to use, own or lease an alarm system or to be in control of a premise wherein an alarm system is operated or maintained when an alarm system permit has been revoked. 
C.  An alarm system permit shall be obtained for each separately addressed operating premises. 
D.  An alarm system permit is valid for one (1) fiscal year, July 1 to June 30, unless revoked. 
E.  Each applicant for an alarm system permit shall file a written application containing the following with the town police department together with the fee established by town council resolution: 
1.  The full legal name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  The name, address, and telephone number of the premises where the alarm system is located. 
3.  The type of alarm system at the protected premises. 
4.  A list of three (3) persons, including their addresses and telephone numbers, who can be contacted and will respond to the premises in the event of an emergency or to reset or deactivate the alarm system, or who could contact the alarm user if the alarm user is not at the protected premises. 
5.  The name(s), address, telephone number, and state license number of the person or company that installed the alarm system. 
6.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or company that is responsible for the maintenance and repair of the alarm system, if applicable. 
7.  The phone number and address of the alarm monitoring station. 
F.  Incomplete applications shall be returned to the applicant. An alarm system permit will not be issued until the completed application is received and approval for the permit has been granted by the police department. 
G.  An application for an alarm system permit shall be denied if: 
1.  The applicant has failed to pay false alarm fees required by this chapter for a different protected premises under the applicant's ownership or control. 
2.  The applicant has failed to comply with any provisions of this chapter. 
H.  The town police department shall be responsible for processing and issuing alarm system permits. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.040 - Alarm permit registration. 
A.  Prior to an installation of an alarm system, the alarm user shall obtain a permit and register the alarm system with the town police department. 
B.  The alarm user shall pay the town an annual permit renewal registration fee for each premise where an alarm control panel [is] in use. The annual permit fee shall be adopted by resolution of the town council. 
C.  All alarm providers shall advise all alarm users with whom they do business that the alarm users must obtain an alarm system permit and register their alarm with the town police department. 
D.  By June 30 of each fiscal year, all alarm users shall renew their alarm user permit and registration with the town police department. 
E.  No annual permit renewal fee shall be charged for an alarm system that has had no false alarms during the previous twelve (12) months (July 1—June 30). 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.050 - Alarm provider registration and license. 
A.  An alarm provider contracted to install, maintain and/or provide monitoring an alarm shall possess a valid California-issued alarm company license and be registered with the town as an alarm system provider. The California alarm licensing requirements shall apply to alarms installed by the owner or occupant in his or her residence. Alarm providers who have an inordinate number of system revocations may have their company removed from the town alarm installer/monitor registration role. 
B.  Alarm providers shall pay the town an annual business registration fee as established by town council resolution. 
C.  By June 30 of each fiscal year, all alarm providers shall renew their business registrations with the town police department. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.060 - Alarm shut-off devices. 
A.  Alarm systems equipped with audible signals, e.g., bells, horns, sirens, shall be fitted with a shut-off device that automatically silences the audible signal within ten (10) minutes of activation. 
B.  Alarm systems equipped with audible signals that are not fitted with an automatic shut-off device shall be subject to deactivation by representatives of the town police department. The alarm user shall be subjected to a shut-off fee adopted by town council resolution, in addition to any false alarm fees, which may be associated with an emergency police or medical response. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.070 - Alarm installation. 
Alarm system installation shall comply with the following: 
1.  Upon completion of an alarm installation, the alarm provider shall thoroughly instruct the alarm user in the proper operation, testing, and maintenance of the system. 
2.  Use only dual action hold-up devices and eliminate using "1+" duress keypad coding and money clips. 
3.  Implement procedures to prevent or cancel exit/entry false alarms. (Extend delay times, enable delays before dialing, enable panel cancel code, etc.) 
4.  Alarm systems shall contain a battery back-up system in case of a power surge, loss of power due to storms or cut wires. 
5.  Alarm users and alarm providers shall assign access codes to premise users that are unique to the individual such as driver's license or social security numbers. 
6.  In commercial robbery alarm application, the alarm user shall locate a phone designated for alarm verification adjacent to the alarm code access panel. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.080 - Alarm reporting by alarm providers. 
A.  When reporting alarms to the police, fire, emergency medical dispatch center, the alarm providers shall indicate whether verification was made. 
B.  Alarm provider shall immediately notify the police, fire, and/or emergency medical dispatch center of all verified alarm cancellations. 
C.  No false alarm fee shall be charged if the alarm is cancelled prior to a town police officer being dispatched to a call for service. 
D.  Alarm providers shall provide the town an alarm user list on a format designated by the town police department. The alarm user list shall be submitted to the town police department no later than the fifteenth (15th) day of the month for the prior month. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.090 - False alarm prohibited. 
A.  Any person who knowingly or willfully initiates a false alarm shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.100 - False alarms—Fees. 
For each false alarm, an alarm user shall be required to pay the town the fee or fees established by town council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.110 - False alarm fees appeal process. 
A.  The town police department shall notify the alarm user, in writing and/or by e-mail of each instance wherein the police department has recorded a false alarm. The alarm user shall have the opportunity within fourteen (14) days from the date of the notification to submit a report for the purpose of showing cause as to whether circumstances exist to warrant voiding the false alarm recordation. The police department shall review the alarm user's report and/or meet with the alarm user and issue a written finding to the alarm user as to whether or not the false alarm record action will be voided. 
B.  Documentation provided to the police department of maintenance or repair to the alarm system after the occurrence of a false alarm may be considered in determining whether or not to assess the false alarm fee. No more than one (1) false alarm fee per fiscal year shall be waived due to malfunction, maintenance, equipment failure, or user error. 
C.  Severe weather, power outages, transmission line malfunctions, malicious acts of person(s) not under the control of the alarm user, or any other cause clearly beyond the control of the alarm user may be considered in determining whether or not action will be taken against the alarm user as provided for in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.120 - Permit revocation. 
A.  Any alarmed premises, which has six (6) or more false alarms within a fiscal year shall subject the alarm user to permit revocation as provided herein. 
B.  If town records show six (6) or more false alarms within a fiscal year for any alarmed premises: 
1.  The police department shall notify the alarm user by certified mail or e-mail, that his or her alarm permit shall be revoked thirty (30) days from date of mailing or e-mailing. The alarm user shall have fourteen (14) days from the date of mailing or e-mail to submit a written report to the police department describing action taken or to be taken to identify and eliminate the cause of the false alarms, and to request that his or her alarm system permit be reinstated. 
2.  If the alarm user submits a report requesting reinstatement of his or her alarm system permit, the police department shall determine if the action taken or to be taken will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms. If the police department determines that the action will substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the police department shall notify the alarm user that the request to reinstate the alarm system permit has been approved. 
3.  If the alarm system permit is reinstated, and the police department responds to subsequent false alarm activations in the same fiscal year at the protected premises, the police department shall proceed with the permit revocation process again as described in this section. 
4.  If the police department determines that the action taken, or to be taken, will not substantially reduce the likelihood of false alarms, the request for reinstatement shall be denied. The police department shall give notice by certified mail or e-mail to the alarm user that the permit will be revoked and that: 
i.  The police department shall require the alarm provider to perform an inspection of the alarm system and provide a report to the police department. 
ii.  The amount of fines and fees. 
iii.  Amount of a reinstatement fee. 
iv.  Attend alarm school/training. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
9.60.130 - Fines and fees. 
A.  Any alarm user who fails to pay any fines or fees provided for under this chapter or by town council resolution within thirty (30) days from the date of invoice requesting payment of same shall have the subject alarm system permit revoked. Any such alarm system permit shall not be reinstated until all the unpaid fees and fines are paid in full. 
B.  Violation of this chapter by an alarm user shall be deemed an infraction. Any person found guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be subject to the penalty provisions pursuant to Government Code Section 36900. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 532, § 2, 10-8-2013)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.02 - SPEED LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.02.010 - Findings. 
The town council, upon the basis of engineering traffic surveys, expressly finds that the prima facie speed limits, as set forth in Sections 10.02.060 through 10.02.100, upon those certain designated portions of public highways designated in Sections 10.02.060 through 10.02.100, are more than is reasonable and safe and that the prima facie speed limits upon the portions of the public highways designated in Sections 10.02.060 through 10.02.100 are most appropriate to facilitate an order and movement of traffic and is reasonable and safe. 
(Ord. 84 § 3, 1983)  
10.02.020 - Adoption. 
The town council declares that this chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted it by Section 22358 of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 84 § 13, 1983)  
10.02.030 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life and property and to implement modifications recommended by a traffic safety study providing certain speed zones along specified public roads. 
(Ord. 84 § 1, 1983)  
10.02.040 - Definitions. 
The following words or phrases have the meanings ascribed to them within this chapter: 
A.  "Public road" means any right-of-way and road surface owned in fee by the town, or that is maintained by the town on a regular basis. 
B.  "Speed zone" means a portion of a public road along which a specified maximum vehicular speed has been determined and posted by the town council. 
C.  "Vehicle" means a device in, upon or by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, excepting a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 84 §4, 1983)  
10.02.050 - Designated. 
The town council establishes certain prima facie speed limits on certain public highways of the town as designated in Sections 10.02.060 through 10.02.100. 
(Ord. 84 § 2, 1983)  
10.02.060 - Prima facie speed limit. 
A.  The town council establishes a prima facie speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour for all town maintained public roads not listed or otherwise set forth in this chapter. 
B.  In accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 22352, the following established school zones shall have a prima facie speed limit of twenty-five (25) miles per hour any time children are present: 
1.  Buschmann Road, from Scottwood Road to Clark Road. 
2.  Pearson Road, from Academy Drive to Clark Road. 
3.  Recreation Drive, from Buschmann Road north five hundred thirty (530) feet (to end of town maintained road). 
4.  Maxwell Drive, from Elliott Road to Central Park Drive. 
5.  Pentz Road, from Merrill Road to Dean Road. 
6.  Pentz Road, from Bille Road to Wagstaff Road. 
C.  The town council also establishes posted speed limits on certain highways as follows: 
Segment ID 	Primary Street 	Start 	End 	Recommended Speed Limit 
1 	Bille Road 	Cliff Drive 	Skyway 	30 
2 	Bille Road 	Skyway 	Clark Road 	30 
3 	Bille Road 	Clark Road 	Pentz Road 	30 
4 	Buschmann Road 	Foster Road 	Clark Road 	30 
5 	Central Park Drive 	Maxwell Drive 	Clark Road 	30 
6 	Clark Road 	Skyway 	Wagstaff Road 	35 
7 	Clark Road 	Wagstaff Road 	Bille Road 	35 
8 	Clark Road 	Bille Road 	Elliott Road 	35 
9 	Clark Road 	Elliott Road 	Pearson Road 	35 
10 	Elliott Road 	Skyway 	Clark Road 	30 
11 	Elliott Road 	Clark Road 	Sawmill Road 	30 
12 	Foster Road 	Buschmann Road 	Roe Road 	30 
13 	Foster Road 	Roe Road 	Town Limits 	30 
14 	Honey Run Road 	Skyway 	Honey View Terrace 	25 
15 	Neal Road 	Skyway 	Roe Road 	30 
16 	Neal Road 	Roe Road 	Town Limits 	35 
17 	Nunneley Road 	Academy Drive 	Clark Road 	35 
18 	Nunneley Road 	Clark Road 	Sawmill Road 	30 
19 	Oliver Road 	Skyway 	Castle Drive 	25 
21 	Pearson Road 	Skyway 	Black Olive Drive 	30 
22 	Pearson Road 	Black Olive Drive 	Clark Road 	30 
23 	Pearson Road 	Clark Road 	Butte View Terrace 	35 
24 	Pearson Road 	Butte View Terrace 	Pentz Road 	35 
25 	Pentz Road 	Skyway 	Wagstaff Road 	35 
26 	Pentz Road 	Wagstaff Road 	Bille Road 	35 
27 	Pentz Road 	Bille Road 	Del Rio Way 	35 
28 	Pentz Road 	Del Rio Way 	Pearson Road 	35 
29 	Pentz Road 	Pearson Road 	Town Limits 	35 
30 	Rocky Lane 	Skyway 	Wagstaff Road 	30 
31 	Roe Road 	Neal Road 	Foster Road 	30 
32 	Sawmill Road 	Bille Road 	Pearson Road 	30 
33 	Skyway Eastbound 	Town Limits 	Princeton Way 	50 
34 	Skyway Westbound 	Town Limits 	Princeton Way 	45 
35 	Skyway 	Neal Road 	Pearson Road 	35 
36 	Skyway 	Pearson Road 	Elliott Road 	30 
37 	Skyway 	Elliott Road 	Bille Road 	30 
38 	Skyway 	Bille Road 	Wagstaff Road 	35 
39 	Skyway 	Wagstaff Road 	Rocky Lane 	35 
40 	Skyway 	Rocky Lane 	Clark Road 	35 
41 	Skyway 	Clark Road 	Town Limits 	35 
42 	Stearns Road 	De Mille Road 	County Club Drive 	30 
43 	Valley View Drive 	Oliver Road 	End 	30 
44 	Wagstaff Road 	Oliver Road 	Skyway 	30 
45 	Wagstaff Road 	Skyway 	Clark Road 	30 
46 	Wagstaff Road 	Clark Road 	Pentz Road 	30 
47 	Skyway 	Princeton Way 	Neal Road 	45 
 
(Ord. No. 552, § 1, 1-13-2015; Ord. 293 § 1, 1997: Ord. 84 § 5, 1983) 
(Ord. No. 536, § 1, 1-14-2014; Ord. No. 528, § 1, 5-14-2013; Ord. No. 409, § 2, 1-27-2004) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 536, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, amended § 10.02.060 to read as herein set out, but at the time of supplementation was not yet effective. Said ordinance takes effect Feb. 13, 2014.  
10.02.070 - Reserved. 
Ord. No. 409, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2004, repealed § 10.02.070 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to thirty miles per hour speed limit as enacted by Ord. 293 § 2, adopted 1997; as amended.  
10.02.080 - Reserved. 
Ord. No. 409, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2004, repealed § 10.02.080 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to thirty-five miles per hour speed limit as enacted by Ord. 84 § 7, adopted 1983.  
10.02.090 - Reserved. 
Ord. No. 409, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2004, repealed § 10.02.090 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to forty-five miles per hour speed limit as enacted by Ord. 84 § 8, adopted 1983.  
10.02.100 - Reserved. 
Ord. No. 409, § 1, adopted Jan. 27, 2004, repealed § 10.02.100 in its entirety. Formerly, said section pertained to fifty-five miles per hour speed limit as enacted by Ord. 84 § 9, adopted 1983.  
10.02.110 - Signs—Authority of town engineer. 
A.  Provisions of this chapter shall not be effective until appropriate signs, giving notice of the prima facie speed limits, are erected on the road within the limit specifically designated in this chapter, in each particular instance. 
B.  It is made the duty of the town engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice of the speed limits upon portions of the public roads designated in this chapter. 
(Ord. 84 §§ 11, 12, 1983)  
10.02.120 - Violations. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to drive or cause to be driven any vehicle upon those portions of public highways designated in Sections 10.02.060 through 10.02.100 in excess of the prima facie speed limits provided for. 
(Ord. 84 § 10, 1983)  
Chapter 10.04 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Prohibited in specified places. 
A.  The town manager is authorized upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation to prohibit stopping, standing or parking of vehicles on certain highways or portions thereof at all or certain hours of the day and to place signs or curb markings, as described in Section 10.04.060, at any of the following places for the purpose of alleviating dangerous or hazardous traffic conditions, facilitating the full use of the roadway, facilitating the movement of traffic or serving the convenience of the public: 
1.  At any place within one hundred feet of the intersection of two or more highways; 
2.  At any place within twenty-five feet of a railroad grade crossing; 
3.  Adjacent to either side of a crosswalk or driveway entrance for a distance not to exceed fifty feet from either side of such crosswalk or driveway; 
4.  Adjacent to any fire hydrant when it has been determined that stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, would present some special hazard or would prevent ready access to the fire hydrant; 
5.  At any place in connection with a street or highway vehicular parking layout or plan; 
6.  On either or both of the sides of a highway in those areas where any highway has been cleared of snow by snowplows, and the width of the highway is restricted by reason of snow conditions; 
7.  On either or both of the sides of a highway when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway do not exceed twenty feet or upon one side of a highway when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway do not exceed thirty feet; 
8.  On either or both of the sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
B.  Whenever the town manager finds upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that the conditions because of which the stopping, standing or parking was prohibited as authorized in subsection A of this section no longer exist, he shall remove such signs and such curb markings from such portion of such street or highway. 
(Ord. 75 § 1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 § 1(J)(part), 1980: County Code § 14-41)  
10.04.020 - Loading zones—Establishment. 
Whenever the town council determines upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation that loading zones, passenger loading zones or bus loading zones are necessary on any highway or portion thereof, the council shall by resolution direct the town manager to place signs or curb markings as provided in Section 10.04.060 on such highway or portion thereof. 
B.  Whenever the council, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which loading zones, passenger loading zones and bus loading zones were established along such highway or portion thereof as provided in subsection A of this section no longer exist, the council shall by resolution direct the town manager to remove such signs or such curb markings designating such zones. 
(Ord. 75 § 1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§ 1(J)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: County Code § 14-42)  
10.04.030 - Loading zones—Effect. 
A.  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading freight shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes. 
B.  The loading or unloading of freight shall apply only to commercial deliveries, the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail. 
C.  Permission granted in this chapter to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor and in no event for more than three minutes. 
D.  Within the total time limits specified in this section, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted by this chapter. (Ord. 16 §1(J)(part), 1980: county code §14-43)  
10.04.040 - Alleys. 
No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or freight in any alley. (Ord. 16 §1(J) (part), 1980: county code §14-44)  
10.04.050 - School bus zones. 
A.  The town manager is authorized upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation to place signs or curb markings described in Section 10.04.060 indicating a bus loading zone upon either side of any street adjacent to any school property when such loading zone would facilitate the orderly movement of traffic. 
B.  Whenever the town manager, upon the basis of a traffic engineering investigation, finds that the conditions because of which a bus loading zone was established as provided in subsection A of this section no longer exist, he shall remove such signs and curb markings. (Ord. 75 §1(M) (part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(J)(part), 1980: county code §14-45)  
10.04.060 - Curb markings and signs. 
A.  The town manager is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this chapter, to place, and when required in this chapter shall place, the following curb markings to indicate stopping, standing or parking regulations, and the curb markings shall have the meaning set forth in this subsection: 
1.  Red means no stopping, standing or parking, whether the vehicle is attended or unattended, except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signposted as a bus loading zone. 
2.  Yellow indicates stopping only for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or freight; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of freight more than twenty minutes. 
3.  White means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading of unloading of passengers; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox. 
4.  Green means no stopping, standing or parking for longer than twenty minutes. 
5.  Blue means that the parking space so marked is for the exclusive use of physically handicapped persons or disabled veterans whose vehicles display distinguishing license plates or a special placard issued to disabled persons by the State Department of Motor Vehicles pursuant to the applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code. 
B.  When there are no curbs, the town manager shall indicate the stopping, standing or parking regulations by installing, in lieu of curb markings, appropriate signs giving notice of such application. 
C.  When the authorized personnel of the town have caused or authorized curb markings or signs to be placed indicating restricted parking, it is unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of the provisions of the ordinances of the town. (Ord. 75 §1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 54 §§2, 3, 1982; Ord. 16 §1(J)(part), 1980: county code §14-46)  
10.04.070 - Parking on town property. 
A.  Whenever the town council determines that it is necessary to restrict parking on property owned or leased by the town to vehicles owned and operated by a public agency and employees of the town, it shall, by resolution, prohibit the parking of vehicles on such property except for vehicles owned or operated by a public agency or employees of the town and shall direct the town manager to cause a sign to be displayed in plain view on such property prohibiting the parking of such vehicles and giving notice that such vehicles may be removed. 
B.  Any police officer or any other person authorized by the California Vehicle Code Section 22651, may remove a vehicle other than a vehicle owned or operated by a public agency or employee of the town which is parked on property owned or leased by the town on which a sign is posted prohibiting such parking and giving notice that such vehicles may be removed. (Ord. 75 §1(B, M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(J)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-46.5)  
10.04.080 - Handicapped parking. 
A.  Any parking space designated for parking by handicapped persons shall prohibit parking by any other than vehicles displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued to disabled persons twenty-four hours per day, seven days a week including holidays but shall be subject to any temporary parking prohibitions imposed by the town. 
B.  The town manager shall designate parking stalls or spaces in all publicly owned, leased or controlled 
off-street parking facilities for the exclusive use by physically handicapped persons. The parking stalls shall be designated by posting immediately adjacent to them, and visible from same, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background. 
C.  Any privately owned and operated parking facility or roadway within, or upon which, the town has agreed to enforce the provisions of the Vehicle Code may, with the consent of the town manager, designate parking stalls, spaces and/or blue curb areas for the exclusive use by physically handicapped persons. Such designation shall be made by posting immediately adjacent to, and visible from, each stall or space, a sign consisting of a profile view of a wheelchair with occupant in white on a blue background. It is unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in a space so designated except a vehicle displaying a distinguishing placard or license plate issued to handicapped persons pursuant to the Vehicle Code. 
D.  There shall be posted immediately adjacent to and visible from each parking space designated for handicapped parking a sign stating the following: "Unauthorized vehicles not displaying distinguishing license plates or placards issued for physically handicapped persons will be issued citations." 
(Ord. 54 §4, 1982: Ord. 16 §1(J)(part), 1980: county code §14-47)  
10.04.090 - Stop signs—Locations—Placement authorized when. 
Whenever any ordinance or resolution of the town designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a through street, or any intersection at which vehicles are required to stop at one or more entrances thereto, or any railroad grade crossing at which vehicles are required to stop, the town engineer shall erect and maintain stop signs as follows: 
A stop sign shall be erected on each and every street intersecting such through street or portion thereof and at those entrances to other intersections or railroad grade crossings where a stop is required; provided, however, stop signs shall not be erected or maintained at any entrance to an intersection when such entrance is controlled by an official traffic-control signal. Every such sign shall conform with, and shall be placed as provided, in the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 155 §1(part), 1986)  
10.04.100 - Obedience to signs. 
When stop signs are erected, as provided in this chapter, at the entrance to any intersection, every driver of a vehicle shall stop at every such sign, before entering the intersection, except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic control signal. 
(Ord. 155 §1(part), 1986)  
10.04.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code § 36900. Any additional violation of this chapter within one year of the first violation may be prosecuted by the town attorney as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or six months in the county jail; and provided, however, the town attorney shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 8, 8-26-2003)  
Chapter 10.06 - ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.06.010 - Adoption. 
The town council declares that this chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 22651 of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 87 §1, 1981)  
10.06.020 - Definitions. 
The following words or phrases have the meanings ascribed to them within this section: 
"Commercial vehicle" is defined as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 260. 
"Principal purpose of display for sale" means the placement of a vehicle with signage advertising it for sale at a particular location when the owner or driver of the vehicle is not in the immediate area conducting other lawful business. 
"Public road" means any right-of-way and road or bike path surface owned in fee by the town, or that is maintained by the town on a regular basis. 
"Vehicles and equipment" are defined as set forth in Sections 100 through 675, inclusive, of the Vehicle Code of the state, as amended. 
(Ord. 364 §1, 2001; Ord. 317 §2, 1999: Ord. 87 §2, 1983)  
10.06.030 - Storage. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave any vehicle or equipment standing or parked upon any public road within the town limits for a period of more than seventy-two hours. 
(Ord. 87 §3, 1983)  
10.06.035 - Parking commercial vehicles. 
It is unlawful to park any commercial vehicles with a manufacturer's gross weight rating of twelve thousand pounds or more upon or within any public road other than a "truck route" designated public road pursuant to Chapter 10.15 of this Code between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. 
(Ord. 317 §3, 1999)  
10.06.040 - Parking or standing prohibited when. 
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to leave any vehicle or equipment standing or parked upon any public road or alley whenever the chief of police has authorized the street or alley or any portion thereof to be used for purposes other than the normal flow of traffic or for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size and the parking of any vehicle or equipment would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement. Towaway signs giving notice that such vehicles or equipment may be removed shall be erected or placed in the prohibited areas at least twenty-four hours prior to any removal. 
(Ord. 87 §4, 1983)  
10.06.045 - Vehicles for sale. 
A.  Except as provided in subsections B and C, it is unlawful to park a vehicle for the principal purpose of display for sale upon and within: (1) a public road or other public property; (2) upon a vacant lot; (3) upon an unoccupied developed property; or (4) upon real property within fifty feet of a centerline of a public road. 
B.  The owner of a vehicle may park one vehicle at a time for the principal purpose of display for sale upon residential property upon which the owner of the vehicle resides. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to a vehicle parked on property occupied by a business lawfully engaged in the retail sale of new or used vehicles. 
(Ord. 364 §2, 2001: Ord. 317 §4, 1999)  
10.06.050 - Impoundment. 
Any vehicle or equipment found to be in violation of Sections 10.06.030, 10.06.035, 10.06.040 and/or 10.06.045 may be impounded or caused to be impounded by any regular, employed and salaried officer of the police department or the town code enforcement officer. The vehicle may be impounded in any garage or impoundment yard designated by the town. Before impounding a vehicle for violating Section 10.06.045(B), the following requirements shall be satisfied: 
A.  Within the past thirty days, the vehicle is known to have been previously issued a notice of parking violation, under local ordinance, which was accompanied by a notice containing all of the following: 
1.  A warning that an additional parking violation may result in the impoundment of the vehicle; 
2.  A warning that the vehicle may be impounded pursuant to this section, even if moved to another street, so long as the signs or placards offering the vehicle for sale remain on the vehicle; 
3.  A statement to the effect that all public roads are covered by the prohibition; 
4.  The notice of parking violation was issued at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal of the vehicle. 
(Ord. 317 §5, 1999: Ord. 87 §5, 1983)  
10.06.060 - Compliance with Vehicle Code. 
Any officer removing any vehicle or equipment pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of Sections 22650 through 22856 of the Vehicle Code of the state, as amended. 
(Ord. 87 §6, 1983)  
10.06.070 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code Section 36900. A second violation of this chapter within one year may be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or six months in the county jail. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. 317 §6, 1999)  
10.06.080 - Provisions to supplement others. 
The provisions of this chapter are not the exclusive regulation of parking within the town. These provisions shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted by the town, the state or any other legal entity having jurisdiction before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 9, 8-26-2003)  
Chapter 10.08 - DIAGONAL PARKING[1] 
Sections : 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 520, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 10.08, §§ 10.08.010, 10.08.020, and enacted a new Ch. 10.08 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from County Code §§ 14-13, 14-14; Ord. 16, §§ 1(H)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980. 
 
10.08.010 - Permitted where. 
It shall be lawful to park vehicles diagonally upon the following streets situate in the town: 
A.  On the east side of Black Olive Drive between its intersection with Pearson Road and Fir Street; 
B.  On the north and south sides of Fir Street between its intersection with the Skyway and Almond Street; 
C.  On the south side of Birch Street between its intersection with Almond Street and Black Olive Drive. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 2, 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 10.10 - PARKING ON TOWN PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
10.10.010 - Adoption. 
The town council declares that this chapter is adopted pursuant to the authority granted by Section 22519 of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(Ord. 91 §1, 1983)  
10.10.020 - Vehicles and equipment defined. 
For the purposes of this chapter, "vehicles" and "equipment" are defined as set forth in Sections 100 through 675, inclusive, of the Vehicle Code of the state, as amended. 
(Ord. 91 §2, 1983)  
10.10.030 - Posting of signs. 
Whenever the town manager determines that the orderly, efficient conduct of the town's business requires that parking or standing vehicles on town property be prohibited, limited or restricted, the town manager has the power and authority to order signs to be erected or posted indicating that the parking of vehicles is thus prohibited, limited or restricted. When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place, giving notice thereof, no person shall park or stand any vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of such signs. 
(Ord. 91 §3, 1983)  
10.10.040 - Impoundment. 
Any vehicle or equipment found to be in violation of section 10.10.030 may be impounded or caused to be impounded by any employed and salaried officer of the police department and/or the town code enforcement officer. The vehicle may be impounded in any garage or impoundment facility designated by the town. 
(Ord. 91 §4, 1983; Ord. No. 401, § 10, 8-26-2003)  
10.10.050 - Compliance with Vehicle Code. 
Any officer removing any vehicle or equipment pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the provisions of Sections 22650 through 22856 of the Vehicle Code of the state, as amended. 
(Ord. 91 §5, 1983)  
10.10.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
In addition to the vehicle impoundment provisions of section 10.10.040 any vehicle owner or person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code § 36900. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 11, 8-26-2003)  
Chapter 10.12 - PRIVATE ROADS 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Applicability of Vehicle Code. 
The town council finds and declares that within the designated areas described in this chapter there are privately owned and maintained roads which are generally open to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic to serve commercial establishments, that upon enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter the provisions of the Vehicle Code shall apply to such privately owned and maintained roads. (Ord. 51 §1, 1981)  
10.12.020 - Designated. 
The private roads designated in this chapter are all the areas used for vehicular travel which are in the town at the following locations: 
A.  The private property known as the Paradise Plaza Shopping Center at Clark and Wagstaff Roads; 
B.  The private property known as the Holiday Shopping Center located on the east side of Skyway near the intersection of Skyway and Center Street; 
C.  The private property known as the Old Town Plaza Shopping Center located on the northeast quadrant of the intersection of Clark Road and Elliott Road; and 
D.  The private property owned and used by the Paradise Auditorium and which includes the Paradise Senior Center located on the north side of Nunneley Road west of the intersection of Clark Road and Nunneley Road. (Ord. 281 §1, 1996: Ord. 109, 1983: Ord. 51 §2, 1981)  
10.12.030 - Posting of notice required. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only during such times as the owners or operators of the designated private roads maintain a notice to the effect that such private roads are subject to the public traffic regulations and control. Such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such private roads, shall not be less than seventeen by twenty-two inches in size, and shall have lettering not less than one inch in height. (Ord. 51 §3, 1981)  
Chapter 10.15 - TRUCK ROUTES[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 98. 
 
10.15.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the movement of certain commercial vehicles through the town. 
B.  The intent of this chapter is to provide increased safety for the residents of the town by prohibiting certain commercial through traffic on all public streets except as provided in Section 10.15.050 and to increase the usable life of town roads where traffic will be decreased. (Ord. 346 §1(part), 2000)  
10.15.020 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
"Commercial vehicle" means any vehicle as defined in the California Vehicle Code Section 260 having a gross vehicular weight of twelve thousand pounds or more. 
"Public road" means a right-of-way and road surface owned and maintained by the town. 
"Truck route" means a designated route for through commercial vehicles exceeding twelve thousand pounds gross weight. (Ord. 346 §1(part), 2000)  
10.15.030 - Established. 
The town council shall adopt a resolution establishing one or more truck routes through the town as shown on that certain map herein known as the truck route map for the town. The truck route map shall be kept on file in the office of the town engineer. (Ord. 346 §1(part), 2000)  
10.15.040 - Procedure. 
A.  When a truck route is established over any public road the town engineer shall have installed appropriate "Truck Route" signs along the road. 
B.  The operator of any commercial vehicle which exceeds twelve thousand gross pounds in weight shall drive on the designated truck route and no other street, except for picking up and delivering within the town. 
C.  Also, nothing in this section will prohibit an commercial vehicle owner/operator from using nontruck route streets when necessary to go to and from his primary place of residence, provided the truck is not carrying a load. (Ord. 346 §1(part), 2000)  
10.15.050 - Exceptions. 
The provisions of this chapter do not apply to: 
A.  Passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or 
B.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. 
C.  Any commercial vehicle engaged in or under contract to a Public Works Project, as defined in Section 1720 of the California Labor Code. (Ord. 346 §1(part), 2000)  
10.15.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any operator of any vehicle which exceeds a gross weight of twelve thousand pounds which drives on nontruck route streets, except as provided in Section 10.15.050, is guilty of an infraction punishable as provided by Government Code Section 36900. (Ord. 346 §1(part), 2000)  
Chapter 10.16 - ABANDONED VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Findings and declarations. 
In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as unlawful public nuisances, the town council makes the following findings and declarations: 
The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof, on private or public property not including highways is found to create conditions tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite theft, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents, insects and vectors, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute an unlawful public nuisance which may be abated and/or prosecuted by penalty as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-51; Ord. No. 401, § 12, 8-26-2003)  
10.16.020 - Exceptions. 
A.  This article shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; 
2.  A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise; or 
3.  A vehicle or part thereof which is located behind a solid fence six feet in height. 
B.  Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of the law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. (Ord. 322 §1, 1999: Ord. 16 §1(K)(part), 1980: county code §14-52)  
10.16.030 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Highway" means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. "Highway" includes street. 
B.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
C.  "Vehicle" means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks; provided, however, that the term "vehicle" shall not include mobile homes or travel trailers. (Ord. 16 §1(K)(part), 1980: county code §14-53)  
10.16.040 - Provisions to supplement others. 
This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the town. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances enacted by the town, the state or any other legal entity having jurisdiction before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §14-54)  
10.16.050 - Administration and enforcement. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the town manager. In the enforcement of this chapter such officer and his deputies, assistants and employees may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 75 §1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §1(K)(part), 1980: county code §14-55)  
10.16.060 - Right of entry of contractors. 
When the town council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this article. (Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-56)  
10.16.070 - Administrative costs. 
The town council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution an amount to be assessed as administrative costs excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof under this article. (Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-57)  
10.16.080 - Notice of intention to abate nuisance. 
Notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle or part thereof as a public nuisance shall be given at least ten days before such abatement and removal. Such notice shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial, in lieu of appearing. The notice of intention to abate and remove shall be mailed, by registered or certified mail, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. (Ord. 16 §1(K) (part), 1980: county code §14-58)  
10.16.090 - Removal without hearing—Public hearing request. 
A.  A public hearing shall be held before the town council upon request for such hearing by the owner of the vehicle or the owner of the land on which such vehicle was located. The request shall be made to the town council within ten days after the mailing of notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request. If such a request is not received within such period, the town manager, his deputies, assistants or employees shall have the authority to remove or cause the removal of the vehicle, and in such cases removal and administrative costs shall be assessed as follows: removal costs shall be assessed by the town council, except when removal is accomplished by a private contractor or franchise holder, in which event the removal cost shall be assessed by the town manager in an amount equal to the amount actually charged for such removal; administrative costs shall be assessed by the town manager in accordance with the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 10.16.070. 
B.  If a hearing is requested or construed to be requested the town council shall set a time for hearing. Fifteen days' notice of hearing shall be mailed to all parties requesting a hearing and to all landowners who have submitted sworn statements denying liability. (Ord. 75 §1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-59)  
10.16.100 - Public hearing—Procedure. 
All hearings under this chapter shall be before the town council, which shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The town council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or may present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial. (Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-60(part))  
10.16.110 - Discretion of council. 
The town council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. (Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-60(part))  
10.16.120 - Removal order. 
At the conclusion of the public hearing, the town council may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance not less than thirty days after the date of the order and disposed of as provided in this chapter, and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. (Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-60(part))  
10.16.130 - Nonresponsibility of landowner. 
If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the town council shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such landowner. (Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-60(part))  
10.16.140 - Notice of council decision. 
If an interested party makes a written presentation to the town council but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. Such notice shall be mailed within fifteen days of the date of the decision. (Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(A) (part), 1980: county code §14-60(part))  
10.16.150 - Disposition of vehicle. 
Upon removal of a vehicle under Sections 10.16.090 or 10.16.100 through 10.16.140 the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historical vehicle license plates pursuant to the California Vehicle Code in which case the vehicle may be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 78 §4, 1982: Ord. 16 §1(K)(part), 1980: county code §14-61)  
10.16.160 - Notice to state. 
Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including, but not limited to, registration certificates, certificates of title or license plates. (Ord. 16 §1(K)(part), 1980: county code §14-62)  
10.16.170 - Assessment of costs. 
If the administrative costs and the costs of removal which are charged against a parcel of land pursuant to Sections 10.16.090 or 10.16.100 through 10.16.140 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 25845 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the administrative services director for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other town taxes. 
(Ord. 75 §1(C)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(K)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §14-63)  
10.16.180 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code § 36900. Any additional violation of this chapter within one year of the first violation may be prosecuted by the town attorney as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars and/or six months in the county jail; and provided, however, the town attorney shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 13, 8-26-2003)  
Chapter 10.20 - PARADES[3] 
Sections : 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 520, §§ 1, 3, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 10.20, §§ 10.20.010—10.20.150, and enacted a new Ch. 10.20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from County Code §§ 14-20—14-29; Ord. 16, 1980; Ord. 75, 1982. 
 
10.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Parade" means any parade, ceremony, show, exhibit, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, highway, road, thoroughfare or alley of the town. 
B.  "Parade permit" means the permit required by this chapter. 
C.  "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
D.  "Town manager" means the Town Manager of the Town of Paradise or his/her official designee. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.020 - Permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to engage or participate in, aid, form or start any parade in the town unless a parade permit has been obtained from the town manager. 
B.  This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  Wedding or funeral processions; 
2.  Students going to and from school classes or participating in school authorized educational activities; 
3.  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; 
4.  Any vehicular procession conducted within five (5) days of an election, which procession is in support of or in opposition to any candidate or ballot measure to be voted on at the election. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.030 - Application—Filing period. 
An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the office of the town manager no less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.040 - Application—Contents. 
The application submitted for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
A.  The name, address (site and/or e-mail) and telephone number of the person or persons and/or organization seeking to conduct such parade; 
B.  The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons who will be responsible for the conduct of the parade; 
C.  The date and time when the parade is to be conducted; 
D.  The proposed parade route, including its starting point and termination point; 
E.  The approximate number and types of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; 
F.  The hours when such parade shall start and terminate; 
G.  Identification of all or only portion of the width of the streets, roads, highways, alleys or thoroughfares to be affected by the proposed parade and its assembly areas; 
H.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area(s); 
I.  The interval of space to be maintained between parade units; 
J.  If the parade is to be conducted by, or on behalf of, any person other than the applicant, the application for such permit shall include a communication in writing from the person proposing the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his/her behalf; 
K.  Any additional information which the town manager deems to be reasonably necessary. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.050 - Application—Late. 
The town manager, where good cause is shown thereafter, shall have the authority to process any application under this chapter which is filed less than thirty (30) days before the date such proposed parade is to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.060 - Administrative review—Issuance. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for a parade permit, the town manager shall forward a copy of the application to the police chief, the fire chief, the public works director, and any town department or any other public agency which may be affected by conduct and operation of such parade. The town manager shall request response comments relating to the effect, if any, of the conduct of such parade upon traffic control, emergency vehicle movement including but not limited to ambulances and the like, the movement of firefighting equipment, and such other matters subject to the control and direction of such responding parties. 
B.  Written response comments shall be submitted to the town manager within twelve (12) days before action is required to be taken on the permit application and in relation to the standards contained in Section 10.20.090. The town manager shall issue the parade permit as applied for if upon conclusion of his/her investigation it is determined that the conduct and operation of such parade will not be adversely affecting the public health, safety and welfare. In order to ensure that the public health, safety and welfare will not be jeopardized by conduct of the proposed parade the town manager is authorized to issue a parade permit altering any of the appropriate items set forth in Sections 10.20.040 and/or 10.20.090. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.070 - Appeals. 
The applicant or any aggrieved person, including but not limited to any town officer, department, board or commission affected by the permit, shall have the right to appeal the issued parade permit to the town council. In order to be valid, the appeal must be filed not later than three (3) days after town manager issuance of the parade permit and it shall be presented before the town council for determination. The town council may hear additional evidence and may sustain or modify the permit decision of the town manager. The decision of the town council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.080 - Notice of issuance to public agencies. 
Immediately upon issuance of a parade permit, the town manager shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
A.  The members of the town council; 
B.  The police chief and the fire chief; 
C.  The town public works director; 
D.  Any other town official and/or public agency who sent response comments to the town manager as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.090 - Permit standards. 
Each parade permit shall state the following standards/conditions: 
A.  Assembly date, time and location; 
B.  Starting time; 
C.  Minimum and maximum speed(s); 
D.  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between parade units; 
E.  The portions of streets, roads, highways, alley or thoroughfares to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
F.  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
G.  Any other permit conditions or information as deemed necessary by the town manager in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.100 - Compliance with, possession of permit. 
A.  Any permittee under this chapter shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
B.  The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the town issued parade permit upon his/her person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.110 - Interference with parade. 
It is unlawful for any person to unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.120 - Driving through parade. 
Except for emergency vehicles or as otherwise directed by a peace officer, no driver of a vehicle or bus shall drive between the vehicles, animals or persons composing a parade when such vehicles, animals or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.130 - Parking on route. 
The town manager shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street, road, highway, alley or thoroughfare, or part thereof, constituting a part of the parade route. The public works department shall post signs to such effect as directed by the town manager, and it is unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.140 - Revocation of permit. 
The town manager and/or the police chief shall have the authority to revoke the parade permit issued under this chapter when, based on substantial evidence, any of the operations or conduct of such parade violate any of the conditions or standards listed within the contents of the issued permit. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
10.20.150 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person or entity to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 3, 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 10.24 - WEIGHT LIMITS 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Pentz Road, Skyway to Pearson. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any vehicle exceeding a gross weight of six tons to be driven or parked upon Pentz Road between Pearson Road and the Skyway. (Ord. 79 §1, 1982)  
10.24.020 - Pentz Road alternate route. 
There is designated as an alternate route for vehicles in excess of six tons which seek to travel between the points on Pentz Road prohibited for travel by Section 10.24.010 the route from Pentz Road along Pearson Road to Clark Road and along Clark Road to the Skyway. (Ord. 79 §2, 1982)  
10.24.030 - Exceptions to Pentz Road limit. 
This chapter shall not prohibit the following types of vehicles exceeding six tons gross weight from being driven or parked upon Pentz Road between Pearson Road and the Skyway: 
A.  Commercial vehicles requiring the utilization of the restricted portion of Pentz Road for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise 
from or to any building or structure located on the restricted portion of Pentz Road or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any buildings or structures upon the restricted portion of Pentz Road for which a building permit has been obtained; 
B.  Any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility; 
C.  Any vehicle owned or operated by a passenger stage corporation or otherwise subject to the provisions of Sections 1031 and 1036 inclusive of the Public Utilities Code. (Ord. 79 §3, 1982)  
Chapter 10.28 - OVERSIZE AND OVERWEIGHT VEHICLES[4] 
Sections : 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 520, §§ 1, 4, adopted June 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 10.28, §§ 10.28.010—10.28.200, and enacted a new Ch. 10.28 as set out herein. The former Ch. 10.28 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 80, 1982. 
 
10.28.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations for the movement of oversized and overweight vehicles over the roadways and highways of the town. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.020 - Title of ordinance. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known and cited as the "Oversized/Overweight Vehicle Movement Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.030 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Oversized vehicle" means any vehicle which exceeds the height, length or width limitations of Sections 35100, 35250 and/or 35400 of the State Vehicle Code. 
B.  "Overweight vehicle" means any vehicle which exceeds the weight limitations of Section 35551 et seq. of the State Vehicle Code. 
C.  "Pilot car" means any motor vehicle having a minimum width of sixty (60) inches and no larger than a one and one-half (1½) ton truck using lights, signs, radio and flags as required by the State Department of Transportation, which escorts oversized and/or overweight vehicles. 
D.  "Public road" means any road or highway within the town limits, except any state-owned roadway. This chapter has no application to state-owned and state maintained roadways within the town. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.040 - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public road within the town to transport an oversized and/or overweight vehicle without first obtaining a Town of Paradise issued moving permit. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.050 - Permit application. 
Each person desiring a moving permit issued by the town shall complete and submit an application (and applicable fee) in the form prescribed by the town public works director/town engineer. The application shall specifically describe the vehicle and load to be operated and moved and the particular roadways over which a moving permit is requested. The town public works director/town engineer is authorized to issue or deny issuance of the permit at his/her discretion; and/or if the permit is issued, to limit the number of trips, or to otherwise limit or prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicle in addition to the regulations specified within this chapter. Permits shall be issued only for movement of vehicles and/or loads which are not reasonably capable of being reduced in size and/or weight by disassembly or otherwise prior to its transportation. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.060 - Regulations. 
The regulations set forth in this section apply to the movement of oversized and/or overweight vehicles on public roads within the town: 
A.  No such vehicle shall be parked on any town-owned right-of-way. 
B.  Operating hours shall be limited to daylight hours; provided, however, that no such vehicle shall be moved between 6:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m., or between 4:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. weekdays, nor during foggy or rainy weather (as determined by town staff). Oversized and/or overweight vehicles shall not be moved during State of California recognized holidays unless specifically so authorized on the town issued permit. 
C.  The town issued moving permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it refers while moving on public roads within the town. 
D.  The moving permit shall be displayed upon demand to any law enforcement officer or employee of the town public works department. 
E.  Each over-length and/or over-width vehicle shall have warning signs on the front and the rear of such vehicle in accordance with the standards determined by the town public works director/town engineer. 
F.  Pilot car(s) shall be furnished by the applicant when a vehicle is seventy-five (75) feet or longer, sixteen (16) feet or higher in height, and/or is of such width that it cannot be kept continuously to the right of the centerline of the roads being traversed. The use of the pilot car(s) does not grant the permittee the right to preempt opposing traffic; and opposing traffic may be stopped only in emergencies. 
G.  All vertical clearances shall be checked by the applicant on the proposed route prior to submitting an application for a moving permit. 
H.  Any load higher than eighteen (18) feet shall have a roof load rider during its movement. 
I.  All submitted moving permit applications shall include a street map which clearly indicates the proposed route of such vehicle within the town limits. The permittee shall move the subject vehicle only in accordance with the permit approved route. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.070 - Liability. 
The permittee shall be responsible for all liability for personal injury, death or property damage which may occur as a result of the permitted transportation of an oversized or overweight vehicle. If any claim is made against the town or any department, officer, or employee thereof, by reason of, or in connection with such transportation, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them and each of them harmless from such claim(s). A certificate of insurance must accompany each application submitted for a town issued moving permit. The permittee shall be responsible for any damage to town-owned trees, roads, culverts, ditches, signs, lights, signal lights or other properties as a result of the permitted moving operation. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.080 - Notice to police. 
The town public works department shall notify the police department when a vehicle or load is of such size and/or weight as to halt traffic in both directions on a public road. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.090 - Flaggers. 
All flaggers and temporary traffic control operations shall comply with part 6 of the California Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices [CA MUTCD], most recent edition. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.100 - Halting of traffic. 
While positioning, placing or installing the subject vehicle/load, traffic on a public street shall not be halted in both directions simultaneously for more than five (5) minutes unless specifically so authorized on the town issued moving permit. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
10.28.110 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this chapter. Such violation shall be punishable as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 520, § 4, 6-7-2011)  
Chapter 10.32 - THROUGH HIGHWAYS 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Designated. 
By authority vested in the town council by the Vehicle Code of the state, and in particular Sections 600 and 21354 of such Vehicle Code, the town roads named in this chapter are designated as through highways, at the entrance to which or at the specified intersections set forth in this sections, vehicular traffic from intersecting highways is required to stop before entering or crossing such highways or intersections when stop signs are erected as provided by law, such highways and intersections being designated as follows: 
A.  Skyway, from the southwesterly town limit to the northerly town limit; 
B.  Clark Road, from the northerly line of Pearson to the easterly line of Skyway; 
C.  Person Road, from the westerly line of Pentz Road to the easterly line of Skyway; 
D.  Elliott Road, from the westerly line of Sawmill Road to the easterly line of Oakmore; 
E.  Bille Road, from the westerly line of Pentz Road to the easterly line of Oliver Road; 
F.  Pentz Road, from the southerly town limit to the southerly line of Pearson Road. (Ord. 155 §1(part), 1986: Ord. 16 §§1(H)(part), 2(A)(part), 1980: county code §14-11)  
Chapter 10.34 - SKATEBOARDS AND ROLLERSKATES 
Sections: 
 
10.34.010 - Purpose. 
The town council finds that the operation of skateboards upon certain public property and upon private property used for public purposes to be hazardous to pedestrians, motorists, and to persons operating skateboards. (Ord. 153 §1(part), 1986)  
10.34.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  A "motorized skateboard" is the same as a skateboard in all respects except that it is designed to be or can be self-propelled by motorized power. 
B.  "Private roads" are those privately owned and maintained roads which are generally open to he public for purposes of vehicular traffic to serve commercial establishments including, but not limited to, those designated in Section 10.12.020 of this Code. 
C.  A "skateboard" is a vehicle, device or conveyance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design, and specifically includes roller skates, upon which a person may place one or more feet, and which is designed to be or can be propelled by human, and which is not classified as a bicycle. (Ord. 153 §1(part), 1986)  
10.34.030 - Prohibitions. 
No person shall: 
A.  While riding any bicycle, motorcycle, coaster, skateboard, motorized skateboard, roller skates or any toy vehicle, attach the same or himself to any moving vehicle upon any roadway, and no person driving any vehicle shall permit the same to be done; 
B.  Ride a bicycle or skateboard upon the sidewalk within a business district, as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code, Section 235, or as may be defined by ordinance or resolution of the town council. Whenever any person is riding a bicycle or skateboard upon a sidewalk other than in a business district, or in any other public place, such person shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian; 
C.  No person shall ride any skateboard or motorized skateboard in, on, over or upon any roadway as that term is defined in the California Vehicle Code, or in this Code; 
D.  No person shall ride any skateboard or motorized skateboard, in, on, over or upon any privately owned and maintained roads which are generally open to the public for purpose of vehicular traffic to serve commercial establishments. (Ord. 153 §1(part), 1986)  
10.34.040 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code § 36900. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes an separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. 153 §1 (part), 1986; Ord. No. 401, § 14, 8-26-2003)  
Chapter 10.36 - Trip Reduction Programs 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Findings. 
The town council finds and determines that: 
A.  The town is projected to experience an increase in employment and population growth over the next twenty years, which will result in a significant increase in peak hour traffic volumes. 
B.  Home-to-work employee commuting generates a significant level of vehicle trips, thereby contributing to traffic congestion, air pollution and energy consumption problems. 
C.  The conventional response to relieving traffic congestion by expanding the capacity of the roadway system is no longer appropriate as the sole solution due to increasing construction and maintenance costs and decreasing revenues for such expenditures. 
D.  Ridesharing, transit and bicycle usage among home-to-work trips are simple, inexpensive alternative means of reducing peak-hour, single-occupant motor vehicle trips. An increase in such trips can be expected to result in a reduction in traffic congestion, air pollution and energy consumption related to employment in the town. 
E.  While employers have traditionally provided parking facilities to accommodate employee vehicles, such employers should also be required to provide programs and incentives to encourage and accommodate ridesharing, transit, bicycle and pedestrian commuting employees. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish requirements and procedures whereby major employers located in the town will develop and implement programs designed to reduce the number of employee vehicles commute trips as part of a broad areawide program to achieve the following objectives: 
A.  Reduce peak-hour traffic circulation and congestion by reducing the number of single occupant motor vehicle trips associated with home-to-work commuting; 
B.  Reduce or delay the need for major transportation facility improvements by making more efficient use of existing facilities; 
C.  Reduce future air pollution concentrations and strive towards meeting federal ambient air pollution standards by reducing the number of single-occupant motor vehicle trips associated with home-to-work commuting; 
D.  Reduce consumption of energy for transportation uses and thereby contribute to the national policy to increase energy self-sufficiency. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.030 - Definitions. 
Unless the context indicates otherwise, the following definitions shall govern the meaning of those terms used in this chapter: 
"Administrator" means the town of Paradise town manager or his/her designated representative. 
"Common business location" means a single building, group of buildings, or work stations at a single site or contiguous site. 
"Commuter matching service" means any system whether by computer, manual or mapping methods, which matches commuters residing in one common area, working in another common area, and having approximately the same work schedule. 
"Employee transportation coordinator" means an employee, tenant, property manager, property owner, or other appropriate person who has been designated to perform various duties related to meeting the transportation needs of employees of a firm, common work location, or other geographic employment area. 
"Employer" means a sole proprietor, partnership, corporation, unincorporated association, cooperative, joint venture, agency, department, district or other individual entity, either public or private, carrying on an enterprise or conducting any other activity, whether or not for profit. 
"Preferential parking" means a program of selecting, assigning or designating vehicle parking spaces in which priority in the selection, assignment or designation is given to specific classes of vehicles such that vehicles in that class may be parked in locations considered by the vehicle operator to be the best or most desirable location. 
"Regular employee" means any employee who works for a business, firm, agency, or other person for three or more days per week and four or more hours per day. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.040 - Permit required. 
Except as provided in Section 10.36.050, no employer shall employ one hundred or more persons at a common business location within the town without first applying for and obtaining a trip reduction permit. Said permit must be obtained within one hundred eighty days of notification, as described in Section 10.36.080. 
When a particular employer has more than one common business location within the town with each location employing one hundred or more persons, that employer may apply for, and, subject to satisfactorily meeting requirements of Section 10.36.140, may be granted a single trip reduction permit applicable to all business locations described in the approved permit. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.050 - Exceptions. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, the following uses and activities shall be specifically exempt from provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Employers who employ fewer than one hundred persons in the town; 
B.  Temporary construction activities, including activities performed by engineers, architects, contractors, subcontractors and construction workers when such activities are related to the construction, development or other improvement of real property; 
C.  Emergency activities in which persons are employed to render aid or other services in the event of an emergency or natural disaster; 
D.  Other temporary activities which employ persons for a period of less than ninety days. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.060 - Authority to issue permit. 
The administrator shall be authorized to issue a trip reduction permit based on satisfactory compliance with the requirements of Section 10.36.140. The administrator shall be authorized to establish reasonable administrative procedures to implement provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.070 - Permit fee. 
The town may, by resolution, and from time to time, prescribe fees for the issuance and renewal of trip reduction permits. Such fees shall be for the sole purpose of defraying costs incurred in the administration of this chapter. 
All fees for the issuance and renewal of permits shall be paid at the time of and with the filing of the application with the administrator. No application shall be deemed valid or complete until all prescribed fees have been paid. Unless otherwise prescribed, fees shall not be refundable in whole or part whether or not a permit is issued or approval granted. Nor shall any fees be refundable in whole or part if a permittee ceases to operate under the permit in advance of the expiration date. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.080 - Notification of requirements. 
The administrator shall notify, in writing, all employers required by this chapter to obtain a trip reduction permit. Such notification shall be made in a timely manner based on the compliance schedule contained in Section 10.36.150 and shall contain at least the following information: 
A.  A statement that the recipient is required by this chapter to obtain a trip reduction permit. 
B.  A description of the requirements which the applicant must satisfy to obtain the permit. 
C.  A description of the procedures to apply for and obtain the permit. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.090 - Application filing. 
All applications for a trip reduction permit shall be filed with the community development department. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.100 - Application contents. 
The application for a trip reduction permit shall be filed on a form and contain such information as prescribed by the administrator. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.110 - Investigation. 
The administrator shall examine the application to determine whether the applicant complies with the requirements contained in Section 10.36.140. Inspection of the business location shall be conducted as necessary to determine compliance with said requirements. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.120 - Issuance of permit. 
The administrator shall act upon the application not later than twenty days after the date it is validly filed, unless the applicant has filed a written request with the administrator to extend the time in order that the applicant may submit additional information prior to action by the administrator. 
The administrator shall issue the permit unless he/she finds, in writing, that the requirements contained in Section 10.36.140 have not been met. The administrator shall notify the applicant, in writing, of his/her decision to issue or not issue the permit. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.130 - Term of permit. 
Except as provided herein, all trip reduction permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issuance by the administrator. The administrator may issue a trip reduction permit which is valid for three years to any employer who has continuously maintained a valid trip reduction permit for two years or more. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.140 - Trip reduction requirements. 
A.  The granting of the trip reduction permit shall be based on satisfactory compliance with the following: 
1.  All employers employing one hundred to two hundred fifty people shall choose from Table 1, one item from Row A and one item from either Rows B, C or D. 
2.  All employers employing two hundred fifty to five hundred people shall choose from Table 1, two items from Row A, one item from Row B and one item from Row C or D. 
3.  All employers employing five hundred to one thousand five hundred people shall choose from Table 1, two items from Row A, two items from Row B and two items from Row C or D. 
B.  Those items chosen should be implemented within the compliance schedule ordained in Section 10.36.150. 
Table 1 
Trip Reduction Permit Options 

Row A 	Provide transit schedules 	On-site availability of transit passes/tickets 	Construct secure bicycle racks 	Flextime work schedules 	
Row B 	Provide discount transit passes 	Construct transit shelter 	Provide financial incentives for employees who are bicyclists and pedestrians 	Provide commuter matching services 	Provide preferential parking for carpools/vanpools 
Row C 	Provide no cost transit passes 	Provide shuttle service to transit station 	Provide showers/lockers 	Employ part-time employee transportation coordinator 	
Row D 		Provide walkways to transit stations 	Bikeway linkages to established bike routes 	Employ full-time employee transportation coordinator 	
 
(Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.150 - Compliance schedule. 
The requirements of this chapter shall be implemented according to the following schedule: 
A.  Any person who files an application within the town for a general business license on or after January 1, 1996 shall be required to comply with provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any employer who, on or after January 1, 1997 employs five hundred or more persons at a common business location, shall be required to comply with provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Any employer who, on or after January 1, 1996 employs two hundred fifty or more persons at a common business location, shall be required to comply with provisions of this chapter. 
D.  Any employer who, on or after January 1, 1996 employs one hundred or more persons at a common business location, shall be required to comply with provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.160 - Appeals. 
Any employer or person may appeal the decision of the administrator regarding the issuance of a trip reduction permit directly to the Paradise town council. Such appeal must be made in writing no later than fifteen (15) days from the date of written notification by the administrator of his/her decision to issue or not to issue the permit pursuant to Section 10.36.120. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.170 - Failure to obtain permit. 
Any employer who, after proper notification as required in this chapter, fails to apply for a trip reduction permit, and any employer who, after making application for a trip reduction permit, employs one hundred or more persons without obtaining a trip reduction permit, as required in Section 10.36.040, shall be in violation of this chapter. The administrator shall notify such employer, in writing, that it is in violation of the chapter. The administrator shall also notify the town attorney and request appropriate legal action be taken. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
10.36.180 - Violations. 
Any person, firm, corporation or partnership, whether as a principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 253 §1(part), 1995)  
Chapter 10.38 - PEDESTRIANS[5] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 537, §§ 1, 2, adopted Jan. 14, 2014, created Ch. 10.38 to read as herein set out, but at the time of supplementation was not yet effective. Said ordinance takes effect Feb. 13, 2014. 
 
10.38.010 - Use of crosswalks. 
It shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to cross a street in any location other than a marked crosswalk within the following public street segments, identified below: 
A.  Pearson Road between Mallan Lane and Clark Road 
B.  Skyway between Black Olive Drive and Center Street 
(Ord. No. 537, § 1, 1-14-2014)  
Title 12 - STREETS AND PUBLIC PLACES  
Chapter 12.04 - GENERAL SETBACK LINE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior history: Butte County Code Sections 10-3 through 10-11 and Town Ordinances 16, 75, 178, 216 and 239. 
 
12.04.010 - Adoption. 
A general setback line is adopted within the town as specifically provided in this chapter. This chapter is part of the precise plan for streets and highways under the master plan of the town; and is also adopted as a town wide zoning regulation pursuant to the provisions of Article 1, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code of the state. 
(Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998)  
12.04.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for and ensure the preservation and orderly development and expansion of an adequate highway transportation system within the town, and to protect and conserve the public interest, presently and for the future, in streets, highways and roads within the town by having adequate alignment, dimensions and vision clearance and by preventing the encroachment of private improvements, the existence of which would render unnecessarily difficult, impracticable and uneconomical the maintenance and expansion of an adequate highway system. It is found and declared that the establishment of a general setback line is necessary to the carrying out of the general purposes set forth in this section, and to the protection and preservation of the public interest and safety. 
(Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998)  
12.04.030 - More restrictive provisions. 
The objective of this chapter is to establish a general, minimum setback zone within the town. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as permitting a front-yard depth or general setback of a lesser distance than may be provided by any valid contract, deed restriction, covenant, subdivision restriction or district ordinance in force as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or thereafter adopted. 
(Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998)  
12.04.040 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to any street, highway or road within the town which is dedicated and accepted to public use after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, effective as of the date of acceptance of the same for public use by duly constituted authority; provided, that any building, structure, well, excavation or subsurface structure within the setback zone of any such street, highway or road which is lawfully in existence at the time of acceptance of the same for public use, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and shall not be subject to the provisions of Section 12.04.060. 
(Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998)  
12.04.050 - Designated. 
A.  A general setback line is established along each side of every street, highway and road which is dedicated to the public use and is within the town. Such general setback line shall be and is located parallel to and on both sides of the established centerline of each such street, highway and road; and the space between the setback lines on either side of each such street, highway and road shall constitute the general setback zone. 
B.  Except for properties in the town established "CB", "CF", and "CS" zoning districts located within the town adopted "Downtown Revitalization Master Plan Area", the general setback line shall be and is located parallel to and distant fifty feet from both sides of the established centerline of each such road, and the space between the setback lines on either side of each such road shall constitute the setback zone along and adjacent to the same, which shall be one hundred feet in width. 
C.  For properties in the town established "CB", "CF", and "CS" zoning districts located within the town adopted "Downtown Revitalization Master Plan Area", the general setback line shall be and is located parallel to and distant forty feet from both sides of the established centerline of each such road, and the space between the setback lines on either side of each such road shall constitute the setback zone along and adjacent to the same, which shall be eighty feet in width. 
(Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998; Ord. 383, §§ 1, 2, 2002)  
12.04.060 - Uses Within general setback zones. 
It is unlawful to install, erect, display or place within any general setback zone, any building or structure including but not limited to derricks, windmills, silos, advertising structures, signs, barns, houses, outbuildings and platforms; or to dig, excavate or install within any general setback zone any well or other excavation whether for water or for oil or other hydrocarbon products or for any other purpose; or install subsurface structures of any kind; save and except as provided via provisions of Sections 12.04.070 and 12.04.080 or provisions in Chapter 12.14. 
(Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998: Ord. 382, § 3, 2002)  
12.04.070 - Exceptions. 
Section 12.04.060 shall not apply to mail boxes and newspaper receptacles, flush-mounted signs, portable signs, refuse containers, trees, agricultural crops or public utility installations, structures and projections specifically enumerated within Section 17.06.600 of this Code, nor to subsurface utility service lines or leaching and drainage fields of private septic systems approved by the town. Section 12.04.060 shall not apply to fences constructed to a maximum height of forty-eight inches providing that such fence is approved for traffic safety by the town engineer; and provided further, that open wire fences (including chain link, open wire mesh and wrought iron fences) may exceed forty-eight inches in height. All or any portion of any brick, concrete, wooden or masonry fence placed in the general setback zone prescribed by this chapter shall be removed, relocated or modified at the owner's expense within ninety days of notification by mail by the town engineer that such removal is necessary to maintain adequate traffic safety. Any such required removal, relocation or modification shall be promptly accomplished without loss or cost to the town. This provision shall not apply to open-wire mesh fences (including chain-link fences) placed around recycling processing facilities. Section 12.04.060 shall not apply to the establishment of bus stop structures that are not obscuring to site-distance provided that such structure is approved for traffic safety by the town engineer. (Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998; Ord. 337, § 1, 2000)  
12.04.080 - Administrative permits for signs and light poles in the general setback zone. 
Except as provided for in Chapter 17.37 of this code, all privately owned (nonutility-owned) light poles and all privately owned signs placed within a general setback zone must first secure issuance of an administrative permit approved or conditionally approved by the planning director based upon input concerning traffic safety received from the town engineer. The planning director may approve, conditionally approve or deny the administrative permit application based on findings of fact adopted by the planning director. No such light pole or sign shall be placed in any public right-of-way or private access easement. (Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998; Ord. 337, § 2, 2000)  
12.04.090 - Abatement of violations. 
Upon failure of an owner to remove, relocate or modify any use as provided in Sections 12.04.070 or 12.04.080 within the prescribed ninety-day period, the town or its agents may enter upon the property and remove, relocate or modify the use and the owner shall promptly reimburse the town for all costs and loss thereby incurred. (Ord. 313, § 1(part), 1998)  
Chapter 12.08 - STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING—ADDRESSES 
 
12.08.010 - Purpose. 
The town council finds that a definite system of road naming procedures is needed in the interest of the public health, safety and welfare of the town; and that such procedures are necessary to enable emergency vehicles to respond quickly to calls, to expedite postal and other delivery services, to eliminate confusion and error, and to locate business places and residences for customers and visitors without difficulty and loss of time. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987: Ord. 39, § 1, 1980)  
12.08.012 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings: 
"Principal access" means the access taken from public or private roads which access enters the property and is used as primary parking or access to the garage or carport. 
"Road" means all ways designed for motor vehicular traffic which are not public streets. 
"Street" means a street, highway, thoroughfare, avenue, boulevard, alley, court, circle or drive which has been accepted into a street system maintained by the town or state except those within any public park, public schools, or similar public grounds. (Ord. 162, §1 (part), 1987)  
12.08.015 - Establishment of street and road naming system. 
The town establishes a street and road naming system. All streets and roads shall be named consistent with this system. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987)  
12.08.020 - Street and road names required. 
Street or road names shall be required of every principal access that serves three or more separate parcels each containing one or more habitable structure or business. Names may be permitted, but are not required on streets or roads that serve less than three parcels containing one or more habitable structure or business. Where access serves condominiums or apartment developments, street or road names are required when deemed necessary by the address coordinator. Street or road names shall be selected for such projects in accordance with this chapter. No shopping center shall have a separate street or road name(s). (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, §2, 1980)  
12.08.030 - Name conformance throughout length of street or road. 
All streets or roads shall have the same name for their entire length. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, § 3(A), 1980)  
12.08.040 - Renaming right of town. 
The town shall have the right to name or rename any and all streets, roads, accesses, or road easements within the town. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, § 3(B), 1980)  
12.08.050 - Reference to block addressing map. 
All streets, roads and addresses within the town shall be shown on the "street, road and addressing map" on file in the planning department of the town. The address coordinator shall place, or cause to be placed, all new street and road names and new addresses on this map within fifteen calendar days of the naming of the street or road, or of the assigning of the address. All new names or addresses shall be assigned in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, § 3(C), 1980)  
12.08.060 - Address coordinator. 
A.  The street and road naming system shall be continued, enforced, operated and maintained within the town by the town manager, or his designee. The designee shall be known as the address coordinator. 
B.  The address coordinator shall notify all appropriate property owners of the street or road name and numbers assigned to their property; make certain address numbers are maintained, and determine whether these numbers are installed in such a manner as to be visible from the street or road in front of each location or from the roadway or driveway leading to buildings which are not visible from the street or road which the subject site accesses. 
C.  The address coordinator shall require all new street or road names to avoid duplication or confusion with any existing street or road name within the town's sphere of influence. 
D.  Upon request, the address coordinator shall issue to any building owner or occupant in the town an address(es) in accordance with this chapter. No fee shall be charged for this service. 
E.  The address coordinator shall be responsible for maintaining the addressing and street or road naming system and shall keep a record of all numbers and names assigned. The records shall be open for inspection by the public during business hours. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, § 3(D), 1980)  
12.08.070 - Solicitation of resident suggestions. 
If the town desires to name or rename an existing street, road, access or road easement, then the address coordinator shall contact abutting property owners maintaining his or her main residence on the street, road, access or road easement and secure the circulation of a petition to select a name or new name. If the petition is not returned within thirty days to the address coordinator, then the town council or the address coordinator, as the case may be, shall select a name or new name for the street, road, access or road easement. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, § 3(E), 1980)  
12.08.080 - Petition to change a street or road name. 
A.  Any street or road name in the town may be changed by petition to the address coordinator stating the existing street or road name, five proposed names and including signatures of sixty percent of the property owners, whose property has principal access from the street or road. If one of these names does not conflict with any existing street or road names within the town's sphere of influence, then this name will be submitted to the town council for approval. 
B.  When a street or road name change has been initiated pursuant to subsection A of this section, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the town council. A resolution of intention to rename the street or road shall be required to set a public hearing to consider such action. The resolution of intention shall be posted at a minimum of three places along the subject street or road at least ten days before the day set for the hearing. 
C.  At the time of the scheduled hearing or at any time to which the hearing may be continued, the council shall hear and consider proposals to change the name of the subject street or road. Upon approval of the change thereof the council shall adopt a resolution designating the name for the street or road. Thereafter, the street or road shall be known by the name so designated. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, § 3(F), 1980)  
12.08.090 - Street or road names. 
A.  No public street or private road shall be given a common first name of a person. 
B.  Any and all proposed names for new public streets or private roads shall avoid duplication of confusion with any existing street or road name within the town's sphere of influence. 
C.  For new private road names within approved land divisions or land developments requiring new road names, those names appearing on the recorded map or the approved plot plan shall be the names of the road(s) as approved by the address coordinator. If the address coordinator denies the name(s) proposed to be shown on the map or plot plan, then the applicant may appeal such action to the planning commission for final disposition. 
D.  For new town street names within approved land divisions or land developments requiring new street names, those names appearing on the recorded map or the approved plot plan shall be the names approved by the town council. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, § 4, 1980)  
12.08.095 - Fees. 
All designated fees shall be paid at the time the application for street or road name changes or new names is submitted. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987)  
12.08.100 - Petition to change road name. 
Any road name in the town may officially be changed upon petition to the address coordinator stating the existing road name, five proposed names and signatures of sixty percent of the property owners whose property is serviced by such road. These names will be studied to assure they do not duplicate or sound like any existing road names in the town and/or county. If one of these road names does not conflict with any existing road names, this will be submitted to the town council. The resolution of intention shall be set for public hearing and notice of such hearing shall be given by posting notice in at least three places along the road or roads proposed to be affected, such posting to be complete at least ten days before the day set for the hearing. At the time set for the hearing or at any time to which the hearing may be continued, the council shall hear and consider proposals to change the name of such road and upon adoption of the change thereof, shall make a resolution officially designating the name for the road; thereafter, such road shall be known by the name so designated. (Ord. 39, § 5, 1980)  
12.08.110 - Street name signs. 
A.  Street name signs for existing town streets will be erected and maintained by the town department of public works. 
B.  Street name signs for new town roads or streets shall be established by subdivisions and site improvements. The person doing the subdivision or improvements will supply and erect all road signs to town standards. The department of public works will maintain the signs for town streets. 
(Ord. 39, § 6, 1980; Ord. 381, § 1, 2002)  
12.08.120 - Addressing procedure. 
A.  All addresses will be assigned or reassigned in accord with the appropriate area and in normal sequence to its respective block. 
B.  Prior to the issuance of any address number, the principal access to the property shall bear a name in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Condominiums, excepting condominium subdivisions, shopping centers or apartment-type developments will be addressed as follows: 
1.  The main entrance will be numbered off the road it enters. 
2.  Street names will not be permitted. 
3.  Each space or apartment will be assigned a space number or apartment number by the address coordinator. 
4.  The owner or developer of this type of development will supply the address coordinator with a small map showing all the spaces or apartments and interior streets to allow numbers to be assigned (Recommended scale of this small map is one inch equals two hundred feet). A copy will then be sent to each emergency agency and post office for their use. 
5.  At all intersections in this type of development there shall be a sign showing the space or apartment number range ahead on the side roads. (Ord. 39, § 7, 1980)  
12.08.130 - Display of addresses. 
The address coordinator shall give notice to the occupants or owners of buildings which are assigned or reassigned numbers under this system, which notice shall contain the new number or number reassigned to a particular building, and the date on which the new number shall be effective. Within sixty days of such effective date of notice of number assigned or reassigned, the occupant(s) or owner(s) of the buildings shall cause the number to be displayed upon the building or land in such a manner as to be visible from the street or road upon which the land or building fronts, and shall remove or obscure from public view any old or previous number not in accordance with the system. The minimum height of numbers to be used shall be three inches and of contrasting color from the basic background. (Ord. 39, § 8, 1980)  
12.08.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code Section 36900. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and is punishable as such. (Ord. 162, § 1(part), 1987; Ord. 39, § 9, 1980, Ord. 381, § 2, 2002)  
Chapter 12.12 - CLOSING OR RESTRICTING USE OF STREETS 
 
12.12.010 - Authority. 
The town manager may restrict the use of or close any town street or highway whenever the town manager considers such closing or restriction of use necessary: 
A.  For the protection of the public; 
B.  For the protection of such street or highway from damage during storms; 
C.  During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon. (Ord. 75 §1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(D)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §10-20)  
12.12.020 - Methods. 
When, pursuant to Section 12.12.010, a town street or highway is closed or the use of it is restricted, the town manager may designate the restricted use or the closing of such town street or highway by: 
A.  Erecting suitable barriers or obstruction upon such street or highway; 
B.  Posting warnings and notices on or adjacent to such street or highway of the condition of any such street or highway; 
C.  Posting signs for the direction of traffic upon it, to or upon any other street or highway, or detour open to public travel; 
D.  Placing warning devices on such street or highway; 
E.  Assigning a flagman to warn, detour or direct traffic on such street or highway. (Ord. 75 §1(M)(part), 1982; Ord. 16 §§1(D)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: county code §10-21)  
Chapter 12.14 - PUBLIC STREETS—GENERAL PROVISIONS  
ARTICLE I - GENERAL 
 
12.14.010 - Open public streets defined. 
All streets, lanes, places, avenues and portions thereof, including extensions in length and width, within the corporate limits of the town, which have been dedicated by the owners thereof to public use and accepted by the town, or acquired for public use by the town in any legal manner, are declared to be open public streets of the town. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.020 - Requirements for acceptance generally. 
Before accepting any street, alley, lane, place, avenue or portions thereof, hereafter, the town council shall have the power to require the same to be completed in such a manner as the town council shall determine. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
ARTICLE II - ENCROACHMENT AND EXCAVATION PERMITS 
 
12.14.030 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted pursuant to the general provisions of the Paradise Municipal Code for the purpose of regulating excavations and/or encroachments on, over or under a public right-of-way or public service easement. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.040 - Definitions. 
Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter: 
Encroachment. The term "encroachment" means any construction work performed within a public right-of-way or public service easement; any work other than construction work performed within a public right-of-way or public service easement which obstructs the public right-of-way or public service easement or interferes with the use of the public right-of-way or public service easement for its intended purpose; and any structure or object other than a vehicle which is placed or installed within a public right-of-way or within a public service easement in a manner which obstructs the public right-of-way or public service easement, or in a manner which otherwise interferes with the use of the public right-of-way or public service easement for its intended purpose. 
Excavation. The term "excavation" means the removal of any macadam, concrete or other surface material covering a public right-of-way or public service easement, and/or the removal of any earth material in or under the public right-of-way or public service easement. 
Person. The term "person" means any person, public utility, corporation, partnership, company or other public or private entity except for the town. 
Public right-of-way. The term "public right-of-way" means any town street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path, alley or any other "public way," as that term is defined in the California Streets and Highways Code. 
Public service easement. The term "public service easement" means any public sewer easement, public storm drain easement, public utility easement or other "public service easement," as the term is defined in the California Streets and Highways Code. 
Public works director/town engineer. The term "public works director/town engineer" means the Public Works Director/Town Engineer of the Town of Paradise, and his or her authorized designee(s). 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.050 - Administrations by public works director/town engineer. 
The public works director/town engineer shall administer this chapter, including, but not limited to, acting on all applications for a permit required by this chapter, and undertaking any of the enforcement actions provided for by this chapter. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.060 - Administrative review of determination or action of public works director/town engineer by town manager. 
A.  Right to administrative review. Any person aggrieved by a determination made or action taken by the public works director/town engineer, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, may apply to the town manager for administrative review of such determination or action. 
B.  Applications for administrative review. Applications for administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the public works director/town engineer pursuant to this chapter shall be in writing and shall be filed in the office of the town manager no later than fifteen days following the date such determination or action was made or taken, or where written notice of such determination or action is required to be served, the date such notice is served, provided that the town manager may extend the time for filing an application for good cause shown. In addition to setting forth a request for administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the public works director/town engineer, such application shall contain a brief statement of the reasons why the applicant believes that such determination or action does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, and shall set forth the relief requested by such person from such determination or action. 
C.  Decision on application for administrative review. Upon the filing of an application for administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the public works director/town engineer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the town manager shall consider the application and render a decision within fifteen days either affirming the determination or action of the public works director/town engineer or reversing or modifying such determination or action. Prior to rendering a decision, the town manager may, at his or her sole discretion, convene an informal hearing for the purpose of reviewing evidence or hearing arguments bearing on such decision, provided notice of the date, time and place of such hearing is served on the person who filed the application for administrative review within a reasonable time prior to such hearing. After rendering a decision, the town manager shall promptly inform the public works director/town engineer of the decision to be served on the person who filed the application for administrative review. 
D.  Stay of determination made or action taken by public works director/town engineer pending administrative review. Any determination made or action taken by the public works director/town engineer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, save and except for an order to stop work issued by the public works director/town engineer or the commencement or prosecution of work by the public works director/town engineer to remove or remedy a condition in a public right-of-way or public service easement which threatens the safety of life or property, shall be stayed pending a decision of the town manager on an application for administrative review of such determination or action. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.070 - Appeal from decision of town manager. 
A.  Right to appeal. A person aggrieved by a decision of the town manager following the filing of an application for the administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the public works director/town engineer pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may appeal such decision to the town council within thirty days. 
B.  Stay of decision of town manager pending appeal. Any decision of the town manager on an application for administrative review of a determination made or action taken by the public works director/town engineer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, save and except for an order to stop work issued by the public works director/town engineer or the commencement or prosecution of work by the public works director/town engineer to remove or remedy a condition in a public right-of-way or public service easement which threatens the safety of life or property, shall be stayed pending a final decision of the town council on such appeal. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.080 - Permit requirements. 
Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to encroach upon a public right-of-way or public service easement or make an excavation within a public right-of-way or public service easement unless and until a permit for such encroachment or excavation has been approved and issued in the manner provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.090 - Exceptions to permit requirements. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter to the contrary, a permit shall not be required for the following encroachments or excavations on or within a public right-of-way or public service easement: 
A.  An encroachment made in the performance of work required by a public works contract between the town and a contractor; 
B.  An encroachment made by the owner of property adjoining a public right-of-way for the purpose of installing concrete flat work in a parkway between a public street and sidewalk or for the purpose of installing concrete flat work behind a public sidewalk, provided the concrete flat work has been approved by the public works director/town engineer; 
C.  An encroachment made by a town officer or employee acting within the course or scope of such officer's or employee's duties or employment; 
D.  An encroachment made by a public entity with an existing legal or contractual right to perform such work; 
E.  Resurfacing or repaving private driveway approach not requiring excavation or significantly altering drainage patterns; 
F.  Minor landscaping performed by the owner of property adjoining a public right-of-way, consisting of bushes, shrubs and ground cover of a temporary nature, which does not negatively affect the traffic site distance, providing such landscaping has been approved by the public works director/town engineer; 
G.  An encroachment within a public service easement by a public utility with rights therein. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.095 - General application requirements for permits. 
Applications for a permit required by this chapter shall be filed in the office of the department of public works, shall be in a form and contain the information prescribed by the public works director/town engineer and shall be accompanied by a permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.100 - Requests for fee waiver. 
All requests for fee waivers or reductions shall be made in writing, to the public works director/town engineer. The public works director/town engineer shall place such request on the next available town council agenda for review and discussion of possible authorization of waiver or reduction of fees. The person or agency requesting waiver shall be responsible for paying the fully burdened rate for staff time involved in research and preparation of town council staff report, and such request shall be accompanied by a deposit, in an amount equal to two hours staff time, at the current hourly staff rate. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.110 - Additional application requirements for permits authorizing construction or excavation work—Applicant qualifications. 
Where an application is filed for a permit pursuant to this chapter authorizing construction or excavation work within a public right-of-way or public service easement, the applicant shall establish to the satisfaction of the public works director/town engineer the following: 
A.  That the applicant holds a valid contractor's license issued pursuant to Chapter 9, Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 7000) to perform the kind of work within the public right-of-way or public service easement which would be authorized by the permit; or 
B.  That the applicant owns the property adjoining that portion of the public right-of-way or public service easement in which the work to be authorized by the permit will be performed, that such work will consist of repairs to sidewalks, curbs, gutters or driveway, and that the work will be performed either entirely by the applicant or by the applicant in conjunction with unpaid assistants. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.120 - Additional application requirements for permits authorizing construction or excavation work—Plans and specifications. 
Where an application is filed for a permit required by this chapter authorizing construction or excavation work within a public right-of-way or public service easement, the applicant shall file with the public works director/town engineer plans and specifications which indicate the location, nature and extent of the work to be performed within the public right-of-way or public service easement pursuant to the permit and which establish that such work will conform to the design criteria and improvement standards adopted by the Town of Paradise and/or any other applicable laws and regulations. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.130 - Action on permit applications—Approval and issuance of permit. 
Where the public works director/town engineer determines that a completed application has been filed for a permit required by this chapter and there are no grounds for denying such permit, the public works director/town engineer shall approve the application and issue the permit subject to all of the general and special conditions hereinafter provided for by this chapter at such time as the applicant has provided the comprehensive liability insurance and otherwise complied with all other general or special conditions required as conditions precedent to the issuance of the permit. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.140 - Action on permit applications—Denial of application. 
A.  Grounds for denial. The public works director/town engineer shall deny an application for a permit required by this chapter if the public works director/town engineer determines that: 
1.  The encroachment or excavation proposed by the application is for the construction or installation of improvements of facilities within a public right-of-way or public service easement which are not an authorized use of a public right-of-way or public service easement; 
2.  The encroachment or excavation, as proposed in the application, would unreasonably interfere with the use of public or private property adjoining or in the vicinity of the public right-of-way or public service easement in which such encroachment or excavation is to be made; or 
3.  The encroachment or excavation, as proposed in the application, would threaten the safety of persons or property. 
B.  Notice of denial. Where the public works director/town engineer determines to deny an application for a permit required by this chapter, the public works director/town engineer shall promptly cause a notice of such determination to be served on the permit applicant. In such notice the public works director/town engineer shall state the reasons for the determination not to approve the application and shall set forth the right of the applicant to apply for administrative review and appeal of such determination in the manner provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.150 - General conditions of permits—Comprehensive liability insurance. 
A.  Liability. The permittee shall be solely liable for all claims or liability associated with the work authorized by a permit. In addition, permittee shall hold harmless, indemnify and defend the town from and against all such claims and liability. 
B.  Insurance requirements. Except as hereinafter provided by this chapter, no permit shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter unless and until the permittee has obtained a comprehensive general liability insurance policy from an insurance company licensed to do business in the State of California and having a financial rating in Best's Insurance Guide of at least "B," which provides insurance coverage against all liabilities for death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way related to the encroachment and/or excavation work authorized pursuant to such permit. 
C.  Amount of insurance. The comprehensive general liability insurance obtained by a permittee at the time of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be in an amount of at least one million dollars, combined single limit, except that where the town manager determines that work performed pursuant to such permit involves unusual risks which expose the town to liabilities in excess of one million dollars, then such insurance shall be in an amount which the town manager determines is necessary to fully cover town's exposure to all such risks. 
D.  Form of insurance. The comprehensive general liability insurance obtained at the time of the issuance of a permit, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall include an endorsement naming the town, the town's officers, employees and agents as additional insureds under the coverage afforded, shall be primary with respect to any other insurance available to the town, shall include a severability of interest (cross-liability) clause, shall require the insurer to provide the town at least thirty days prior notice of cancellation, and otherwise shall be in a form approved by town manager. 
E.  Proof of insurance. Proof of comprehensive general liability insurance provided by a permittee at the time of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be in a form approved by the town manager and shall be filed with the public works director/town engineer prior to the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.160 - General conditions of permits—Liability insurance requirements for permittees owning adjoining property. 
Where a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, authorizing construction or excavation work within a public right-of-way or public service easement to be undertaken and performed by a person owning the property adjoining that portion of the public right-of-way or public service easement in which the work is to be performed, the permittee may comply with the liability insurance requirements of this chapter by filing with the public works director/town engineer a copy of the permittee's homeowner's insurance policy with liability limits of at least three hundred thousand dollars, in lieu of the comprehensive general liability insurance required by Section 12.14.150 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.170 - General conditions of permits—Compliance with traffic control plan. 
As a further condition of the issuance of a permit required by this chapter, the permittee shall undertake and carry out the encroachment or excavation authorized by such permit in accordance with the provisions of the state of California Manual of Traffic Controls for Construction and Maintenance Work Zones as published by the State Department of Transportation and/or any additions or modifications thereto now or hereafter adopted. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.180 - Additional conditions of permits authorizing construction or excavation work—Surety bond or other security. 
A.  Security requirements. Except as hereinafter provided by this chapter, no permit shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, authorizing construction or excavation work within a public right-of-way or public service easement unless and until the permittee has obtained and provided to the town a surety bond or other security guaranteeing performance by permittee of all of permittee's duties and obligations under such permit including, in particular, the duty and obligation to restore the site of the construction or excavation work to the same condition as it was in prior to commencement of the construction or excavation work, or such modified condition as has been approved by the public works department. 
B.  Amount of security. The surety bond or other security obtained and provided by a permittee at the time of the issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter authorizing construction or excavation work on or within a public right-of-way or public service easement shall be in the amount of at least ten thousand dollars; except that where the public works director/town engineer determines that the work performed pursuant to such permit is extensive and would expose the town to costs substantially in excess of ten thousand dollars to remedy any breach by the permittee in the permittee's duties and obligations to restore the public right-of-way or public service easement to the same condition as it was in prior to the commencement of the construction or excavation work or such modified condition as approved by the public works director/town engineer, then the surety bond or other security shall be in an amount which the public works director/town engineer determines is necessary to fully cover the town's exposure to all such costs. 
C.  Form of security. The surety bond obtained and provided by a permittee at the time of issuance of a permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter authorizing an encroachment or excavation within a public right-of-way or public service easement shall be conditioned on the permittee's compliance with all requirements of this chapter, including all orders of the public works director/town engineer pertaining thereto, and shall otherwise be in a form approved by the town attorney. In lieu of a surety bond, a permittee may obtain and provide to the town a cash deposit, certificate of deposit naming the town as the payee thereof or such other kind of security acceptable to the town manager, provided such cash deposit, certificate of deposit or the security is accompanied by an agreement stating that the security is being pledged to guarantee performance of the permittee's duties and obligations under the permit issued to permittee pursuant to this chapter, which pledge agreement shall also be in a form approved by the town attorney. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.190 - Additional conditions of permits authorizing construction or excavation work—Waiver of surety bond or other security for permittees owning adjoining property. 
Where a permit is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter authorizing construction or excavation work within a public right-of-way or public service easement to be undertaken and performed by a person who owns property adjoining that portion of the public right-of-way or public service easement in which the work is to be performed, the surety bond or other security requirements of this chapter shall be waived. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.200 - Additional conditions of permits authorizing construction or excavation work—Performance of construction or excavation work. 
As a further condition of the issuance of a permit required by this chapter authorizing construction or excavation work within a public right-of-way or public service easement, the permittee shall design, undertake and complete such work in the following manner: 
A.  All public improvements constructed or installed within a public right-of-way pursuant to such permit shall be designed, constructed and installed in accordance with the design criteria and improvement standards adopted by the town. 
B.  Upon the commencement of construction or excavation work authorized by a permit, such work shall be prosecuted with due diligence and in a manner that does not obstruct or interfere with a public street, public utilities or other facilities located within a public right-of-way or public service easement any more than is absolutely necessary. 
C.  Upon completion of construction or excavation work authorized by a permit, the public right-of-way or public service easement in which such work was performed shall be restored to the same condition as it was in prior to commencement of the work or such modified condition as has been expressly approved by the public works director/town engineer. All surplus soils or waste materials removed from the public right-of-way or public service easement shall be deposited, removed or handled as required by applicable federal, state and city laws and regulations. 
D.  At the conclusion of construction or excavation work authorized by such permit, the permittee shall file with the public works director/town engineer such "as-built" plans and specifications as may be required by the public works director/town engineer depicting any new improvements or facilities or any modifications to existing improvements or facilities which were constructed or installed in the public right-of-way or public service easement pursuant to such permit. 
E.  In any case in which the street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way is caused to be excavated, the permittee shall restore such excavation to like new condition in the manner prescribed by the standard plans and specifications, orders, rules and regulations of the public works department. As a minimum, trench restoration shall include resurfacing to a constant width equal to the widest part of the trench excavation. All final resurfacing shall be completed within thirty days of completion of excavation, weather permitting, unless otherwise specified on the approved encroachment permit. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.210 - Special conditions of permits. 
When acting on a permit required by this chapter, the public works director/town engineer may condition the issuance of such permit on compliance with any special requirements which the public works director/town engineer determines are necessary in order to ensure that such encroachment or excavation will be carried out in a manner that does not threaten the safety of persons or property and in a manner that will not unreasonably interfere with the use by the town or general public of any public right-of-way or public service easement and/or any public or private property adjoining or in the vicinity of the public right-of-way or public service easement in which the encroachment or excavation is to be made. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.220 - Stop notice. 
A.  Determination of public works director/town engineer to order work to be stopped. Whenever the public works director/town engineer determines that an encroachment or excavation made within a public right-of-way or public service easement pursuant to a permit issued in the manner provided by this chapter has been undertaken or is being carried out in a manner which threatens the public safety, unreasonably interferes with the use of such public right-of-way or public service easement or any property adjoining and in the vicinity thereof, or damages or threatens to damage other facilities located within the public right-of-way or public service easement in a manner not authorized by the permit, the public works director/town engineer may, by service and posting of the notice required by this section, order such work to be stopped. 
B.  Service of notice of order to stop work. Upon determining to order the stoppage of work undertaken or being carried out pursuant to a permit issued in the manner provided by this chapter, the public works director/town engineer shall cause a written notice of such order to be served on the person to whom the permit was issued and on any person known to the public works director/town engineer to be engaged in such work if such person is someone other than the person to whom the permit was issued. In addition to setting forth the order of the public works director/town engineer to stop work, such notice shall contain a brief description of the reasons why such work is being ordered stopped and the action, if any, which may be taken in order that the work may be resumed; shall contain a statement of the right of the person to whom the permit was issued to apply for administrative review of the order and to appeal the order in the manner provided by this chapter, and shall advise the person upon whom the notice is served that unless authorized by the public works director/town engineer, any further work performed pursuant to such permit may subject such person to the misdemeanor penalties hereinafter provided for in this chapter. 
C.  Posting of order to stop work. Upon determining to order the stoppage of work undertaken or carried out pursuant to a permit issued in the manner provided by this chapter, the public works director/town engineer shall also cause a written notice of such order to be posted in a conspicuous place within the public right-of-way or public service easement in which such work is being performed. In addition to setting forth the order of the public works director/town engineer to stop work, such notice shall state that it is a misdemeanor for such person to perform any further work without authorization of the public works director/town engineer or to remove or deface the posted notice of such order. 
D.  Effect of an order to stop work. No permittee or other person served with a notice of the public works director/town engineer to stop work undertaken or carried out pursuant to a permit issued in the manner provided by this chapter shall cause or allow such work to be performed or continued. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.230 - Permit revocation. 
A.  Determination by the public works director/town engineer to order the revocation of a permit. Whenever the public works director/town engineer determines that an encroachment or excavation made within a public right-of-way or public service easement pursuant to a permit issued in the manner provided by this chapter has been undertaken or is being carried out in a manner that violates the terms or conditions of such permit or that the permit was issued based on a permit application or plans and specifications which contained a material misrepresentation of fact, the public works director/town engineer, may, by service of the notice required by this section, order the revocation of the permit. 
B.  Service of notice of order revoking a permit. Upon determining to order the revocation of a permit issued in the manner provided by this chapter, the public works director/town engineer shall cause written notice of such order to be served on the person to whom the permit was issued. In addition to setting forth the order of the public works director/town engineer revoking such permit, such notice shall contain a brief description of the reasons why the permit is being revoked and shall contain a statement of the right of the person upon whom the notice is served to apply for administrative review of the order and to appeal the order in the manner provided by this chapter. 
C.  Effect of order revoking a permit. The permittee or other person served with a notice of the order of the public works director/town engineer revoking a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall promptly terminate the encroachment or excavation authorized by such permit and restore the public right-of-way or public service easement in which such encroachment or excavation was undertaken or carried out to the same condition as it was in prior to commencement of the encroachment or excavation, or such modified condition as may be approved by the public works director/town engineer. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.240 - Removal and restoration work. 
A.  Determination of the public works director/town engineer to perform removal and restoration work. Where the public works director/town engineer determines that an encroachment or excavation has been made in a public right-of-way or public service easement without a permit required by this chapter, or in violation or contrary to the terms and conditions of a permit or order issued pursuant to this chapter, or in any manner that endangers the safety of persons or property, the public works director/town engineer may remove such encroachment, refill such excavation and/or restore such public right-of-way or public service easement to the same or substantially the same condition as it was in prior to commencement of such encroachment or excavation, all for the account of and at the cost of the permittee or other person having made the encroachment or excavation, after service of any notice required by this chapter. 
B.  Service of notice of intent to undertake removal and/or restoration work. Upon determining to remove an encroachment, refill an excavation and/or perform restoration work in public right-of-way or public service easement, the public works director/town engineer shall cause written notice of such determination to be served on any person having undertaken the encroachment or excavation pursuant to a permit issued in the manner provided by this chapter. In addition to setting forth the intent of the public works director/town engineer to perform such work, such notice shall set forth the reasons for undertaking such work and shall state that the permittee shall be liable for the full cost thereof. Except where the work to be performed by the public works director/town engineer is necessary to remove or remedy the condition which threatens the safety of persons or property, such notice shall also offer to the permittee the right to immediately undertake such work, at the permittee's sole cost and expense, provided the work is completed by the permittee within a reasonable time as determined by the public works director/town engineer and set forth in the notice. 
C.  Liability for cost of removal or restoration work. Any permittee or other person having caused the encroachment or excavation which results in the performance of removal or restoration work by the public works director/town engineer in the manner provided by this section shall, upon completion of such removal or restoration work, be liable to the town for the full cost thereof. In addition, where a surety bond or other security has been provided to the town as a condition of a permit authorizing construction or excavation work within a public right-of-way or public service easement, such surety or other security shall be liable to the town for the cost of such work to the full amount of the surety bond or other security. 
D.  Repair of sunken pavement over excavation. If the pavement or the surface of the public right-of-way or public service easement over any excavation should become depressed or broken at any time within one year after the excavation has been completed and before resurfacing of such area, natural wear of the surface excepted, the permittee shall, upon written notice from the town, immediately proceed to inspect the depressed or broken area over the excavation to ascertain the cause of the failure. The permittee shall make repairs to the installation or backfill and have the pavement restored as specified by the town, within such time period as may be specified by the town. If the pavement is not restored as specified by the town, and unless delayed by a strike or conditions beyond permittee's control, the town may cause the work to be done after giving the permittee twenty-four hours final notice. The cost thereof including any inspection costs and administrative overhead incurred by the town, shall be assessed against the permittee. After the cost is paid by the permittee to the town, the town shall be responsible for any future repairs of that portion of pavement repaired by the town. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.250 - Emergency excavation. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent any person from taking any action necessary for the preservation of persons or property when such necessity arises during days or times when the public works department is closed. In the event that any person takes any action to excavate or cause to be excavated the public right-of-way pursuant to this chapter, such person shall apply for an emergency permit within four hours after the public works department's offices are first opened. The applicant for an emergency permit shall submit a written statement of the basis of the emergency action and describe the work performed. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.260 - Moratorium areas—No permit shall be issued. 
Permission to excavate in newly renovated streets shall not be granted for three years after completion of street renovation as shown by the filing of a notice of completion. Utilities shall determine alternate methods of making necessary repairs to avoid excavating in newly renovated streets. Exceptions to the above are as follows: 
A.  Emergency endangering persons or property; 
B.  Interruption of essential utility service; 
C.  Work mandated by city, state or federal legislation; 
D.  Service for buildings where no other reasonable means of providing service exists; 
E.  Other situations deemed by the town council to be in the best interest of the general public. 
All permits which are issued under subsections A through E of this section shall be in accordance with the standards, details and specifications established by and on file in the office of the public works director/town engineer. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
12.14.270 - Violations. 
Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be an infraction which is punishable by a fine in an amount set forth in California Government Code Section 36900; except that a violation of an order revoking a permit, or an order to stop work or the removal or defacement of a notice of such order posted by the public works director/town engineer in the manner provided by this chapter shall be a misdemeanor punishable by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months or by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars. 
(Ord. 321, § 1(part), 1999)  
Chapter 12.15 - REMOVAL OF PHYSICAL ENCROACHMENTS FROM PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY 
Sections : 
 
12.15.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for removal of unauthorized physical encroachments in public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 10-10-06)  
12.15.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
(a)  The term "public right-of-way" includes any town street, sidewalk, pedestrian path, bike path, alley or any other "public way," as that term is defined in the California Streets and Highways Code. 
(b)  The term "physical encroachment" includes any structure or object of any kind or character placed, without the authority of law, either in, under or over any public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 10-10-06)  
12.15.030 - Authority to remove encroachments. 
The community development director, or his/her designee, or the public works director/town engineer, and/or designee, may immediately remove, or by notice may require the removal of, any of the following physical encroachments: 
(a)  A physical encroachment which obstructs or prevents the use of a public right-of-way. 
(b)  A physical encroachment which consists of refuse or discarded furniture. 
(c)  A physical encroachment which is a traffic hazard. 
(d)  A physical encroachment which is an unauthorized advertising sign or device of any description. The community development director, or designee, may return such sign or device to its owner, or otherwise dispose of it in his or her discretion, except that if the community development director, or designee, determines in good faith that the sign or other device is of more than nominal value, he or she shall not dispose of it until he or she has made a reasonable attempt to identify and notify the owner of the sign or device and provided a reasonable time for the owner to retrieve it under provisions of this chapter. The return of such sign or device to its owner may be conditioned upon payment of an amount sufficient to reimburse the town for the expense of removal. 
The community development director, or designee, or the public works director/town engineer, or designee, may recover from the person causing any of the above physical encroachments in an action brought in the name of the town for that purpose, the court costs of the town, the expense of such removal, and any other damages caused by the physical encroachment. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 10-10-06)  
12.15.040 - Service of notice; contents. 
If the community development director, or designee, elects not to immediately remove a physical encroachment, he or she shall serve a notice to remove the physical encroachment upon the person causing, controlling or owning it or shall be left at the place of residence or business of such person, if known. The notice shall specify the place and extent of the physical encroachment, and shall require the removal of such physical encroachment within no more than two days. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 10-10-06)  
12.15.050 - Penalty. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause an unauthorized physical encroachment to be within a public right-of-way. The person causing, owning, or controlling the physical encroachment shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine of three hundred fifty dollars for each day the physical encroachment is present in a public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 10-10-06)  
12.15.060 - Removal of encroachment at owner's expense. 
If the physical encroachment is not removed within the time provided in the notice, the community development director, or designee, may remove the physical encroachment at the expense of the person causing, owning or controlling the physical encroachment. The town may recover from the person, in an action brought in the name of the town for that purpose, the town's court costs and the expense of removal and also a penalty of three hundred fifty dollars for each day the physical encroachment remained in the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 455, § 1, 10-10-06)  
Chapter 12.16 - SPRINKLING OR SPRAYING—DISTURBING SURFACE 
 
12.16.010 - Sprinkling or spraying. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or having in possession or control any sprinkler or spray, whom permits the water therefrom to spray, sprinkle or otherwise fall upon any roadway, as defined by Section 530 of the Vehicle Code of the state. 
(County Code § 10-1O: Ord. 16, § 1(D)(part), 1980: Ord. No. 401, § 15, 8-26-2003)  
12.16.020 - Disturbing surface or subsurface. 
No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, any plow, disc, cultivator, harrow or scarifier on, or in any manner disturb the surface or subsurface of, any town street, public right-of-way, public easement or public owned property without first obtaining a permit from the public works director/town engineer in accordance with the applicable provisions of Chapter 12.14. 
(County Code § 10-2: Ord. 16, §§ 1(D)(part), 2(B)(part), 1980: Ord. 75, § 1(M)(part), 1982: Ord. No. 401, § 15, 8-26-2003)  
12.16.030 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code § 36900. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 401, § 15, 8-26-2003)  
Chapter 12.20 - IMPROVEMENTS—RIGHT-OF-WAY DEDICATION 
 
12.20.010 - Findings. 
The council finds and declares the following: 
A.  That various streets within the town are deficient with respect to right-of-way width and public street improvements therein, including but not limited to curbs, gutters, sidewalks or pathways, street paving and storm drainage facilities; 
B.  That such deficiencies impair safe motor vehicle and pedestrian circulation, contribute to excessive dust and noise, impede effective stormwater drainage and hinder the efficient operation of emergency vehicles; 
C.  That such deficiencies will be exacerbated by additional construction of housing units, commercial buildings and community service uses, unless commensurate street facilities are improved to adequate standards. 
(Ord. 85, § 1, 1983)  
12.20.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing the dedication of rights-of-way and the construction of street improvements related to the use and development of individual parcels of land, and to accomplish the following specific purposes: 
A.  To promote acquisition or dedication of rights-of-way and construction of street improvements made necessary by the development of adjoining parcels; 
B.  To assure conformity with zoning and subdivision regulations, and to establish requirements for dedication and street improvement applicable to development on parcels not subject to subdivision or parcel map regulations; 
C.  To establish criteria and procedures governing the time for construction of improvements, and to promote coordination and efficiency with respect to design and construction of improvements; 
D.  To encourage use of benefit assessment procedures, in accord with constitutional and statutory limitations, for the construction of street improvements; 
E.  To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public. 
(Ord. 85, § 2, 1983)  
12.20.030 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning defined in this section: 
A.  "Engineer" means the town engineer or his authorized representative. 
B.  "Improvement agreement" means an agreement between the town and a property owner providing for deferred construction of street improvements pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  "Improvement standards" means uniform standards for design and construction of street improvements, promulgated by the town pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  "Manager" means the town manager. 
E.  "Owner" means any person owning a parcel, or having the legal authority from the owner of a parcel to carry out the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the owner. Except where exempted by law, "owner" includes any public entity. 
F.  "Parcel" means one or more lots or contiguous units of real property in common ownership, capable of being legally conveyed without approval pursuant to subdivision or parcel map regulations. 
G.  "Private road" means any private right-of-way providing vehicular or pedestrian access to one or more parcels, and for which one or more owners bear responsibility for construction and maintenance. 
H.  "Public street" means any public right-of-way, together with street improvements therein, accepted and maintained by the town and open for use by the public for the primary purpose of vehicular or pedestrian travel. 
I.  "Right-of-way" means real property acquired by or dedicated to the town for public use and access, whether held in fee, easement or other interest sufficient to guarantee public use and access. 
J.  "Street improvements" means pavement, curbs, gutters, sidewalks or pathways, driveways, drainage facilities, fire hydrants, utilities and such other improvements ordinarily located in and appurtenant to the use of a public street or private road. 
(Ord. 85, § 3, 1983)  
12.20.040 - Required for building permit. 
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a requirement for dedication of right-of-way and construction of street improvements pursuant to this chapter is imposed on every owner to whom a building permit is granted. The requirement for dedication and construction of improvements shall be a condition of the building permit. 
(Ord. 85, § 4(A), 1983)  
12.20.050 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to building permits authorizing the following types of construction: 
A.  Normal and customary maintenance and repairs to existing buildings and uses; 
B.  Minor expansion of an existing residential use, where the increase in habitable floor area on the parcel, whether within an existing dwelling unit or within an additional dwelling unit, is less than seven hundred fifty square feet; 
C.  Minor expansion of an existing commercial, industrial, public or institutional use, where the increase in usable floor area is less than one thousand square feet; 
D.  Reconstruction of a building damaged by fire or natural calamity, where the gross floor area of the reconstructed building does not exceed the original gross floor area plus allowable minor expansion pursuant to subsections B or C of this section; 
E.  Buildings, structures and site improvements which are incidental to an existing building or use, including but not limited to decks, patios, swimming pools, landscaping and yard improvements, signs, fencing, reroofing or similar incidental improvements which do not increase the general intensity or change the basic character of a use. 
(Ord. 85, § 4(B), 1983)  
12.20.060 - Administration by engineer. 
The engineer shall determine the extent of right-of-way dedication and street improvement requirements applicable to each parcel and shall determine the applicability of deferred construction provisions, in accord with this chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 85, § 4(C), 1983)  
12.20.070 - Dedication—Limit. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, no street dedication shall be required which would result in dedication of right-of-way in excess of twenty percent of the area of any parcel prior to dedication. Right-of-way requirements exceeding twenty percent of the parcel area shall be the responsibility of the town, and shall be obtained either through agreement with the parcel owner or by purchase or eminent domain proceedings. If the town determines to acquire such additional rights-of-way, the time for performance by the parcel owner for the construction of required street improvements shall be adjusted to reflect any period of delay necessary for the town to obtain title to the additional right-of-way. 
(Ord. 85, § 4(D), 1983)  
12.20.080 - Dedication—Requirements. 
The council shall, by resolution, establish requirements governing the width of right-of-way dedication applicable to one or more streets within the town. These requirements may be established by written description, map reference or a combination thereof, and may be revised from time to time to reflect current conditions and long-range plans of the town. 
(Ord. 85, § 5(A), 1983)  
12.20.090 - Dedication—Grant and acceptance. 
A.  Grant of title. The parcel owner shall grant the required rights-of-way to the town. Title shall be transferred by grant deed, and may be a fee title, easement or other interest corresponding to the title held by the town to surrounding right-of-way and which is sufficient to carry out the purposes of this chapter. Forms for transfer prepared by the town may be utilized. 
B.  Acceptance. The manager or engineer is authorized to accept the transfer of title on behalf of the town. No encumbrances, limitations, restrictions or exceptions to the title shall be accepted by the manager, unless such encumbrances, limitations, restrictions or exceptions do not in any manner interfere with or hinder the use for which the right-of-way is being dedicated. 
C.  Recordation. The manager shall cause each transfer of title to be filed for record in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. 85, § 5(B, C, D), 1983)  
12.20.100 - Improvements—Required. 
Street improvements shall be constructed by the parcel owner, and shall conform to all applicable improvement standards. Except when construction of improvements is deferred pursuant to Section 12.20.140, street improvements shall be completed prior to occupancy of the building or use authorized by the building permit. 
(Ord. 85, § 6(A), 1983)  
12.20.110 - Improvements—Plans. 
A.  Required. Each owner required to construct street improvements shall be responsible for preparation of complete plans and specifications for the improvements. The form of such construction plans and the design and specifications for the improvements shall be as specified by the improvement standards or as required by the engineer. When construction of improvements is deferred pursuant to Section 12.20.140, plans shall not be required until necessary for such deferred construction. 
B.  Waiver. The engineer may modify, defer or waive the requirements for complete construction plans when: 
1.  Only relatively minor street improvement work is required; 
2.  Existing data and physical conditions are sufficient to establish construction requirements; 
3.  Plans are prepared by the town pursuant to a benefit assessment district or other street improvement project. 
C.  Approval. Construction plans shall be completed and submitted for approval by the engineer prior to the issuance of a building permit, or prior to issuance of an encroachment permit in the event of deferral of construction requirements. The approval of such construction plans by the engineer shall constitute the approval of the town of the design of the street improvements set forth within such plans. 
(Ord. 85, § 6(B, C, D), 1983)  
12.20.120 - Improvements—Security. 
In lieu of completion prior to occupancy or prior to a required completion date for deferred construction, the engineer may require the owner to secure the completion of the improvements by cash deposit or bond in the amount of the cost of the required improvements as estimated by the engineer. 
(Ord. 85, § 6(E), 1983)  
12.20.130 - Improvements—Failure to make. 
When an owner fails to make required improvements, the manager may cause the installation of such improvements by the town and may bill the owner for the full cost of such work. If the cost is not paid to the town within thirty days following billing therefor, the town shall cause a lien to be placed on the parcel for the cost of such work, and the charge shall be inserted upon the tax roll of the town to be collected at the same time as other property taxes. 
(Ord. 85, § 6(F), 1983)  
12.20.140 - Deferred improvements—When permitted. 
A.  The time specified by Section 12.20.100 for completion of construction of required street improvements may be deferred in order to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. Full or partial deferral may be authorized subject to execution of an improvement agreement between the owner and the town. 
B.  The council may, by resolution, establish criteria for deferral of the construction of required street improvements. These may be revised from time to time to reflect current conditions, programmed street construction projects and other relevant considerations. 
C.  The engineer shall determine the applicability of deferral provisions and the appropriate terms of an improvement agreement, pursuant to the criteria established by the council. 
(Ord. 85, § 7(A, B, C), 1983)  
12.20.150 - Deferred improvements—Improvement agreement. 
A.  Improvement agreements shall be in a form approved by the manager. Standard agreement forms may be specified. Each improvement agreement shall contain the following: 
1.  A description or identification of the parcel to which the agreement applies, and a description of the required improvements for which construction shall be deferred; 
2.  The consent and agreement of the owner to construct directly, or to pay the costs of construction by the town or its agents, of the deferred improvements, by one or more of the following means, at the option of the town: 
a.  Agreement to participate in a benefit assessment district and to pay in full all benefit assessments levied for street improvements, 
b.  Agreement to construct the required improvements at such time as specified by the town, pursuant to Section 12.20.160(A), 
c.  Deposit of the estimated cost of the deferred improvements, as estimated by the engineer, in a fund to be utilized by the town for subsequent construction of deferred street improvements. Such payment shall constitute completion of the improvement requirements on the part of the owner, 
d.  Such other provisions as may be agreed between the town and the owner. 
B.  The manager shall cause each improvement agreement pursuant to this chapter to be filed for record in the office of the county recorder. The obligations of the owner as set forth in the improvement agreement shall constitute an irrevocable covenant. 
(Ord. 85, § 7(D, E), 1983)  
12.20.160 - Deferred improvements—Completion. 
A.  The council shall determine the time at which deferred improvements shall be required to be constructed along any street, upon recommendation of the manager or the engineer. 
B.  Following a determination of necessity by the council, the engineer shall serve written notice upon the owner of the requirement to construct the street improvements or the requirement to participate in the construction of such improvements as provided by the improvement agreement. The owner shall be responsible for completion of plans and for construction of the required improvements within a period of one year following receipt of notice, or such other reasonable time limit as may be specified by the engineer and related to the method of satisfying the required construction of improvements. 
(Ord. 85, § 7(F, G), 1983)  
12.20.170 - Appeals. 
A parcel owner aggrieved by any action or determination by the manager or engineer pursuant to this chapter may appeal such determination to the council within thirty days of notification of the determination. The appeal shall state the specific determination or requirement being appealed. The council shall hear the appeal at a public meeting and render a decision on the appeal within thirty days thereafter. The decision of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 85, § 8, 1983)  
12.20.180 - Fees. 
The council may by resolution establish such fees to be charged in connection with any determination, review, approval, inspection, recordation action, or other procedure pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. 85, § 9, 1983)  
Chapter 12.24 - SKATEBOARDING 
 
12.24.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate skateboarding activities at any skateboard park or facility owned or operated by the town. 
(Ord. 303, § 1(part), 1998)  
12.24.020 - General. 
It is unlawful for any person to use a town-owned or operated skateboard park or facility in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 303, § 1(part), 1998)  
12.24.030 - Rules and regulations. 
A.  "Skateboard" means any device with wheels, coasters or any other form of movability with a platform upon which a person rides or stands primarily for recreational purposes, including in-line skates and roller skates. 
B.  Any person using a skateboard at town-owned or operated skateboard park or facility shall wear a helmet, knee pads and elbow pads while riding a skateboard. 
C.  Signs shall be posted at any town-owned or-operated skateboard park or facility requiring any persons riding a skateboard to wear a helmet, knee pads and elbow pads. Such signs shall also state that any person who fails to wear a helmet, knee pads and elbow pads as required by this chapter shall be subject to being issued a citation pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 11580 and this chapter. 
D.  No person shall ride a bicycle within skateboarding areas of a town-owned or-operated park. 
(Ord. 303, § 1(part), 1998)  
12.24.040 - Violation. 
Any person who violates the provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by fine pursuant to Government Code Section 36900. 
(Ord. 303, § 1(part), 1998)  
Chapter 12.25 - PARADISE COMMUNITY PARK 
 
12.25.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of the Paradise Community Park consisting of four (4) acres, excluding the Memorial Trailway within the park. The Paradise Community Park is located at the intersection of Pearson Road and Black Olive Drive, Paradise, California. 
(Ord. 461, § 1, 4-24-2007)  
12.25.020 - Hours. 
The Paradise Community Park shall be open to the public between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in the park during the hours when it is not open to the public except for town authorized employees or contractors. During the hours that the park is closed persons may pass through the park. 
(Ord. 461, § 1, 4-24-2007)  
12.25.030 - Park Regulations. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the following regulations within the Paradise Community Park: 
A.  There shall be no smoking of tobacco. 
B.  Riding bicycles, skateboards or similar devices shall be prohibited except on the Memorial Trailway or for ingress and egress of bicycles to town bicycle racks. 
C.  Except for town authorized employees or contractors, motorized vehicles shall be permitted only within designated vehicle parking areas. 
D.  There shall be no residential or commercial waste deposited in park receptacles. 
E.  No plants shall be removed, damaged or disturbed. 
F.  No town property shall be removed or damaged. 
G.  Except for special events approved by the town, fires shall be permitted only in the barbeque/picnic area. Portable camp stoves and portable barbeque grills shall be prohibited. Campfires and fireworks shall be prohibited. 
H.  Camping shall be prohibited. 
I.  The posting of advertisements and notices shall be prohibited. 
J.  Solicitation shall be prohibited. 
K.  The use of metal detectors shall be prohibited. 
L.  No person shall use offensive language, make or engage in offensive gestures, make unreasonable noise, or engage in disorderly conduct. 
M.  The cutting, collecting and/or gathering of firewood shall be prohibited. 
N.  Except for special events approved by the town, persons may perform as artists or entertainers within the following restrictions: 
1.  Performers shall not block sidewalks, impede pedestrians, or hinder vehicular traffic circulation. 
2.  Performers shall not be within one hundred (100) feet of existing park concessions or private events. 
3.  Performers shall set up at community and special events with the expressed written permission of the event organizer. 
4.  Performers shall not use amplified sound. 
5.  Performers shall not juggle potentially hazardous materials or items such as knives and fire. 
6.  Any money exchanged shall be limited to "tips" or donations. 
7.  Performers shall be required to obtain written approval from the town manager permitting their performance art. Performers shall have a copy of the letter of approval available during their performances and be prepared to present the letter of approval to park attendant/employee upon request. 
O.  Drop in groups/events shall vacate whenever the town has officially reserved the park for an event. 
P.  Except for special events approved by the town, the construction or erection of any structure, whether permanent or temporary shall be prohibited. 
(Ord. 461, § 1, 4-24-2007)  
12.25.040 - Permit to Use Park. 
The town council shall adopt a resolution under which persons may obtain a permit from the town manager to use the Paradise Community Park for special events. 
(Ord. 461, § 1, 4-24-2007)  
12.25.050 - Infraction. 
Any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(Ord. 461, § 1, 4-24-2007)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES  
Chapter 13.04 - SEWAGE DISPOSAL  
Article I - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
13.04.000 - Intent. 
A.  The discharge of certain materials to on-site wastewater disposal systems, or the construction and maintenance of on-site wastewater disposal systems which are defective or substandard in operation, may result in adverse impacts on human health or the physical environment, including but not limited to: pollution of soil and groundwater, disruption of proper system functioning, disruption of treatment plant functioning, creation of a health hazard to septic service personnel, or creation of a hazard where septic tank sludge is discharged. 
B.  It is the intent of this chapter to prevent such adverse impacts by prohibiting the discharge of hazardous or deleterious materials to on-site wastewater disposal systems, to prohibit the improper disposal of contaminated septic tank sludge, and to assure that all on-site wastewater disposal systems within the town are constructed and operated in a safe, healthful and environmentally responsible manner. 
(Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.010 - Purpose. 
The purposes of the provisions as set forth in this chapter are: 
A.  To facilitate an orderly development within the town; 
B.  To protect the groundwater and surface water quality within the town's hydrologic basins; 
C.  To implement the recommendations of the Montgomery Phase I, 201 Report concerning surface wastewater accepted by the town council in April 1983; 
D.  To implement the on-site wastewater management zone, established by the town council in May, 1992, and the provisions of the Manual for the Onsite Treatment of Wastewater, as prepared by Nolte and Associates; 
E.  To establish local rules and regulations applicable to the disposal of sewage effluent for purposes of protecting the public health and safety in accordance with the requirements and authorizations of California Health and Safety Code Sections 6950 et seq. 
(Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Abatement" means an action that results in the removal and/or termination of a nuisance existing upon real property. 
B.  "Advanced treatment wastewater system" means an onsite sewage disposal system that provides secondary treatment to wastewater through an oxygenation process and provides effluent quality for BOD and TSS that meets or exceeds standards as established in Chapter 6 of the Town of Paradise Manual for the Onsite Treatment of Wastewater. 
C.  "Auxiliary system" means a secondary sewage disposal system designed to dispose of a portion of the sewage from a building. 
D.  "Bedroom" is as defined in Section 13.04.112, for use in this chapter. 
E.  "Building" means a single-family residence, multi-family residence, place of business or other structure where persons reside, congregate or are employed, and accessory buildings. 
F.  "Community wastewater system" means an onsite sewage disposal system that serves a combination of two (2) or more residential, commercial residential, commercial or industrial units located on the same or different parcels. A community wastewater system may or may not provide advanced treatment to wastewater. 
G.  "Construction permit" means a written authorization issued by the on-site sanitary official to a property owner to install and/or alter a sewage disposal system. 
H.  "Deleterious material" is defined as either a: 
1.  Substance or combination of substances which inhibit the normal biological or physical treatment process in the septic tank or other parts of the on-site wastewater disposal system; or 
2.  Substances or combinations of substances which interfere with the process or efficiency of any wastewater treatment plant where the septic tank sludge is discharged. 
I.  "Development" means any change in the density or intensity of the land use, or any construction or alteration of an existing structure or land use. 
J.  "Discharge permit" means a permit to operate a special design sewage disposal system. 
K.  "Hazardous material" means a substance or combination of substances which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may either: 
1.  Cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; or 
2.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of or otherwise managed. 
L.  "Impervious stratum" means a layer or lens of fine-grained soil, rock, cemented material or similar soil structure in which the percolation rate exceeds one hundred twenty minutes per inch or in which twelve inches of water depth will not seep completely away in a twenty-four-hour period. 
M.  "Living unit" means a residential building or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one family, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
N.  "Net lot area" is as defined in Section 13.04.110, for use in this chapter. 
O.  "New parcel" means any parcel or lot created by subdivision of land after the date the provisions of this chapter are legally in effect. 
P.  "Nuisance" means a condition causing danger or annoyance either to a limited number of persons or to the general public. 
Q.  "On-site manual" means the Manual for the Onsite Treatment of Wastewater, as prepared by Nolte and Associates and adopted and amended by resolution of the town council. 
R.  "On-site sanitary official" means the legally designated authority of the town or his/her authorized representative administering this chapter. 
S.  "Operating permit" means a written authorization issued by the on-site sanitary official permitting the operation and use of a sewage disposal system. 
T.  "Sewage" means and includes any and all waste substance, liquid or solid, associated with human habitation, or which contains or may be contaminated with human or animal excreta, offal or any feculent matter. The term "wastewater" shall be synonymous with "sewage." 
U.  "Sewage disposal system" means and includes septic tank, drainfield, seepage pit, chemical toilet and any other structure or system used for the treatment, discharge or disposal of sewage. 
V.  "Wastewater disposal services" are specifically defined in the on-site manual but, at a minimum, wastewater disposal services are defined to include the following activities: 
1.  The construction, installation or modification of on-site wastewater disposal systems (including the placement of portable toilets), or any part thereof; 
2.  The pumping out or cleaning of systems (including portable toilets), or any part thereof; 
3.  The inspection of standard on-site wastewater disposal systems for the town; 
4.  The disposal of material derived from the pumping out or cleaning of systems (including portable toilets). 
(Ord. No. 512, § 1, 2-8-2011; Ord. 228 §§1—3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 512, § 1, adopted Feb. 8, 2011, added two definitions to § 13.04.020. For purposes of alphabetization, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as subsections B. and F. The remaining subsections have been renumbered to facilitate inclusion of these new subsections.  
13.04.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter applies to all real properties located within the town on-site wastewater disposal zone. The on-site sanitary official may waive the permit and inspection requirements contained in this chapter when the provisions of this chapter are preempted by state regulations. 
(Ord. 228 §3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.035 - On-site manual applicability. 
All parcels with and without existing developments shall be governed by the on-site manual, including construction, repair, modification, replacement and operation of sewage disposal systems. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 1, 3-8-2016; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.040 - Sewage disposal system required. 
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, occupy or use any building not provided with a sewage disposal system or which disposes of wastewater in a manner that does not comply with the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of the on-site manual. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 2, 3-8-2016; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.045 - On-site wastewater disposal services—Licensing requirement. 
A.  No person, corporation or other business entity will perform wastewater disposal services as defined in this chapter, nor advertise or represent itself as being in the business of performing such services without first obtaining a license from the town that legally authorizes such party to perform such services. 
B.  The administrative procedure and regulatory provisions that govern the licensing of individuals to perform wastewater disposal services as required by this section shall be subject to all applicable provisions of Section 1.8 of the on-site manual. 
(Ord. 254 §1, 1995: Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.050 - Construction permit—Required. 
A.  Review by On-Site Sanitary Official. No person shall begin, or cause to have begun, construction of any development or any sewage disposal system without review and approval by the on-site sanitary official. All developments requiring a sewage disposal system, or an alteration, enlargement or repair of an existing system, must submit plans showing the means of sewage disposal to the on-site sanitary official and obtain a permit therefor from the on-site sanitary official. Sewage disposal permits shall be obtained prior to the issuance of building permits. 
B.  Validity. Permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for one year and shall automatically become void one year from the date of issuance, unless renewed prior to the expiration date; provided, however, repair permits shall be valid no more than 90 days. All permit renewals shall comply with all applicable, current codes at time of renewal. 
C.  Auxiliary Systems. No person shall construct an auxiliary sewage disposal system for a building presently served by a sewage disposal system without first submitting plans of the proposed means of sewage disposal to the on-site sanitary official and obtaining a permit therefor from the on-site sanitary official. 
D.  Abandonment. No person shall abandon a septic tank or cesspool or discontinue from further use without first obtaining a permit from the on-site sanitary official. 
E.  Permit—Application. The following items are required in order to process a sewage disposal permit application: 
1.  The submittal of a plot plan drawn to scale that includes the following information: 
a.  Lot boundaries; 
b.  Locations of proposed and existing buildings and sewage disposal facilities; 
c.  Location of proposed leach field and one-hundred percent replacement area for the leach field; 
d.  A floor plan of the building, the number of bedrooms and other potential sleeping quarters, and all proposed appurtenant structures; 
e.  Source and location of domestic water and treatment, if required. If a well is proposed as a domestic water source, a well-drilling permit application shall be made at the time a sewage disposal permit application is submitted; 
f.  Ditches, creeks, springs, or other surface water on the premises and within one hundred feet in any direction of the proposed sewage disposal area; and lakes or reservoirs within two hundred feet of the proposed sewage disposal areas; 
g.  Location of known or proposed wells on property and within one hundred feet of property lines; 
h.  Topography, including contours and rock outcroppings, cliffs, etc.; 
i.  Setbacks from property lines; 
j.  Driveways and parking areas; 
k.  Such other additional information as deemed necessary by the on-site sanitary official to process the application; 
2.  Additional information and/or testing may also be required at the discretion of the on-site sanitary official. Such information or testing may include but not be limited to the following: 
a.  Water Table Depth Determinations. The time of year that these tests are performed shall be determined by the on-site sanitary official based upon drainage characteristics, topography, soil types or strata, precipitation in the area, snow melt, and/or other pertinent factors; 
b.  Soil mantle depth determinations; 
c.  Detailed engineering plans shall be submitted for approval of all special design systems, sewage treatment plants and any deviations from standard practice; 
d.  Design criteria to accommodate anticipated flows; 
e.  Soils percolation test data. 
(Ord. No. 512, § 2, 2-8-2011; Ord. No. 429, § 1, 11-9-2004; Ord. 228 § 3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 § 2(part), 1992)  
13.04.060 - Construction permit—Fees. 
A.  Every applicant for a permit required by Section 13.04.050 shall pay a fee at the time of application for each permit or for renewal of each permit. The fees shall be established by resolution of the town council. 
B.  If development on a lot or parcel is begun or if construction of a sewage disposal system or an auxiliary sewage disposal system has begun prior to obtaining the required permit, the permit fee specified in subsection A of this section shall be doubled, but shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter nor from any other penalties prescribed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 219 § 2(part), 1992)  
13.04.070 - Construction standards. 
A.  The septic tank shall be of two-compartment construction and shall be of the size and type constructed in accordance with the requirements outlined in Chapter 5.1 of the on-site manual. 
1.  The minimum liquid capacity of new septic tanks shall be one thousand five hundred (1,500) gallons. Lesser capacities may be authorized by the on-site sanitary official for auxiliary septic tanks. 
2.  The septic tank shall be constructed of concrete or equally durable material satisfactory to the on-site sanitary official. 
B.  Dispersal Field/Effluent Disposal. The effluent from a septic tank or an approved alternative treatment system shall be discharged into a dispersal field or an approved alternative disposal system of the size and type constructed in accordance with the requirements of the on-site manual as administered by the on-site sanitary official. 
C.  Volume and Soil Criteria. 
1.  When a project has an average daily sewage flow in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons per day, one hundred (100) percent of the original and replacement dispersal field shall be installed along with accessible diverter value. 
2.  Permeable soil depth below the bottom of the leaching trench that receives non-secondary treated septic tank effluent shall not be less than four (4) feet. 
3.  Depth to seasonally high groundwater below the bottom of the leaching trench that receives non-secondary treated septic tank effluent shall not be less than four (4) feet. 
4.  Ground slope in the disposal area shall not be greater than thirty (30) percent. 
5.  When a project involving the new construction of or alteration to the primary dispersal field has an average daily sewage flow of less than one thousand (1,000) gallons per day and is to be served by a septic tank/dispersal field system, there shall be suitable area available upon the subject property for the installation of the primary dispersal field and a one hundred (100) percent replacement area for a secondary dispersal field system. 
6.  Soil composition shall be such that it will serve as an effective filter for septic tank (or an approved alternative treatment system) effluent. 
7.  Individual leach fields shall not be excavated when the soil is wet enough to compact or smear easily. 
8.  Any soil testing performed pursuant to meeting the above criteria may, at the discretion of the on-site sanitary official, be witnessed by a representative from the town on-site sanitation division. 
9.  Wastewater effluent dispersal is not allowed in any areas that will receive vehicle loading, stationary or moving, whether the surface is asphalt, concrete, gravel or soil, which has a percolation rate greater than thirty (30) minutes per inch. Paved areas, or areas proposed to be paved, which exceed thirty (30) minutes per inch of percolation rate shall not be used to determine net lot area when new parcels are being created. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 3, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 429, § 2, 3, 11-9-2004; Ord. No. 425 §§ 1, 2, 2004; Ord. 343 § 1, 2000; Ord. 228 § 3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 § 2(part), 1992)  
13.04.080 - Inspections required. 
No person shall backfill or cover with earth, or put into use, any sewage disposal system constructed under provisions of this chapter until an inspection of the sewage disposal system has been made by the on-site sanitary official and approval has been given. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 4, 3-8-2016; Ord. 228 § 3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 § 2(part), 1992)  
13.04.090 - Evaluations required. 
A.  Evaluations of the Observed Performance of On-Site Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Systems at Time of Real Property Sale. 
1.  It shall be unlawful for any person to transfer title to another person of any parcel of land in the town upon which a septic tank and disposal drainfield, also known as an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, have been constructed and operating without first providing evidence to the town that the septic tank and drainfield are in substantial compliance with the operational provisions of this code. 
2.  As used in this section, evidence of substantial compliance shall be based on an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system evaluation performed by a qualified person possessing the authority as confirmed by Chapter 5.14 of this code within twelve (12) months prior to the transfer of title. 
3.  The town shall issue a clearance to record the appropriate deed within five working days following notification by the title company processing the change of ownership title, or other competent authority, that any of the following have been completed: 
a.  The on-site wastewater system serving the subject parcel has been evaluated in accordance with this code and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system has no observed operational deficiencies as determined by the on-site sanitary official; 
b.  The on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system serving the subject parcel has been evaluated in accordance with the provisions of this code and the observed operating deficiencies of the system have been corrected as directed by the on-site sanitary official so that the system is operational; 
c.  The on-site wastewater system serving the subject parcel has been evaluated in accordance with the provisions of this code and sufficient moneys are on deposit in the escrow account held by the title company to fully fund the correction of the operating deficiencies as directed by the on-site sanitary official. 
4.  It shall be unlawful for any person to request the county recorder to accept for recording a deed to a property without the accompanying clearance to record as required by this section. 
B.  Periodic Evaluations of On-Site Wastewater Systems. 
1.  a. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to have his, her or its septic system evaluated in accordance with this section. Beginning on May 18, 1992, each on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system within town limits shall be periodically evaluated as determined by the town. Standard systems meeting certain criteria shall have a time interval between evaluations of twelve years, seven years, or two years as described in this section. A standard system is defined in Section 4.1 of the Town of Paradise Manual for the On-site Treatment of Wastewater as follows: "A standard absorption system is an on-site wastewater disposal system for a single family dwelling consisting of a septic tank, a flow distribution unit and a gravity-fed absorption field constructed in accordance with the guidelines outlined in this manual. 
1.  Twelve Year Interval. To receive a twelve-year evaluation interval and operation permit, the property and on-site system must meet the following criteria: 
i.  The property must be owner-occupied (not a rental property). 
ii.  The property is a single-family residence and not a commercial property. 
iii.  The on-site system must not be within the area boundary identified as TW-MA, 0-30 (high ground water) on the Town of Paradise Wert Soil Map. 
iv.  Any deficiencies identified in the evaluator report upon completion of an on-site system evaluation must be corrected prior to issuance of a permit. 
v.  The on-site system must receive a hydraulic load test rating that is run, as part of the on-site system evaluation, of satisfactory, good or excellent. 
2.  Seven Year Interval. To receive a seven year evaluation interval and operation permit, the property and on-site system must meet the following criteria: 
i.  Any deficiencies identified in the evaluator report upon completion of an on-site system evaluation must be corrected prior to issuance of a permit. 
ii.  The on-site system must receive a hydraulic load test rating that is run, as part of the on-site system evaluation, of satisfactory, good or excellent. 
3.  Two Year Interval. A two year evaluation interval and operation permit will be issued to onsite systems that fall under the following criteria: 
i.  An on-site system that receives a hydraulic load test rating that is run, as part of the on-site system evaluation, of marginal or poor. 
ii.  Any deficiencies identified in the evaluator report upon completion of an on-site system evaluation must be corrected prior to issuance of a permit. 
4.  The town shall send notices by regular mail to the property owners specifying the due date by which their on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be evaluated. 
b.  Alternative and Large System Evaluations. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. Each alternative or large on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system within the town limits shall be periodically evaluated as determined by the town. The time interval between evaluations for each system shall be established by the town based on its approximated volume of wastewater processed and the town's most current septic system evaluation report(s) concerning the observed performance of the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system. The town shall, from time to time, send notices by regular mail to the property owners specifying the due date by which their on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system shall be evaluated. 
c.  Pretreatment Systems with Monitoring Programs. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the requirements of this section. Pretreatment systems with assigned monitoring programs per subsection 1.4.A. of the Town of Paradise Manual for the On-site Treatment of Wastewater, as revised January 1, 2000, shall be evaluated per the schedule outlined in subsection 1.4.D of the On-site Manual. 
2.  The on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system evaluation shall be accomplished by a qualified person possessing the authority as confirmed by Chapter 5.14 of this code. 
3.  The town shall issue an operating permit renewal as provided in this chapter upon notification by the evaluator that the system serving the subject property is in compliance with this chapter and has no observed operating deficiencies. 
4.  The operating permit renewal shall not be issued until all operating deficiencies of the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system have been corrected as directed by the on-site sanitary official. 
C.  Evaluation of the Observed Operating Performance of On-Site Wastewater Treatment and Disposal Systems at the Time of Building Permit Application Submittal. 
1.  No person shall obtain town approval of a building permit application requiring a plan check for any property in the town upon which a septic tank and disposal drainfield, also known as an on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system, has been constructed and/or is operating without first providing a septic system evaluation report to the town. Such septic system evaluation report shall be completed by a town-licensed evaluator. The septic system evaluation report shall provide evidence that the observed operational performance of the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system is in substantial compliance with town regulations including Section 13.04.230. 
2.  As used in this section, evidence of substantial compliance shall be a current on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system evaluation performed by a qualified person possessing such authority as confirmed by Chapter 5.14 of this code. Evidence of a current on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system evaluation shall be a current operating permit. 
3.  The town shall grant on-site sanitation approval for a building permit when any of the following have been completed: 
a.  The on-site wastewater system serving the subject property has been evaluated in accordance with the provisions of this code and the on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system has no observed operational deficiencies; 
b.  The on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system serving the subject property has been evaluated in accordance with the provisions of this code and the observed operating deficiencies have been corrected as directed by the town on-site sanitary official and the system is operational; 
c.  The on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system serving the subject property has been evaluated in accordance with the provisions of this code and the observed operating deficiencies are to be corrected in accordance with a repair or alteration construction permit issued by the on-site sanitary official. 
(Ord. No. 466, § 1, 7-24-2007; Ord. 343 §§ 2, 3, 2000; Ord. 254 § 2, 1995: Ord. 220 § 1, 1993)  
13.04.091 - Evaluation appeals. 
A.  All decisions of the on-site sanitary official relating to septic system evaluations may be appealed by the owner of the system to the public works director/town engineer. No other person shall have a right to file an appeal under this provision. 
B.  If the appellant disagrees with the decision of the public works director/town engineer relating to the evaluation, he or she may, within seven days, appeal the decision to the town manager. In the event the appellant disagrees with the decision of the town manager, he or she may file an appeal to the town council and have the matter heard by the council at their next regularly scheduled meeting. An appeal to the town council shall be accompanied by an appeal fee authorized by resolution of the town council. 
(Ord. 343 § 4, 2000)  
13.04.095 - Violations an infraction. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation or partnership violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 343 § 5, 2000: Ord. 254 §3, 1995: Ord. 220 §2, 1993)  
Article II - NEW SYSTEMS ON NEW PARCELS 
 
13.04.110 - Lot area requirements. 
A.  When designing new parcels, the establishment and use of advanced treatment systems and community wastewater systems may be approved by the on-site sanitary official. 
B.  The on-site sanitary official and the state regional water quality control board are authorized to formulate guidelines for advanced treatment systems and community wastewater systems. Advanced treatment systems and community wastewater systems shall be located, designed and installed under the direction of a registered civil engineer, registered engineering geologist or registered environmental health specialist and so certified in a manner acceptable to the on-site sanitary official. 
C.  When designing new parcels that will not be using a community wastewater system, the minimum required net lot areas shall be sized according to Table 13.04.110 of this section. "Net lot area" means that portion of a parcel not including the following areas: 
1.  Private and public easements for access or roadway purposes; 
2.  Areas within the minimum separation distances shown in Table 13.04.120 of this section except required setbacks for buildings and streets; 
3.  Areas with a slope in excess of thirty (30) percent; 
4.  Areas where the percolation rate is in excess of one hundred twenty (120) minutes per inch or thirty (30) minutes per inch where pavement is proposed; 
5.  Areas with less than seven (7) feet of soil above impervious stratum or winter groundwater, unless alternative or advanced treatment sewage disposal systems are approved by the on-site sanitary official; 
6.  Easements dedicated or reserved for sewage disposal purposes shall be established in a document recorded in the recorder's office of the county. Such recorded documents shall apply only to repairs and to existing lots of record on the effective date of the regulations codified in this chapter. 
D.  Each new parcel not served by a community wastewater system shall provide the minimum net lot area for sewage disposal found in Table 13.04.110 of this section. Areas shown in Table 13.04.110, up to and including two (2) acres, are net lot areas for sewage disposal, as defined in Section 13.04.020. Areas in Table 13.04.110 in excess of two (2) acres are minimum gross parcel sizes; provided, however, that such gross parcels contain not less than two (2) acres of net lot area as defined in subsection C of this section. 
E.  Each new parcel to be served by a community wastewater system shall be sized using gross acreage criteria as established in Section 6.2.4 of the Town of Paradise Manual for the Onsite Treatment of Wastewater. Gross acreage sizing includes all parcels that are participant with the community wastewater system. Owners of parcels served by a community wastewater system shall enter into an agreement with each other or the operator of the system which shall be in a form approved by the town. The agreement shall set forth the rights and obligations concerning the establishment, operation and maintenance of the community wastewater system. 
F.  Required net lot areas shall be based on a wastewater generation rate of three hundred (300) gallons per day ("gpd"). When designing land divisions of real property that entail existing land uses, minimum required net lot areas as set forth in Table 13.04.110 of this chapter shall be adjusted proportionately using the following wastewater generation rates: 
Type of Development 
(each living unit) 	Wastewater Generation Rate 

(gallons per day) 
One bedroom 	150 
Two bedroom 	225 
Three bedroom 	300 
Each additional bedroom, add 	75 
Commercial, industrial, institutional 	Wastewater generation rate to be determined by the on-site sanitary official based on water use records or published waste-water generation data. (In UPC, EPA Manual or Manual of Septic Tank Practices.) 
 
G.  An "impervious stratum" is a layer or lens of fine-grained soil, rock, cemented material or similar soil structure in which the percolation rate exceeds one hundred twenty (120) minutes per inch or in which twelve (12) inches of water depth will not seep completely away in a twenty-four-hour period. 
H.  Areas with less than two (2) feet of soil, slopes in excess of thirty (30) percent, or percolation values in excess of one hundred twenty (120) minutes per inch are deemed unsuitable for meeting net lot area requirements. 
I.  In addition to the other requirements of these standards, sewage disposal areas must be of such a configuration that it is practicable to use them based upon standard practices for the installation of on-site wastewater treatment and disposal systems. 
J.  Net lot area necessary to accommodate the sewage flow from a private or multifamily residence(s) shall be based upon the number of bedrooms or other potential sleeping quarters in the residence, and upon the average percolation rate in the proposed sewage disposal area. 
TABLE 13.04.110 
MINIMUM NET LOT AREAS BASED ON WASTEWATER GENERATION RATE OF 300 GALLONS PER DAY 
Slope 	Perc Value 
(min./in.) 	Average Soil Depth in Feet Above Winter Groundwater or Impervious Stratum 
		Conventional Systems 	Advanced Treatment Systems 
		7 or Greater 
(sq. ft.) 	7 to 6 
(sq. ft.) 	6 to 5 
(sq. ft.) 	5 to 4 
(sq. ft.) 	4 to 3 
(sq. ft.) 	3 to 2 
(acres) 
0 to 10% 	0—10 	14,520 	20,520 	25,520 	35,520 	80,860 	5 
	11—20 	16,520 	22,520 	27,520 	37,520 	82,860 	5 
	21—40 	18,520 	24,520 	29,520 	39,520 	84,860 	5 
	41—60 	20,520 	24,520 	31,520 	41,520 	86,860 	5 
	61—80 	31,520 	34,520 	41,520 	51,520 	2.00 ac. 	5 
	81—100 	41,520 	44,520 	51,520 	61,520 	2.25 ac. 	5 
	101—120 	61,520 	64,520 	71,520 	81,520 	2.75 ac. 	5 
Over 10% 

to 20% 	0—10 	16,520 	30,520 	38,520 	53,520 	2.25 ac. 	5 
	11—20 	18,520 	32,520 	40,520 	55,520 	2.50 ac. 	5 
	21—40 	20,520 	34,520 	42,520 	57,520 	2.50 ac. 	5 
	41—60 	27,520 	36,520 	44,520 	59,520 	2.75 ac. 	5 
	61—80 	39,520 	46,520 	54,520 	69,520 	2.75 ac. 	5 
	81—100 	49,520 	56,520 	64,520 	79,520 	3.00 ac. 	5 
	101—120 	69,520 	76,520 	84,520 	99,520 	3.50 ac. 	5 
Over 20% 

to 30% 	0—10 	20,520 	40,520 	50,520 	74,080 	3.50 ac. 	10 
	11—20 	22,520 	42,520 	52,520 	76,080 	3.50 ac. 	10 
	21—40 	24,520 	44,520 	54,520 	78,080 	3.75 ac. 	10 
	41—60 	26,520 	46,520 	56,520 	80,080 	3.75 ac. 	10 
	61—80 	46,520 	56,520 	66,520 	90,080 	4.00 ac. 	10 
	81—100 	56,520 	66,520 	76,520 	100,080 	4.25 ac. 	10 
	101—120 	76,520 	86,520 	2.25 ac. 	2.75 ac. 	4.75 ac. 	10 
 
(Ord. No. 559, § 5, 3-8-2016; Ord. No. 512, § 3, 2-8-2011; Ord. No. 429, § 4, 11-9-2004; Ord. 228 §3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.112 - Bedrooms. 
The sizing of sewage disposal system is related in the provisions as set forth in Section 13.04.110, including Table 13.04.110 to the number of bedrooms in a residential use. 
A.  For purposes of uniform application of sanitation requirements, a "bedroom" shall be defined as any of the following: 
1.  Any room proposed as a bedroom and meeting Uniform Building Code (UBC) standards; 
2.  Any room enclosed on all sides, except for doorways, that is large enough to be legally used for sleeping purposes; and 
a.  Subject room is open to a hall off of which is a bath, or 
b.  The room is open to a bath (private or shared); 
3.  A loft with or without an adjoining bathroom: 
a.  For the purpose of application, a "loft" is defined as the uppermost floor area enclosed on three sides and suitable for human habitation. 
B.  A room shall not be defined as a "bedroom" for any of the following: 
1.  Any room that has sufficient improvements or plumbing such that render the room impractical for use as a bedroom. This would include bathrooms, kitchens, laundry rooms, etc.; 
2.  Any room with an opening four feet wide or larger but without a solid door which opens onto the main entry way or a main activity area. Typically such a room includes a den, library or special use room; 
3.  When determining whether or not a particular room is a "bedroom," the on-site sanitary official, and the town manager on appeal, may take into consideration the following features which, in various combinations (generally having only one feature does not preclude use as a bedroom), may make it unlikely that a room will be used as a bedroom: 
a.  Use of a half wall or railing along at least one side of the room, 
b.  A conversation pit which encumbers the floor area, 
c.  Presence of a fuel-burning water heater or fireplace in a room designated as the family room, game room or recreation room, 
d.  Located in a main activity area of the dwelling, 
e.  Wet bar in family, game or recreation room, 
f.  Built-in bookcases, file cabinets, desk, etc. 
C.  1.  Additionally, the following overall house size (gross floor area excepting garage space) shall apply to the design of sanitation systems: 
a.  Floor area greater than one thousand five hundred square feet but less than two thousand two hundred one square feet shall have the sanitation system designed for a minimum two-bedroom equivalent. 
b.  Floor area greater than two thousand two hundred square feet, but less than two thousand nine hundred one square feet shall have the sanitation system designed for a minimum three-bedroom equivalent. 
c.  Floor area greater than two thousand nine hundred square feet shall have the sanitation system designed for a minimum four-bedroom equivalent. 
2.  Square footage requirements are a minimum. Actual identified bedrooms shall be counted to determine system design if yielding more than the minimum requirements. 
D.  Determination of bedrooms and sewage disposal system size shall be made by the on-site sanitary official. In the event of a dispute on the number of bedrooms determined for a specific project, the applicant may appeal the determination to the town manager. Appeals should be in writing, stating the facts and point of dispute. The town manager will issue a written resolution of the dispute. 
(Ord. No. 559, § 6, 3-8-2016; Ord. 228 §3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.120 - Sewage disposal system location. 
A.  Buildings Separately Owned. No permit shall be issued for a sewage disposal system where the buildings it is to serve are under different ownership, nor for buildings proposed to go under separate ownership. When the development is to utilize a sewage disposal system(s) under common ownership, and an association of property owners is formed, and which is responsible for maintenance and repair of the sewage disposal system(s) according to the written articles of the association, then the on-site sanitary official may grant an exception to this section. 
B.  The location and placement of sewage disposal systems shall be established in accordance with the current approved version of the Town of Paradise Manual for the Onsite Treatment of Wastewater, Chapter 3, Table 3.1, Required Setbacks. 
(Ord. No. 522, § 1, 9-6-2011; Ord. No. 429, § 5, 11-9-2004; Ord. No. 380, § 1, 2002; Ord. 343, § 6, 2000; Ord. 219, § 2(part), 1992)  
Article III - NEW OR EXISTING SYSTEMS ON EXISTING LOTS 
 
13.04.200 - Applicability requirements of the on-site manual. 
The installation of new sewage disposal systems upon existing parcels and/or the alteration of existing sewage disposal systems located upon existing parcels shall be subject to all applicable provisions and regulations established within the town adopted on-site manual and this chapter. 
(Ord. 219, § 2(part), 1992)  
13.04.220 - Operation, repair or modification of existing disposal system. 
A.  Repairs. 
1.  No person shall alter, repair, relocate, add to or replace any existing sewage disposal system without first securing a construction permit from the on-site sanitary official. 
2.  With respect to the repair of existing sewage disposal systems, the on-site sanitary official may allow lesser distances as contained in Table 13.04.120 as they shall determine are necessary to avoid undue hardship, but that will accomplish the general purposes and intent of this chapter. 
3.  No installation is permitted under this subsection in areas not owned or controlled by the property owner, unless the area is dedicated for sewage disposal purposes, in a document recorded in the recorder's office of the county. 
B.  Operating Permit Required. 
1.  Before operating any private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written operating permit therefor signed by the on-site sanitary official. The application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the town. 
2.  Operating permits shall be issued to each owner of a private wastewater disposal system by the on-site sanitary official. 
3.  Each owner of a private wastewater disposal system shall pay fees to the town as adopted by resolution of the town council. All fees collected under this section shall be used for the following purposes: 
a.  Activities of the on-site wastewater zone; 
b.  Processing and record keeping; 
c.  Stream and subsurface water monitoring; 
d.  Investigations; 
e.  Informational programs concerning on-site disposal systems. 
4.  The following process shall be followed for the collection of the annual sewage disposal operating permit fee: 
No later than July 15th, of each year, the Finance Director shall submit an itemized written report, showing all the parcels and owners thereof who are required to pay the Town's annual Sewage Disposal Operating Permit fee. Such report shall refer to each separate lot or parcel of land by description sufficiently reasonable to identify the same, together with the fees against it, which shall include charges sufficient to meet the administrative costs of the program. 
A certified copy of the report shall be filed with the County Auditor on or before August 10th of each year for the entry of such assessment fees on the County Tax roll. The Town shall also prepare an electronic filing of such fees from the annual Wastewater Operating Permit fee report for inclusion on the next immediate tax roll. 
The assessment amount shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary, municipal taxes. If delinquent, the assessment amount shall be subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale provided for ordinary municipal taxes. 
If a holder of an operating permit fails to pay any fee adopted pursuant to this subsection within five days after the due date, the town shall the right to record a lien against the real property being served by the private wastewater disposal system. In addition, the town shall have the right to file a lawsuit against the owner of the operating permit to collect any unpaid fees. 
C.  Renewal of Operating Permits. Except as hereinafter provided, each operating permit shall be subject to renewal every time the septic tank is pumped, may be renewed every time the on-site wastewater disposal system is inspected by personnel certified by the town, shall be renewed by the new owner upon transfer of title of the lot or parcel to which the permit is applicable, and shall be renewed by the owner upon a change of occupants of business, commercial or industrial property. The town may require more frequent renewals of operating permits with respect to special wastewater disposal systems or to systems serving residences identified as having high rates of water use, or multifamily, business, commercial or industrial property which may require more frequent monitoring of special monitoring devices. 
D.  Criteria of Issuance and Renewal of Operating Permits. No operating permit shall be issued or renewed with respect to a wastewater disposal system if the discharge from the system does not meet the applicable policies, regulatory provisions and standards established in the on-site manual. 
(Ord. 343, § 7, 2000; Ord. 228, §§ 3(part), 4, 1993: Ord. 219, § 2(part), 1992; Ord. No. 452, § 1, 6-27-06)  
13.04.230 - Existing disposal systems—Operating standards. 
Existing on-site wastewater treatment and disposal system installations observed to be operating without adverse impact to public health and safety and in accordance with the provisions of the original permit relating to the installation thereof shall be sanctioned for continued use and maintenance. 
(Ord. 254, § 4, 1995; Ord. 219, § 2(part), 1992)  
Article IV - VARIANCES AND EXEMPTIONS 
 
13.04.310 - Reserved.  
13.04.312 - Reserved.  
13.04.314 - Reserved.  
13.04.316 - Reserved.  
13.04.320 - Exemption. 
If a building or a portion thereof is destroyed by fire or other natural disaster, that building(s) will be exempt from the requirements of this chapter, provided the building is not expanded beyond its original foundation and/or the occupancy of the building does not change. 
(Ord. 294, § 1(part), 1997; Ord. 219, § 2(part), 1992)  
Article V - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE—FAILED SYSTEMS AND CORRECTIVE PROCEDURES 
 
13.04.400 - Unlawful systems. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to construct, maintain or use any sewage disposal system which results in any of the following: 
1.  Sewage overflowing any lands whatever; 
2.  Sewage emptying, flowing, seeping or draining into any stream, spring, river, lake or other waters within the town; 
3.  Sewage being accessible to rodents, insects or humans. 
B.  It is provided, however, that when sewage is treated and disposed of in such manner that it does not constitute a hazard to the public health or does not create a nuisance, and that adequate requirements for such disposal are set by the Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board pursuant to Division 7, Department 4, Article 2 of the State Water Code, then the disposal shall be considered to be lawful. 
(Ord. 219, § 2(part), 1992)  
13.04.410 - Discharge of hazardous or deleterious materials to on-site wastewater disposal systems. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to discharge to an on-site wastewater disposal system any hazardous or deleterious material unless prior authorization to do so has been granted by the on-site sanitary official. Authorization may only be granted where such discharge would not cause adverse impacts, as defined via authority vested with the on-site sanitary official. 
B.  Discharge of septic tank sludge containing hazardous or deleterious material(s) shall be to a site or facility approved by the County of Butte for disposal of such contaminated sludge. 
(Ord. 219, §2 (part), 1992; Ord. 228, §§ 3(part), 4, 1993; Ord. No. 429, § 7, 11-9-2004)  
13.04.420 - Correction of unlawful systems—Procedure. 
A.  Authority. Any wastewater disposal system which discharges in violation of the town's standards as set forth in this chapter and the on-site manual, for whatever reason, shall be deemed an unlawful or failed system and will be subject to the corrective, abatement and enforcement procedures provided for herein. 
B.  Responsibility for Repair. The owner of the lot or parcel upon which there exists a failed wastewater disposal system shall be responsible for its repair, reconstruction or replacement. The owner may apply to the town for financial assistance in effecting any repairs, reconstruction or replacement deemed necessary by the on-site sanitary official for the lawful operation of that owner's wastewater disposal system, pursuant to subsection G of Section 13.04.430. Some failed wastewater disposal systems will be inherently incapable of repair, reconstruction or replacement to meet town standards on the lot or parcel of land on which is located the structure served by such system due to lack of space, inadequate ground conditions, or other reasons. Under these circumstances, lands or easements within a reasonable distance from such failed system may be secured for the purpose of construction of private wastewater disposal systems. Any such system so constructed shall remain the full responsibility of the owner for operation and maintenance. 
C.  Corrective Notice. If the town's on-site sanitary official determines that a wastewater disposal system is discharging in violation of the town's standards, a written correction notice shall be mailed by the town to the owner at the address shown on the application for an operating permit, or as reflected in the records of the wastewater management zone. The notice shall describe the violation and shall state that the operating permit pertaining to such system will be withdrawn on a date certain, depending on the severity of the violation, unless prior to that time the owner proves to the satisfaction of the on-site sanitary official any of the following: 
1.  That the system is not an unlawful system as defined in Sections 13.04.400 and 13.04.420; 
2.  That adequate measures are in process to correct the violation, and that the violation will in fact be corrected in full within the time prescribed in the mailed corrective notice. 
Time periods prescribed in the mailed corrective notice to complete repairs of an on-site system are based on two conditions of failure as follows: 
1.  On-site systems illustrating surfacing effluent, which is an immediate threat to public health and safety, shall be required to be pumped to mitigate the surfacing effluent. The mailed corrective notice shall prescribe that repairs be completed within thirty days from the date of mailing the corrective notice. The corrective notice shall set a date certain of thirty-one days from the date of mailing the corrective notice that the operating permit will be withdrawn if repairs are not completed within thirty days. 
2.  On-site systems having failures or violations of the town's standards that are not an immediate threat to public health and safety, as determined by the on-site sanitary official, shall have up to ninety days to complete repairs. The mailed corrective notice shall prescribe that repairs be completed within ninety days from the date of mailing the corrective notice. The corrective notice shall set a date certain of ninety-one days from the date of mailing the corrective notice, that the operating permit will be withdrawn if repairs are not completed in the prescribed ninety day period. 
3.  If, after a corrective notice is given and an operating system is brought into compliance by receiving an excellent, good or satisfactory rating, the operating system shall be granted either a seven or twelve year evaluation interval, as defined by the criteria in Section 3.1.1. 
(Ord. 343 § 8, 2000: Ord. 228 §3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.430 - Abatement. 
A.  Mailing of Notice to Abate. When the on-site sanitary official determines that an unlawful or failed wastewater disposal system constitutes a nuisance, he shall direct that a notice be sent by certified mail to the owner of the property at the address shown on the application for an operating permit, or as reflected in the records of the wastewater management zone. The notice shall describe the conditions that constitute the nuisance and shall order abatement of that nuisance within thirty days after the date of mailing of the notice. 
1.  The fact that the owner of the property upon which the nuisance exists, or other person(s) residing on that property, does not receive mailed notice provided for herein does not affect the validity of any subsequent proceedings in abatement. 
B.  Posting of Notice to Abate. In addition to the mailed notice under subsection A of this section, the town shall post conspicuously at least one copy of the notice to abate upon the property where the nuisance exists. 
C.  Effect of Failure to Abate. If the nuisance is not abated within the period specified in the notice to abate, the on-site sanitary official shall proceed with abatement. The on-site sanitary official shall thereupon give a second notice to abate, identified as such, in the same manner set forth in subsection A of this section. The second notice shall direct the owner of the property to appear before the town council at a stated time and place to show cause why the nuisance should not be ordered abated by the town council. 
D.  Hearing. At the time fixed in the notice, the town council shall hear the testimony of all competent persons and consider all relevant evidence concerning the condition constituting the nuisance, including but not limited to the estimated cost of abatement, the degree of hazard posed by the condition, and any efforts made to date to correct the condition. At the conclusion of the hearing, the town council shall, by resolution, declare its findings. If, in its discretion, the town council determines that abatement is warranted, it may declare the condition to be a nuisance and direct the property owner to abate it within thirty days after the date of posting on the premises a notice of the adoption of the resolution declaring the nuisance. 
E.  Extension of Time. The town council may grant an extension of time to abate the nuisance if, in its opinion, good cause exists for such an extension. 
F.  Abatement by Town. If the property owner fails to abate the nuisance within the time set forth in the resolution declaring same, the town may proceed to abate the nuisance as provided for in this section. 
1.  Alternatively, at any time following receipt of a notice to abate under this section, the property owner upon which the nuisance exists may request that the town abate the nuisance pursuant to Section 6950 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code, and may enter into an agreement with the town for the abatement procedures. Following receipt of such a request, the town council may authorize the execution of such an agreement and direct the abatement of the nuisance as provided therein and, if applicable, in accordance with subsection G below. 
G.  Voluntary Abatement by Town. In the event that the owner of a lot upon which a failed system exists does not possess obtainable finances to effect the repair, reconstruction or replacement of the failed disposal system, the property owner may voluntarily authorize the town to abate the nuisance. Repayment of the costs incurred by the town to abate the nuisance shall be established either by a voluntary lien recorded and affecting the real property of the owner, or by a repayment schedule formally executed between the property owner and the town. 
H.  Procedures for Town Abatement. Following a determination that the person has failed to abate the nuisance as prescribed, the town council shall by resolution order the town manager to abate the nuisance. The town manager may direct any town employee, contracting agent, or other representative to enter upon private property for the purpose of abating the public nuisance. 
I.  Record of Expenses—Hearing—Assessment as Lien. The town manager shall keep an account of the costs of abatement and shall render an itemized written report to the town council showing such costs. The report shall be posted on the property on which the nuisance exists for at least three days, and a copy mailed to the property owner at least ten days, prior to consideration of the report by the town council. The report shall set forth the time and place when and where the report will be considered by the town council and shall state that objections or protests to the report shall be heard at that time. 
1.  At the time fixed for consideration of the report, the town council shall consider it and all protests or objections raised at the hearing by or on behalf of the person assessed for abatement costs. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the town council shall either adopt by resolution the report as submitted, or make such modification as it deems necessary, which shall be incorporated into the resolution adopting the report. 
2.  If the property owner does not pay the costs of abating the nuisance within five working days after the town council issues its resolution adopting the report of abatement costs, those costs shall become a special assessment against the real property upon which the nuisance was abated and a personal liability of the owner of such property. Such lien shall attach upon recordation of a certified copy of the resolution adopting the abatement costs in the office of the county recorder. Any recording or other fees of the county recorder shall be added to the amount of the total special nuisance abatement assessment provided for herein. 
J.  Collection of Assessed Costs. A certified copy of the confirmed report shall be given to the county assessor and tax collector, who shall add the amount of the assessment to the net regular tax bill levied against the property. A certified copy shall also be given to the county auditor who shall enter the assessment on the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary property taxes. All laws relating to the levy, collection and enforcement of county taxes shall apply to such special assessment. The town council may enforce the personal liability of the owner by directing counsel to file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to collect the costs of abatement. 
K.  Procedure in Case of Emergency. When, in the opinion of the on-site sanitary official, the conditions which constitute the nuisance pose an immediate threat to the public peace, health or safety, the town council may order the nuisance abated immediately by adopting a resolution by a four-fifths vote. Any abatement conducted under this chapter shall conform with the procedures set forth in the current Uniform Administrative Code. 
(Ord. 228 §3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
Article VI - ABANDONMENT 
 
13.04.510 - Abandonment restrictions. 
A.  Every cesspool, septic tank and seepage pit which has been abandoned or has been discontinued otherwise from further use or to which no waste or soil pipe from a plumbing fixture is connected, shall have the sewage removed therefrom in a manner acceptable to the on-site sanitary official and shall be sufficiently uncovered to allow an examination of structural integrity and a determination of appropriate means of processing. 
B.  Processing of abandoned septic tanks and cesspools shall depend upon materials of construction and structural integrity at the time of abandonment: 
1.  Systems constructed entirely of concrete, including compartment covers, which are confirmed to be structurally sound by the on-site sanitary official, may be left in place without further action. Such systems which are structurally sound except for the top or cover may be processed in this manner, provided a new top or cover, cast in concrete, is added prior to final abandonment. 
2.  Systems constructed of fiberglass may be left in place, provided they are covered with a layer of concrete of not less than four inches nominal thickness, and the slab shall not extend one foot beyond outside wall of the tank. 
3.  All other systems, including those made of wood, steel and concrete or fiberglass not processed as provided in subsection B of this section, shall be completely filled with earth, sand, gravel, concrete or other approved material as follows: 
a.  The top of the septic tank shall be demolished before filling and the filling shall not extend above the top of the vertical portions of the side walls or above the level of any outlet pipe until inspection has been called and the fill material has been inspected. After the inspection, the cesspool, septic tank or seepage pit shall be filled to the level of the top of the ground. 
4.  If the abandoned tank, etc., is going to be under a structural stem wall or pier and soil is used for backfill, the soil shall be compacted as determined by the building official. 
5.  Nothing contained in this section prevents the on-site sanitary official from requiring additional or other processing requirements in the furtherance of health and safety. 
(Ord. 228 §3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
Article VII - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
 
13.04.610 - Enforcement authority. 
It shall be the duty of the on-site sanitary official to enforce the provisions of this chapter and the on-site sanitary official, or his or her duly authorized representative, is empowered to enter at any reasonable hour any premises necessary in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(Ord. 228 §3(part), 1993; Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.620 - Nonliability of town. 
This chapter shall not be construed as imposing upon the town or the county any liability or responsibility for damage resulting from the defective construction of any sanitary disposal system, as provided in this chapter; nor shall the town or any official, employee or any contract agency, its employees, agents or servants thereof be held as assuming any such liability or responsibility by reason of standards, requirements or inspection authorized thereunder. 
(Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
13.04.630 - Privies. 
Pit or vault privies are prohibited within the town. 
(Ord. 219 §2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 13.08 - WATER WELLS 
 
13.08.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health of the residents of the town by regulating the placement of water wells a safe and sanitary distance from waste disposal systems within the town. 
(Ord. 89 §1, 1983)  
13.08.020 - Definitions. 
The following terms as used in this chapter are, for the purpose of this chapter, defined as set forth in this section: 
A.  "County health officer" means the legally designated health authority of the county or his/her authorized representative. 
B.  "Open space easement" means an area of land beyond required setbacks within which no septage system, leach field, cesspool or seepage pit can be installed or used. 
C.  "Water well" means a well used to supply water for residential or commercial needs of an individual or business, including community wells used by any irrigation or water district. 
(Ord. 89 §2, 1983)  
13.08.030 - Placement procedure. 
After the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no person shall dig, drill, bore or drive or cause to be dug, drilled, bored or driven, any water well within one hundred feet of any property line without written approval of the county health officer. No approval shall be given for placement of any water well within one hundred feet of a property line unless an open space easement is granted by the affected adjacent property and the easement is recorded with the county recorder's office. No such easement shall be required on affected portions of adjacent properties which could not utilize individual sewage disposal because of topography, soil conditions or other factors. In addition, no open space easement is required for portions of the one hundred foot water well setback within any required setback on adjacent parcels. 
(Ord. 89 §4, 1983)  
13.08.040 - Appeals. 
Any person affected by the decision of the county health officer may appeal in writing the decision to the town council within fifteen calendar days of the decision. The town clerk shall set a time and place for the appeal hearing and a notice shall be given to the person appealing at least ten days prior to the hearing. The decision of the council is final and binding. 
(Ord. 89 §5, 1983)  
13.08.050 - Chapter 8.36 unimpaired. 
The passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter does not abrogate nor annul the application of Chapter 8.36. 
(Ord. 89 §3, 1983)  
13.08.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, on conviction, be guilty of an infraction punishable by: 
A.  A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation; 
B.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation within one year; 
C.  A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars for each additional violation within one year. 
(Ord. 89 §6, 1983)  
Chapter 13.12 - OVERHEAD UTILITY REMOVAL AND UNDERGROUND INSTALLATION 
 
13.12.010 - Definitions. 
Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
B.  "Person" means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees. 
C.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the town within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.12.030 of this chapter. 
E.  "Utility" includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.020 - Public hearing by council. 
The town council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, convenience, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the town and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The town clerk shall notify all affected property owners, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the town council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.030 - Council may designate underground utility districts by resolution. 
If, after any such public hearing the town council finds that the public necessity, convenience, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the town council may, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.040 - Unlawful acts. 
Whenever the town council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.12.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution. However, as an exception, such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant) of property prior to the performance (by such owner or occupant) of the underground work necessary to enable such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.12.050, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.041 - Exception, emergency or unusual circumstances. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the town council in order to provide emergency service. The town engineer may grant special permission, on such terms as he/she may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.042 - Other exceptions. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.12.030 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the town engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electrical energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.050 - Notice to property owners and utility companies. 
Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.12.030, the town clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The town clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their promises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
Notification by the town clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.12.030, together with a copy of the ordinance codified in this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.060 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.12.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.061 - Responsibility of owners, operators, lessees. 
Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.12.060 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.062 - Enforcement. 
If the responsibility imposed by Section 13.12.061 is not accomplished with the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.12.030, the town engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice. 
A.  The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as such owner's name appears, and must be addressed to such owner's last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, Town of Paradise. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight hours after mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of such premises, the town engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. 
B.  The notice given by the town engineer to provide the require underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if such work is not completed within thirty days after receipt of such notice, the town engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefited and become a lien upon such property. 
C.  If upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the town engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the town engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the town engineer, he shall file a written report with the town council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The town council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which such time shall not be less than ten days thereafter. 
D.  The town engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the town council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. 
E.  Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the town council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment. 
F.  If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the town council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the town engineer, and the town engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of such properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessments shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.070 - Responsibility of town. 
Town shall remove at its own expense all town-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 13.12.030. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.080 - Extension of time. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 13.12.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
13.12.090 - Violation—Penalty. 
It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 156 (part), 1986)  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION  
Chapter 15.01 - FACTS AND FINDINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.01, § 15.01.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.01 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.01 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.01.010 - Facts and findings. 
A.  Changes or Modifications. Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sections 17958.5, 17958.7 and 18941.5, the town of Paradise adopts and amends the 2016 California Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 2) based on the 2015 International Building Code (ICC); the 2016 California Residential Code (Title 24, Part 2.5) based on the 2015 International Residential Code (ICC); the 2016 California Electrical Code (Title 24, Part 3) based on the 2014 National Electrical Code (NFPA); the 2016 California Mechanical Code (Title 24, Part 4) based on the 2015 Uniform Mechanical Code (IAPMO); the 2016 California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5) based on the 2015 Uniform Plumbing Code (IAPMO); the 2016 California Fire Code (Title 24, Part 9) based on the 2015 International Fire Code (IFC); the 2016 California Administrative Code (Title 24, Part 1); the 2016 California Energy Code (Title 24, Part 6); the 2016 California Historical Building Code (Title 24, Part 8); the 2016 California Existing Building Code (Chapter 10; Title 24, Part 10); the 2016 California Green Building Standards Code (Cal Green, Title 24, Part 11) and the 2016 California Referenced Standards Code (Title 24, Part 12). 
NOTE: The state of California officially adopted the 2016 California Administrative, Building, Residential, Electrical, Mechanical, Plumbing, Energy, Historical, Fire, Existing Building, Green Building Standards, and Referenced Standards Codes in July of [2016], and they become mandatory at the local level effective January 1, 2017. 
B.  Findings. Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Sections 17958.5, 17958.7 and 18941.5, the town of Paradise has determined and finds the attached amendments, additions and/or modifications are needed and are reasonably necessary because of its local climatic, geologic and topographical conditions. 
C.  Local Conditions. Local conditions have an adverse effect on the potential for life and property loss, making necessary changes and modifications to the 2016 California Building Standards Code in order to establish and maintain an environment which will provide the community a desirable level of protection. 
1.  Climatic Conditions. 
1A.  On average the town of Paradise has an annual rainfall of fifty-two (52) to fifty-four (54) inches of rain. However, in the summer months there is little, if any, measurable precipitation. Winter months can be characterized by heavy rains and periodic heavy snowfalls with accumulations above the 1,800-foot level. During the year the temperatures range from the mid 20s to low 100s degrees in the summer months with light to gusty westerly winds. These drying winds, mixed with the density of vegetation, which is dominant throughout the town, creates a hazardous fuel condition that can have severe consequences. 
2.  Geographical and Topographical Conditions. 
2A.  The town of Paradise is located within Butte County in Northern California. It is approximately one hundred (100) miles north of Sacramento and within fifteen (15) miles east from the urban community of Chico. The town of Paradise population is approximately twenty-six thousand plus (26,000+) and is the second largest community in Butte County. The town encompasses 18.6 square miles and was incorporated in 1979. Prior to incorporation, the town was a county mountain community with older construction of light commercial and industrial with a predominant residential character. 
2B.  The town of Paradise is located one thousand four hundred (1,400) to two thousand two hundred feet (2,200) above sea level and is bordered by rugged canyons, creating somewhat of a triangular shaped area in which the town is situated. 
2C.  This environment has natural vegetative growth that is dense, both in the canyon areas and throughout the town, which presents a challenge and difficulty in fighting and controlling the spread of wildfires. The town of Paradise has been identified as a very high fire hazard severity zone pursuant to Government Code Sections 51178.5 and 51179, which is based upon the climatic, topographic and geologic conditions combined with the dense vegetation throughout the town. 
2D.  The topography of the town presents problems in delivery of emergency services, including fire protection. Hilly terrain with narrow, winding roads with little circulation, limited escape routes, and limited ingress and egress to access the town prevents rapid access and orderly evacuations. There are many miles of both public streets and private roads, many of which were built years ago, and many of the private roads are substandard in design and access capability due to topography. 
2E.  Combined with these features, all weather surfaces based upon the soil and topographic conditions may not be able to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and reduced accessibility to emergency response personnel. These conditions increase the likelihood of difficulty with approach angles, steep slopes and grades and the ability for emergency response personnel to be effective. 
D.  Conclusion. Local climatic, geologic, and topographic conditions impact the built environment and necessitate amendments to the California Building Standards Code. Therefore, it is found to be reasonably necessary that the State Building Standards Codes be changed or modified to mitigate the effects of the above conditions by the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title. Furthermore, California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.7 requires that the modifications or change be expressly marked and identified as to each finding to which it refers. Therefore, the town of Paradise finds that Exhibit "A" [below] provides the code sections that have been modified pursuant to the ordinance that are building standards as defined in the Health and Safety Code Section 18909 and the associated referenced conditions or modifications are due to local climatic, geologic and topographical considerations. 
EXHIBIT "A"
FACTS & FINDING CORRELATION 
PARADISE MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION 	CALIFORNIA CODE 	CODE SECTION AMENDED 	SHORT TITLE 	REFERENCED FACT/FINDING
(Page 3-5) 
15.02.010 	CBC 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
15.02.020 	CBC 	101.4 	Referenced Codes 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
15.02.030 	CBC 	101.4.1 	Gas - Plumbing Code 	Administrative 
15.02.040 	CBC 	101.4.2 	Mechanical Code Reference to California 	Administrative 
15.02.050 	CBC 	101.4.3 	Plumbing Code Reference to California 	Administrative 
15.02.055 	CBC 	101.4.4 	Property Maintenance 	Deleted 
15.02.060 	CBC 	101.4.5 	Fire Prevention 	Administrative 
15.02.070 	CBC 	103 	Department of Building & Safety 	Deleted 
15.02.080 	CBC 	105.2 	Work Exempt from Permits 	Administrative 
15.02.090 	CBC 	105.3.2 	Time Limitation of Application 	Administrative 
15.02.100 	CBC 	105.5 	Expiration 	Administrative 
15.02.110 	CBC 	105.8 	Transferability 	Administrative 
15.02.120 	CBC 	107.5 	Retention of Construction Documents 	Administrative 
15.02.130 	CBC 	107.6 	Expiration of Plan Review 	Administrative 
15.02.140 	CBC 	109.2 	Schedule of Permit Fees 	Administrative 
15.02.150 	CBC 	109.4 	Commencing Work/Permit 	Administrative 
15.02.160 	CBC 	109.6 	Refunds 	Administrative 
15.02.170 	CBC 	110.3.9.1 	Special Inspectors 	Administrative 
15.02.180 	CBC 	110.4 	Inspection Agencies 	Administrative 
15.02.190 	CBC 	111.1 	Use and Occupancy 	Administrative 
15.02.200 	CBC 	112.3 	Disconnect Service Utilities 	Administrative 
15.02.210 	CBC 	114.4 	Violation Penalties 	Administrative 
15.02.220 	CBC 	202 	Definitions 	Administrative 
15.02.230 	CBC 	1505.1.3 	Roof Coverings 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2C 
15.02.240 	CBC 	1603.1.3 	Roof Snow Loads 	1A, 2A 
15.02.250 	CBC 	J101.1 	Scope 	Administrative 
15.02.260 	CBC 	J101.3 	Purpose 	Administrative 
15.02.270 	CBC 	J101.4 	Hazards 	Administrative 
15.02.280 	CBC 	J102 	Definitions 	Administrative 
15.02.290 	CBC 	J103 	Permits Required 	Administrative 
15.02.300 	CBC 	J104.2 	Site Plan Requirements 	Administrative 
15.02.310 	CBC 	J104.5 	Bonds 	Administrative 
15.02.320 	CBC 	J105.3 	Inspections 	Administrative 
15.02.330 	CBC 	J106.2 	Rounding of cut slopes 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
15.02.340 	CBC 	J106. 3 	Private road construction 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
15.02.350 	CBC 	J106. 3.1 	Private road construction 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
15.02.360 	CBC 	J107.7 	Rounding of fill slopes 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 
15.02.370 	CBC 	J109.5 	Overflow protection 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
15.02.380 	CBC 	J110.3 	Disturbed surfaces 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
15.02.390 	CBC 	J110.4 	Storm damage precautions 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
  
15.03.010 	CRC 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
15.03.020 	CRC 	R101.2 	Scope 	Administrative 
15.03.030 	CRC 	R102.1 	General 	Administrative 
15.03.040 	CRC 	R105.3.2 	Time Limitation for Application 	Administrative 
15.03.050 	CRC 	R108.5 	Refunds 	Administrative 
15.03.069 	CRC 	R108.6 	Commencing Work Before Permit 	Administrative 
15.03.070 	CRC 	R202 	Definitions 	Administrative 
15.03.080 	CRC 	R313.2 	Automatic Fire Sprinklers 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D 
15.03.090 	CRC 	R313.2.2 	Alarms 	1A, 2C, 2D 
15.03.100 	CRC 	R902.1 	Roof Coverings 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2C 
  
15.04.010 	CEC 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
  
15.05.010 	CMC 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
  
15.06.010 	CPC 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
  
15.07.010 	Ca. Energy Code 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
  
15.08.010 	Ca. Historical Code 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
  
15.09.010 	CFC 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
15.09.020 	CFC 	103 	Dept. of Fire Prevention 	Administrative 
15.09.030 	CFC 	105.2.3 	Time Limitation of Application 	Administrative 
15.09.040 	CFC 	105.6.29 	Miscellaneous Combustibles 	2A, 2B, 2D, 
15.09.050 	CFC 	109.3 	Violation Penalties 	Administrative 
15.09.060 	CFC 	111.4 	Failure to Comply 	Administrative 
15.09.070 	CFC 	113.3 	Work Commencing 	Administrative 
15.09.080 	CFC 	113.5 	Refunds 	Administrative 
15.09.090 	CFC 	202 	Sky Lantern 	Administrative 
15.09.100 	CFC 	307.1 	General Open Burning 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D 
15.09.110 	CFC 	308.6.3 	Sky Lantern 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D 
15.09.120 	CFC 	503.2.1 	Dimensions 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D, 2E 
15.09.130 	CFC 	503.2.3 	Surface-Access Roadways 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
15.09.140 	CFC 	503.4.1 	Roadway Design Features 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
15.09.150 	CFC 	503.6 	Gates 	2D, 2E 
15.09.160 	CFC 	505.3 	Map/Directory 	2D 
15.09.170 	CFC 	507.1.2 	Required Water Supply 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D 
15.09.180 	CFC 	510.6.1 	Testing and Proof 	Administrative 
15.09.190 	CFC 	901.4.2 	Non-Required Fire Prot. System 	2D 
15.09.200 	CFC 	2206.2.3 	Aboveground Storage Tanks 	1A, 2A, 2B 
15.09.210 	CFC 	Chapter 33 	Fireworks 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2C, 2D 
15.09.220 	CFC 	B105.2 Exception 1 	Reduced Fire Flow 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D 
15.09.230 	CFC 	C105.1 	Distribution of Fire Hydrants 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D 
15.09.240 	CFC 	D103.4 	Dead End Access 	1A, 2A, 2B, 2D, 2E 
				
15.10.010 	Ca. Existing Building Code 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
  
15.11.010 	Ca. Green Building Standards Code 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
  
15.12.010 	Ca. Administrative Code 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
  
15.13.010 	Ca. Ref. Stds. 		Adoption 	Health & Safety Code 17958.5 
 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.02 - 2016 CALIFORNIA BUILDING STANDARDS CODE (TITLE 24, PART 2) BASED UPON THE INTERNATIONAL BUILDING CODE (ICC)[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.02, §§ 15.02.010—15.02.390, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.02 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.02 pertained to 2013 California Building Standards Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.02.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Part 2, Volumes 1 and 2, including Appendices "I," "J," known as the California Building Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, including the town's amendments, deletions and additions set forth in this chapter, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.020 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.4, Referenced Codes, amended. 
The other codes listed in Sections 101.4.1 through 101.4.5 and referenced elsewhere in this code shall be considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference unless otherwise amended herein. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.030 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.4.1, Gas, amended. 
The provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation of gas piping from the point of delivery, gas appliances and related accessories as covered in this code. These requirements apply to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances and the installation and operation of residential and commercial gas appliances and related accessories. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.040 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.4.2, Mechanical, amended. 
The provisions of the California Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation, alterations, repairs and replacement of mechanical systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and/or appurtenances, including ventilation, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators and other energy-related systems. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.050 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.4.3, Plumbing, amended. 
The provisions of the California Plumbing Code shall apply to the installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including equipment, appliances, fixtures, medical gas systems, fittings and appurtenances and, where connected to a water or sewage system. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.055 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.4.4, deleted. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.4.4, Property maintenance is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.060 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 101.4.5, Fire Prevention, amended. 
The provisions of the California Fire Code shall apply to matters affecting or relating to structures, processes and premises from the hazard of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use of structures, materials and devices; from conditions hazardous to life, property and or public welfare in the occupancy of structures or premises; and from the construction, extension, repair, alteration or removal of fire suppression and alarm systems or fire hazards in the structure or on the premises from occupancy or operation. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.070 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 103, Department of Building and Safety, deleted. 
The Department of Building and Safety identifying the creation of an enforcement agency, appointments and Deputies is hereby deleted in its entirety. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.080 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.2, Work Exempt from Permits, added. 
14.  Approved prefabricated carports which are entirely open on two or more sides, do not exceed 480 square feet in footprint, are installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and are located in compliance with applicable building or structure setbacks but not upon property located within the Town adopted Paradise Redevelopment Project area or a Paradise General Plan Scenic Highway Corridor. 
15.  Floor sheathing, decking and exterior siding repair - limited to 100 square feet of floor sheathing or siding and less than 100 linear board feet of decking. 
16.  Replacement, repair or overlay of less than 10% not to exceed 100 square feet of an existing roof within any 12-month period, all repairs shall be Class A only. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.090 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.3.2, Time Limitation of Application, amended. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall expire one (1) year after the date of filing, unless the permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.100 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.5, Expiration, amended. 
Every permit issued by the Building Official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void after one (1) year from the date of issuance of such permit. Provided, however, that if the building or work authorized by such permit was commenced prior to such expiration and no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such building or work, a renewal permit shall be applied for at least thirty (30) days prior to the original permit expiration date for projects for which a plans examination was required. If application for a renewal permit has not been made prior to the thirty (30) days, or if work was not commenced pursuant to the original permit, a new permit application and fees shall be required. A renewed permit shall expire and becomes null and void one (1) year beyond the expiration date of the original or previously renewed permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.110 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.8, Transferability, added. 
A permit may be transferred from the original permittee to another person due to a change of ownership, contractor, or death as long as there is no change in the original plans or specifications, authorization of the design professional, and a written notice is provided for and approved by the Town of Paradise Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.120 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107.5, Retention of Construction Documents, amended. 
One set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be retained by the Building Official until completion of the work covered therein and then per the records retention requirements adopted by the Town; and one set of approved plans, specifications and computations shall be returned to the applicant and shall be kept on the site of the building or work at all times during which the work authorized thereby is in progress. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.130 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 107.6, Expiration of Plan Review, added. 
Applications for which no permit has been issued shall expire one-year following the date of application, or on the effective date of a new Town adopted edition of any part of the California Building Standards Code, whichever comes later. Plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the Building Official. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee. 
Exception: Such applications shall not expire under the following circumstances: 
1.  If the Building Official determines the new code changes are minor, additional reviews of the plans to determine compliance with the new codes may be done in lieu of expiration. The normal hourly rate as determined by the Master Fee Schedule adopted by the Town of Paradise Town Council shall apply to any additional review. 
2.  Applications for which plans have been submitted as a result of a compliance investigation shall expire 180 days following the date of application. No extensions will be granted except in emergency situations approved prior to the expiration by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.140 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 109.2, Schedule of Permit Fees, amended. 
On buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, fire protection systems, and plumbing systems or alterations requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the Master Fee Schedule as adopted by the Town of Paradise Town Council. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.150 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 109.4, Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance, amended. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before first obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an investigation fee equal to the permit fee to be paid in addition to the permit fee when obtaining the building permit. All fees must be paid prior to release of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.160 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 109.6, Refunds, amended. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit or plan review fee paid when no work or plan examination has been done under an application or permit issued in accordance with this code, provided a written refund application is filed by the original permittee prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.170 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 110.3.9.1, Special Inspectors, added. 
The Special Inspector shall be a qualified person approved by the Building Official after all certifications have been supplied, reviewed and approved by the Building Official regarding their qualifications. The Special Inspector shall furnish continuous inspection reports on the construction and work requiring his/her employment as prescribed in the applicable codes. The Special Inspector shall report to the Building Official in writing, noticing all code violations and other information as required on forms, prescribed and/or approved by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.180 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 110.4, Inspection Agencies, amended. 
The Building Official is authorized to accept reports of approved inspection agencies, provided such agencies satisfy the requirements as to qualifications and reliability. The inspection agencies shall have written approval from the Building Official prior to any inspections. If written approval is not obtained prior to actual inspections, the Building Official may reject all inspections reports and the applicant shall cause to have all work re-inspected by an approved inspector. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.190 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 111.1, Use and Occupancy, amended. 
A building or structure shall not be used or occupied, and a change in the existing use or occupancy classification of a building or structure or portion thereof shall not be made, until the Building Official has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore as provided herein. Issuance of a certificate of occupancy shall not be construed as an approval to violate any provisions of this code or other ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.200 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 112.3, Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities, amended. 
The Building Official and/or the Fire Chief shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility services to buildings, structures or systems regulated by this code and the codes referenced in case of an emergency, where necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life, property or an immediate public health risk. The Building Official shall have the authority to authorize disconnection of utility service to buildings, structures or systems regulated by this code and the codes referenced when any building service equipment is maintained in violation of Section 101.4 of Chapter I, Division II, of the 2016 California Building Code, or of the codes adopted herein, or in violation of a notice issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 114 of Chapter I, Division II, of the 2016 California Building Code. The Building Official and/or Fire Chief shall notify the serving utility, and whenever possible the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of the decision to disconnect prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practical thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.210 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 114.4, Violation Penalties, amended. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish equip, use, occupy or maintain any real property, building, structure, or building service equipment or cause or permit the same to be done in violation of Title 15 of the Paradise Municipal Code (PMC), this code or the technical codes as amended and adopted by the town. Any person who violates any of the provisions of Title 15 of the PMC, this code or the technical codes adopted by this jurisdiction or fails to comply with any order made there under, or who builds in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted or approved there under, or any certificate or permit issued there under, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the Board of Appeals or by a court of competent jurisdiction within the time fixed herein, is severally for each violation or noncompliance respectively guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each separate day or any portion thereof during which any violation occurs or continues is a separate offense, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable as provided in this section. Any person, firm or corporation found guilty of any such violation shall be fully responsible for all of the town's costs relating to the enforcement, investigation and prosecution of the offender. 
The imposition of a penalty for any violation or noncompliance shall not excuse the violation of noncompliance or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions. 
(c)  The issuance or granting of a permit or approval of plans and specifications shall not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation of any of the provisions of these codes and shall not prevent the administrative authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in said plans or specifications or from preventing construction operations being carried on there under when in violation of these codes or any other ordinance or from revoking any certificate of occupancy or approval when issued in error. No permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the provisions of this chapter shall be valid, except insofar as the work or use which it authorized is lawful. 
(d)  Any violation of the provisions of Title 15 or of the technical codes as adopted by the town shall be and is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner provided by law. 
(e)  The Town Attorney shall, upon the order of the Town Manager or his/her designee, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment of any violation of Title 15 or of any technical codes as adopted by the town as provided by law, and shall take such action and shall apply to such courts of competent jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or structure or use, and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, building, maintaining, or using such real property, building, structure, use or occupancy contrary to this code or the technical codes. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.220 - Chapter 2, Section 202, Definitions, added. 
Administrative Authority : Shall be the Building Official or his/her designee. 
Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention : Shall be the Fire Chief for the Town of Paradise. 
City : Shall be the Town of Paradise. 
Fire Code : Shall be the 2016 California Fire Code as adopted by the Town of Paradise. 
New Construction : For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of the California Fire Code, California Building Code, and the California Residential Building Code, any work, addition to, remodel, repair, renovation, or alteration of any building(s) or structure(s) shall be considered "New Construction" when 50 percent or more of the exterior weight bearing walls are removed or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.230 - Chapter 15, Section 1505.1.3, Roof Coverings, amended. 
All roofing materials shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. The entire roof covering of every new structure shall be a minimum Class "A" roof covering. Any roof covering material applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of the existing structure shall be a minimum of a Class "A" roof covering. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within a one-year period shall be a minimum of a Class "A" roof covering. The owner of any structure regulated by this code shall comply with the provisions of this section relating to roofing materials. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.240 - Chapter 16, Section 1603.1.3, Roof Snow Loads, amended. 
Snow loads full or unbalanced shall be considered in place of loads set forth in Table No. 1607.1, where such loading will result in larger members and connections. The minimum design snow load and roof live load for the Town of Paradise shall be twenty (20) pounds per square foot below elevation 1,800 feet and thirty (30) pounds per square foot at 1,800 feet and elevations above. 
Potential accumulations of snow at roof valleys, parapets, roof structures and offsets in roofs of uneven configuration shall be considered. Where snow loads occur, the snow loads shall be determined by the Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.250 - Section J101.1, amended. 
Section J101.1. This chapter sets forth rules and regulations to control excavation, grading and earthwork construction, including fills and embankments, and erosion and sediment control; establishes the administrative procedure for issuance of permits; and provides for approval of plans and inspection of grading, erosion and sediment control operations. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.260 - Section J101.3, amended. 
Section J101.3. The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property and the public welfare, and to preserve and enhance the natural environment by preventing and eliminating conditions of accelerated erosion and by regulating grading on private and public property in the incorporated areas of the Town of Paradise. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.270 - Section J101.4, added. 
(a)  Hazardous Conditions. Whenever the Building Official or the Town Engineer determines that any existing excavation, embankment or fill has become a hazard to life and limb, or endangers structures, or adversely affects the safety, use, or stability of a public way or drainage channel, the owner of the property upon which the excavation, embankment, or fill is located, or other person or agent in control of said property, upon receipt of notice in writing from the Building Official or Town Engineer shall within the period specified therein repair, reconstruct or remove such excavation, embankment, or fill so as to eliminate the hazard. 
(b)  Maintenance of Protective Devices and Rodent Control. The owner of any property on which grading has been performed and a permit issued under the provisions of this code, or any other person or agent in control of such property, shall maintain in good condition and repair all drainage structures and other protective devices and burrowing rodent control when shown on the grading plans filed with the application for grading permit and approved as a condition precedent to the issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.280 - Section J102, Definitions, amended. 
The following definitions are amended or added to Section J102 with all other definitions in the section remaining unchanged: 
Certifications shall mean the specific inspections or tests required by the Building Official or Town Engineer have been performed and that the results of such tests are satisfactory and that all work complies with the conditions of the permits and the requirements of this Chapter. 
Design Engineer shall be the Civil Engineer responsible for the preparation of the plans for the grading work. 
Drainage Course shall be a well-defined natural or man-made channel which conveys storm runoff either year round or intermittently. 
Hazardous Condition shall be any natural ground, natural slope, excavation, fill, drainage device or erosion control device on public or private property is a menace to life and limb, or a danger to public safety, or endangers or adversely affects the safety, usability or stability of adjacent property, structures, or public or private facilities. 
Hill Area shall be any part of the Town with street grades of ten percent (10%) or greater. 
Landscape Architect shall be a person who holds a certificate to practice landscape architecture in the State of California. 
Natural Grade shall be the vertical location of the ground surface prior to excavation or fill. 
Soil Testing Agency shall be an agency regularly engaged in the testing of soils under the direction of a Civil Engineer experienced in soil mechanics. 
Surface Drainage shall be water flows over the ground surface. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.290 - Section J103, Permits required, amended. 
Section J103. No person shall do any grading, clearing or grubbing without first having obtained a grading permit from the Town Engineer except for the following: 
1.  An excavation which does not exceed two feet in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from the original ground surface and which does not create a cut slope greater than four feet in height and steeper than one and one-half horizontal to one vertical and does not exceed fifty cubic yards of material. 
2.  A fill that does not exceed one foot in vertical depth and is placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than five horizontal to one vertical at its deepest point measured from the natural ground surface, or less than three feet in depth, not intended to support structures, which do not exceed fifty cubic yards on any one lot and does not change the existing drainage pattern. 
3.  Temporary excavations in a public street or right-of-way for which a permit has been issued by the Department of Public Works. 
4.  An excavation below finish grade for a basement, footing, retaining wall, swimming pool, or other structure authorized by a valid permit, which excavation will be completely occupied by and retained by the structure authorized by valid building permit. 
5.  A fill above existing grade, which fill will be retained by the exterior wall of a building, a retaining wall, swimming pool or other structure authorized by a valid building permit. 
6.  Gardening and routine agricultural crop management practices. 
7.  Excavations for utilities installed pursuant to permits issued by the Building Department and/or the Department of Public Works. 
8.  Refuse disposal sites controlled by other regulations. 
9.  Mining, quarrying, excavating, processing, stockpiling of rock, sand, gravel, aggregate or clay where established and provided for by law, provided such operations do not affect the lateral support or increase the stresses in or pressure upon any adjacent or contiguous buildings or property. 
10.  Exploratory excavations under the direction of soils engineers or engineering geologist. 
11.  Routine maintenance of private roads. 
12.  Clearing of vegetation for fire protection purposes within one hundred (100) feet of a dwelling unit. Any additional clearing for fire prevention, control or suppression purposes is exempt when authorized or required in writing by a fire prevention or suppression agency. 
In addition, all excavations or fills that disturb one (1) acre or greater must comply with the State Construction Stormwater Permit and supply a copy of the required Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) to the Town Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.300 - Section J104.2, amended. 
Section J104.2 Information on Plans and in Specifications. Plans shall be drawn to scale upon substantial paper and shall be of sufficient clarity to indicate the nature and extent of work proposed and shown in detail that they will conform to provisions of ordinances, rules and regulations. The first sheet shall give the location of the work and the name and address of the owner and the person by whom they were prepared. 
The plans shall include the following information: 
1.  Vicinity Map showing the project site in relationship to surrounding areas, water courses, water bodies and other significant geographic features, roads and structures. 
2.  Site Map and Grading plan showing topographic and boundary survey with existing and proposed contours, with enough off-site contours included to show how surface water will flow onto and off the site; proposed limits of cuts and fills and other earthwork; proposed retaining structures; existing off-site structures within fifteen (15) feet of the site boundary and other off-site improvements, including but not limited to underground utilities, septic systems, water wells and french drains which may be affected by the grading work; public and private easements of record; typical sections of areas to be graded and profiles of all proposed traveled ways for vehicles and pedestrians; all proposed uses for the site; all proposed divisions; rock disposal areas, buttress fills or other specials features. 
3.  Drainage plan showing all drainage devices, walls, cribbing or other protective devices and estimated runoff; building site including elevations of floors with respect to finish site grade and locations of proposed stoops, slabs and fences that may affect drainage. 
4.  A statement of the quantities of material to be excavated and/or filled and the amount of such material to be imported to or exported from the site. 
5.  A statement of the estimated starting and completion dates for work covered by the permit. 
6.  Erosion and Sediment control plans when required by the Town Engineer shall be prepared by a Registered Civil Engineer or Certified Engineering Geologist and shall include all the following: 
(a)  Interim measures designed to prevent excessive storm runoff of water or solid materials onto adjacent property, streets or watercourses including, but not limited to short term erosion control planting, waterproof slope covering, check dams, interceptor ditches, benches, storm drains, dissipation structures, diversion dikes, retarding berms and barriers, devices to trap, store and filter out sediment and stormwater retention basins. 
(b)  A narrative description of measure to be taken, planting materials and specifications, maintenance provisions and fertilizers. A statement: the plans are subject to change as conditions change. 
(c)  Calculations of anticipated stormwater runoff and sediment volumes shall be included, if required by the Building Official or the Town Engineer. 
(d)  The name, address and contact telephone number of the person responsible for emergency call out in the event of apparent danger to life or property as determined by the Town Engineer or Building Official. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.310 - Section J104.5, added. 
Section J104.5 Bonds. 
(a)  Bond Requirements. Whenever an application for grading permit is filed for the excavation or fill and the nature of the work is such that if left incomplete it will create a hazard to human life or endanger adjoining property, or property at a higher or lower level, or to any street or street improvement or any other public property, the Town Engineer shall, before issuing the grading permit, require the applicant to guarantee faithful performance and payment of labor and material in an amount determined by the Town Engineer, which shall be not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the total estimated cost of the work, including corrective work necessary to remove or eliminate geological hazards. An additional cash deposit may be required by the Town Engineer in the form of a cash bond sufficient to cover the cost of site cleanup and debris removal. Where grading is required on property adjacent to the grading site to complete a project satisfactorily, the owner of the adjacent property need not provide additional security if the original guarantee is of sufficient amount to include such additional grading. Each bond and agreement shall remain in effect until the work authorized by the grading permit is completed and approved by the Town Engineer. 
(b)  Type of Bond. A guarantee of faithful performance and payment of labor and material, when required under the provisions of this section, shall be provided by one of the following methods: 
1.  Bonds executed by the applicant, as principal, and a corporate surety authorized to do business in the state, as surety, and in a form furnished by the Town Engineer and approved by the Town Attorney. 
2.  A cash deposit with the Town. 
3.  An instrument or instruments of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government pledging that the funds necessary to meet the performance are on deposit and guaranteed for payment, and an agreement that the funds designated by the instrument shall become trust funds for the purpose of securing faithful performance and payment of labor and material. The instrument of credit and agreement shall first be approved by the Town Attorney. 
(c)  Procedure on Default. 
1.  Whenever the Town Engineer finds that a default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of any grading permit, written notice of the fact of default shall be given to the principal and to the corporate surety, financial institution or the depositor, stating the work to be done and the period of time deemed by the Town Engineer to be reasonably necessary for the completion of such work. Thirty days after the receipt of such notice the principal or the surety shall perform or cause the required work to be performed by commencing and diligently prosecuting the work to its completion. If either or both of them fail to commence such work within thirty (30) days, or having so commenced the work, fail, neglect or refuse to proceed diligently to complete the same within the time so specified in the notice, then the Town may enter the premises and do the work, and the cost and expense of doing the work so specified shall be the obligation of the principal and the surety, and shall be a part of the terms of the performance bond in consideration of the issuance of the grading permit. 
2.  If a cash bond has been posted, notice of default as provided by subdivision 1 of this subsection is given to the depositor, and if the depositor fails to cause the required work to be resumed as set forth in the notice within thirty (30) days after receipt thereof, the Town Engineer shall proceed without delay and without further notice or proceedings whatsoever to use the cash deposited, or any portion thereof, and cause the required work to be completed by such mode as he deems convenient. The balance of such cash deposit, if any, shall, upon the completion of the work, be returned to the depositor or his successor or assigns after deducting ten percent (10%) thereof. 
3.  If an instrument of credit is used to guarantee performance, notice of default shall be given, as provided in subdivision 1 of this subsection to the principal and to the financial institution issuing the instrument of credit, and if the principal fails to cause the required work to be resumed as set forth in the notice within thirty (30) days after receipt thereof, the Town Engineer shall make a demand upon the financial institution for the payment of the estimated costs from the trust fund held by the financial institution pursuant to the agreement. Upon receipt of said sum, the Town Engineer shall proceed without delay and without further notice or proceedings whatsoever to use the sum, or any portion thereof, and cause the required work to be completed by such mode as he deems convenient. The balance of such sum, if any, shall, upon the completion of the work, be returned to the financial institution, its successors or assigns, after deducting ten percent (10%) thereof; but if the financial institution fails or refuses to pay over said sum, then the Town Engineer shall proceed as in subdivision 1 of this subsection and shall look to said institution for the costs and expenses of the work, and the contractual liability of such institution therefore shall be a term or condition of its agreement. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.320 - Section J105.3, added. 
Section J105.3 Inspections. The owner or his agent shall notify the Town Engineer twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the time when the grading operation is ready for each of the following inspections: 
1.  Initial inspection. When the permittee is ready to begin work, but before any grading or brushing is started; 
2.  Toe Inspection. After the natural ground is exposed and prepared to receive fill, but prior to the placement of any fill; 
3.  Excavation Inspection. After the excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation exceeds ten (10) feet; 
4.  Fill Inspection. After the fill emplacement is started, but before the vertical height of the lifts exceeds ten (10) feet; 
5.  Drainage Device Inspection. After forms, pipe and wire mesh are in place, but before any concrete is placed; 
6.  Final Inspection. When all work, including installation of all drainage structures, other protective devices, irrigation systems, planting and slope stabilization has been completed as per the approved grading plan and required reports have been submitted; 
7.  Other Inspection. In addition to the called inspections above, the Town Engineer may make periodic inspections of the grading operations to ascertain compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.330 - Section J106.2, added. 
Section J106.2 Rounding of cut slopes. All cut slopes shall be rounded into the existing terrain to produce a contoured transition from cut face to natural ground where conditions permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.340 - Section J106. 3, added. 
Section J106. 3 Private Road Construction. All private road construction shall conform to the requirements of Section J106.4.1. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.350 - Section J106.3.1, added. 
Section J106.3.1 Private Road Construction. 
(1)  All private road construction involving grading shall be done under permit pursuant to the provisions of this section and shall be subject to the requirements stated in the Town of Paradise Resolution titled, "Public and Private Road Standards of the Town of Paradise." 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.360 - Section J107.7, added. 
Section J107.7 Rounding of Fill Slopes. All fill slopes shall be rounded into the existing terrain to produce a contoured transition from fill face to natural ground where conditions permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.370 - Section J109.5, added. 
Section J109.5 Overflow Protection. Berms, swales or other devices shall be provided at the top of cut or fill slopes to prevent surface waters from overflowing onto and damaging the face of the slope. Gutters or other special drainage controls shall be provided where the proximity of runoff from buildings or other structures is such as to pose a potential hazard to slope integrity. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.380 - Section J110.3, added. 
Section J110.3 Disturbed Surfaces. All disturbed surfaces resulting from grading operations shall be prepared and maintained to control erosion. This control may consists of effective planting such as rye grass, barley or some other fast germinating seed. The Town Engineer may require watering of planted areas to assure growth. Dust from grading operations must be controlled. The owner or contractor may be required to keep adequate equipment on the grading site to prevent dust problems. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.02.390 - Section J110.4, added. 
Section J110.4 Storm Damage Precautions. 
1.  The period between the first day of October and the following fifteenth day of April is found and determined to be the period in which heavy rainfall normally occurs in the Town. During this period, no grading work in excess of two hundred fifty (250) cubic yards may be commenced on any single grading site if the Town Engineer determines by inspection that such work will endanger the public health or safety. 
2.  If grading operations are to be conducted during such period, plans for erosion control devices shall be submitted to the Town Engineer and design approval obtained prior to starting work. 
3.  All persons performing any grading operations during such period shall put into effect all safety precautions which are necessary to protect public and private property and access ways. All loose dirt shall be removed from the grading site and adequate anti-erosion or drainage devices, debris basins, or other safety devices shall be installed to protect persons and property from damage of any kind. All temporary erosion control devices, including desilting basins, shall be installed and be operative no later than the first day of November of each year. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.03 - 2016 CALIFORNIA RESIDENTIAL CODE (TITLE 24, PART 2.5) BASED UPON THE 2015 INTERNATIONAL RESIDENTIAL CODE (ICC)[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.03, §§ 15.03.010—15.03.090, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.03 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.03 pertained to 2013 California Residential Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.03.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Residential Code, Title 24, Part 2.5, including Appendix "H," known as the California Residential Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, including the town's amendments and additions, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.020 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R101.2, Scope, amended. 
The provisions of the California Residential Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal, and demolition of detached one and two family dwellings and town houses not more than three stories above grade plane in height with a separate means of egress and their accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.030 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R102.1, General, amended. 
Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. Where in any specific case, different sections of the code specify different materials, methods of construction or other requirements the most restrictive shall govern. Where in any specific case, the California Residential Code does not have a provision that is included in the California Residential Code that would be applicable due to the type or method of construction the California Building Code provisions will apply. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.035 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.2, Work Exempt from Permits, added. 
14.  Approved prefabricated carports which are entirely open on two or more sides, do not exceed 480 square feet in footprint, are installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions, and are located in compliance with applicable building or structure setbacks but not upon property located within the Town adopted Paradise Redevelopment Project area or a Paradise General Plan Scenic Highway Corridor. 
15.  Floor sheathing, decking and exterior siding repair - limited to 100 square feet of floor sheathing or siding and less than 100 linear board feet of decking. 
16.  Replacement, repair or overlay of less than 10% not to exceed 100 square feet of an existing roof within any 12-month period, all repairs shall be Class A only. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.040 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R105.3.2, Time Limitation of Application, amended. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall expire one (1) year after the date of filing, unless the permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.050 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R108.5, Refunds, amended. 
The Building Official may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The Building Official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit or plan review fee paid when no work or plan examination has been done under an application or permit issued in accordance with this code, provided a written refund application is filed by the original permittee prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.060 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section R108.6, Work Commencing Before Permit Issuance, amended. 
Any person who commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system before first obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a penalty equal to the permit fee to be paid in addition to the permit fee when obtaining the building. All fees must be paid prior to release of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.070 - Chapter 2, Section 202, Definitions, added. 
New Construction : For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of the California Fire Code, California Building Code, and the California Residential Building Code, any work, addition to, remodel, repair, renovation, or alteration of any building(s) or structure(s) shall be considered "New Construction" when 50 percent or more of the exterior weight bearing walls are removed or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.080 - Chapter 3, Section R313.2, One and Two Family Dwellings Automatic Fire Sprinkler Systems, amended. 
An automatic residential fire sprinkler system meeting the requirements of NFPA 13D or 13R and Title 24, Part Two, California Building Code, Chapter 9 shall be installed in all new Residential occupancies. 
Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing building that are not already equipped with an automatic residential fire sprinkler system. Any detached Residential occupancy building accessory to a single or two family building intended for intermittent use and less than 640 square feet will not require a residential fire sprinkler system. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.090 - Chapter 3, Section R313.2.2, Alarms, added. 
One exterior approved audible sprinkler water flow alarm device shall be connected to every automatic fire sprinkler system in an approved location. Such device shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the system. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.03.100 - Chapter 9, Section 902.1, Roofing Covering Material, amended. 
All roofing materials shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions. The entire roof covering of every new structure shall be a minimum Class "A" roof covering. Any roof covering material applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of the existing structure shall be a minimum of a Class "A" roof covering. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within a one year period shall be a minimum of a Class "A" roof covering. The owner of any structure regulated by this code shall comply with the provisions of this section relating to roofing materials. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.04 - 2016 CALIFORNIA ELECTRICAL CODE (TITLE 24, PART 3) BASED UPON THE 2014 NATIONAL ELECTRICAL CODE (NFPA)[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.04, § 15.04.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.04 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.04 pertained to 2013 California Electrical Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.04.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 3, California Electrical Code, including the informative Appendices A, B, C, D, F, and G, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.05 - 2016 CALIFORNIA MECHANICAL CODE (TITLE 24, PART 4) BASED ON THE 2015 UNIFORM MECHANICAL CODE (IAPMO)[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.05, § 15.05.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.05 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.05 pertained to 2013 California Mechanical Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.05.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 4, California Mechanical Code, including Appendices B, C, and D, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.06 - 2016 CALIFORNIA PLUMBING CODE (TITLE 24, PART 5) BASED UPON THE 2015 UNIFORM PLUMBING CODE (IAPMO)[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.06, § 15.06.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.06 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.06 pertained to 2013 California Plumbing Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.06.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 5, California Plumbing Code, including Appendices A, B, G, I, and J, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.07 - 2016 CALIFORNIA ENERGY CODE (TITLE 24, PART 6)[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.07, § 15.07.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.07 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.07 pertained to 2013 California Energy Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.07.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 6, California Energy Code, including Appendix "1-A," as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.08 - 2016 CALIFORNIA HISTORICAL BUILDING CODE (TITLE 24, PART 8)[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.08, § 15.08.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.08 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.08 pertained to 2013 California Historical Building Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.08.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 8, California Historical Building Code, including Appendix A, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.09 - 2016 CALIFORNIA FIRE CODE (TITLE 24, PART 9)[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.09, §§ 15.09.010—15.09.240, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.09 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.09 pertained to 2013 California Fire Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.09.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 9, including Appendix Chapters 4, "B," "BB," "C," "CC," "D," "E," "F," "G," "H," "I," "K" and "N," known as the California Fire Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, including the town's amendments and additions, is hereby adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.020 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 103, Department of Fire Prevention, amended. 
The California Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire Prevention Bureau within the Town of Paradise which is hereby established and which shall be operated under the direction of the Fire Chief of the Fire Department. The Fire Chief of the Fire Department may detail to the fire prevention bureau such members of the Fire Department as may from time to time be necessary. The Fire Chief of the Fire Department shall review, authorize, or require technical experts as may be necessary in order to ensure that life and property protection requirements have met the requirements of this and all other Title 24 codes and standards. 
Sections 103.1; 103.2; and 103.3 are hereby deleted in their entirety. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.030 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 105.2.3, Time Limitation of Application, amended. 
An application for a permit for any proposed work shall expire one (1) year after the date of filing, unless the permit has been issued. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.040 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 106.6.29, Miscellaneous Combustible Storage, amended. 
An operational permit is required to store in any building or upon any premises in excess of 2,500 cubic feet gross volume of combustible empty packing cases, boxes, barrels or similar containers, rubber tires, rubber, cork, firewood (retail or storage) or similar combustible material. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.050 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 109.3, Violation Penalties, amended. 
Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties as set forth in Section 15.02.210. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.060 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 111.4, Failure to Comply, amended. 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $100 or more than $500. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.070 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 113.3, Work commencing before permit issuance, amended. 
Any person who commences any work, activity or operation regulated by this code before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to an investigation fee that is equal to 50% of the original permit fee, which shall be in addition to the required permit fees. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.080 - Chapter 1, Division II, Section 113.5, Refunds, amended. 
The Fire Marshal may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected. The Fire Marshal may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit or plan review fee paid when no work or plan examination has been done under an application or permit issued in accordance with this code, provided a written refund application is filed by the original permittee prior to the expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.090 - Chapter 2, Section 202, Definitions, Sky Lantern, added. 
Sky Lantern : An unmanned device with a fuel source that incorporates an open flame in order to make the device airborne. 
New Construction : For the purposes of enforcing the provisions of the California Fire Code, California Building Code, and the California Residential Building Code, any work, addition to, remodel, repair, renovation, or alteration of any building(s) or structure(s) shall be considered "New Construction" when 50 percent or more of the exterior weight bearing walls are removed or demolished. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.100 - Chapter 3, Section 307.1, General Open Burning, amended. 
Burn permits are required for all outdoor burning within the Town of Paradise limits with the exception of barbeque equipment used for the preparation of food and outdoor fireplaces or warming devices used in accordance with the manufacturers specifications, approved screening not to exceed ?-inch opening and in a safe manner. 
Residential Burn Permits: Permits shall be issued annually, March 1st through May 31st, and for one month in the fall and or as determined by the Fire Chief and a fee in accordance with the Master Fee schedule of the Town of Paradise shall be charged. Permits shall only be valid for the address, and name of the individual cited on the permit. Permits shall not be transferable to other addresses or individuals. Permits may be issued to persons to perform maintenance on residential property, providing the owner of the residential property has given their written consent and that is produced and verified as to the owner of record. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of a Fire Department response caused by the maintenance person as a result of an escape burn in violation of the rules of the burn permit on behalf of the maintenance person. Residential burn permits shall be issued for parcels containing one and two family residence, for which an address has been issued by the Town of Paradise, and only for the purpose of maintenance of vegetation growth on the parcel. Garbage, rubbish, demolition, construction debris, lumber, painted or treated lumber, plywood, particle board, petroleum waste, tires, plastics, cloth or other similar smoke producing materials are strictly prohibited from being burned. All requirements provided for on the burn permit must be followed at all times. Residents shall burn only on those days specified in the permit for either the East or West Side of the Town. Burn bans shall be strictly adhered to. Failure to follow the burn ban restrictions may result in the requirements of Section 109.3 as amended to apply and any emergency response cost recovery. 
Land Clearing Permits: Land clearing permits are issued on an annual basis to coincide with the time when open, outdoor burning is permitted, March 1st through May 31st, and for one month in the fall and or as determined by the Fire Chief. Land clearing permits expire when seasonal burn bans go into effect in the late spring of each year and shall be null and void. Persons burning on the property for which a permit is issued shall be responsible for following all of the requirements of that permit until the permit has expired or is revoked. The Fire Department may revoke the permit at any time due to unsafe conditions, practices, or violations of the permit. Burning of wood waste from trees, vines, or bushes on property being developed for commercial or residential purposes, may be disposed of by open outdoor fires on the property where it was grown, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 41802—41805 of the California Health and Safety Code and in compliance with the conditions of Butte County Air Quality Management District Rule 300, and authorized by the Town of Paradise Fire Department. Permits are required by both agencies prior to burning. All burning times must be strictly adhered to otherwise it may require another method of disposal. The land clearing burn site must be determined and inspected prior to releasing the permit by the Paradise Fire Department. This site must be the only site authorized to burn once the permit is issued. Any changes in site location will require additional inspections and fees. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of a Fire Department response caused by the maintenance person as a result of an escape burn in violation of the rules of the burn permit on behalf of the maintenance person. Garbage, rubbish, demolition, construction debris, lumber, painted or treated lumber, plywood, particle board, petroleum waste, tires, plastics, cloth or other similar smoke producing materials are strictly prohibited from being burned. 
Fuel Reduction Permits: Fuel reduction permits are issued for parcels ?-acre or larger on an annual basis to coincide with the non-fire season when open, outdoor burning is permitted, March 1st through May 31st, and for one month in the fall and or as determined by the Fire Chief. Fuel reduction permits expire when the seasonal burn ban goes into effect in the late spring of each year. Persons burning on the property for which the permit is issued shall be responsible for following all of the requirements of that permit as indicated until the permit expires or is revoked. The Fire Department may revoke the permit at any time due to unsafe burning conditions, practices, or violations of the permit. Burning of wood waste from trees, vines, or bushes on existing improved property, may be disposed of by open outdoor fires on the property where it was grown, pursuant to the provisions of Sections 41802—41805 of the California Health and Safety Code and in compliance with the conditions of Butte County Air Quality Management District Rule 300, and authorized by the Town of Paradise Fire Department. All burning times must be strictly adhered to otherwise it may require another method of disposal. The fuel reduction burn site must be determined and inspected prior to releasing the permit by the Paradise Fire Department. This site must be the only site authorized to burn once the permit is issued. Any changes in site location will require additional inspections and fees. The owner shall be responsible for the cost of a Fire Department response caused by the maintenance person as a result of an escape burn in violation of the rules of the burn permit on behalf of the maintenance person. Garbage, rubbish, demolition, construction debris, lumber, painted or treated lumber, plywood, particle board, petroleum waste, tires, plastics, cloth or other similar smoke producing materials are strictly prohibited from being burned. 
Campfires/Bon Fires/Recreational Fires and Special Event Fires: Permits are required for these activities and a permit fee will be charged in accordance with the Master Fee Schedule adopted by the Town Council. A minimum of 48 hours' notice is required for the inspection. Such activities shall be in strict conformance with the requirements provided for on the permit and the requirements within Section 307 of the California Fire Code. Permits are only issued March 1st through May 31st of each year. Permits will not be issued after May 31st, unless they are approved by the Fire Chief. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.110 - Chapter 3, Section 308.6.3, added. 
Sky Lanterns or similar devices. The ignition and/or launching of a Sky Lantern or similar device is prohibited. Exceptions: Upon approval of the fire code official, sky lanterns may be used as necessary for religious or cultural ceremonies providing that adequate safeguards have been taken as approved by the fire code official. Sky Lanterns must be tethered in a safe manner to prevent them from leaving the area and must be constantly attended until extinguished. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.120 - Chapter 5, Section 503.2.1, Dimensions, amended. 
Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 20 feet, exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6, and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches. Exception: Residential driveways shall comply with Town of Paradise Road Standards. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.130 - Chapter 5, Section 503.2.3, Surface, amended. 
Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed load of fire apparatus at 75,000 pounds and shall be surfaced so as to provide all-weather driving capabilities. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.140 - Chapter 5, Section 503.4.1, Roadway Design Features, added. 
Roadway design features (speed bumps, speed humps, speed control dips, etc.) which may interfere with emergency apparatus responses shall not be installed on fire apparatus access roadways. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.150 - Chapter 5, Section 503.6, Gates, amended. 
The installation of security gates across a fire apparatus access road shall be approved by the Fire Marshal. Where security gates are installed, they shall have an approved means of emergency operation. The emergency gates and emergency operation shall be maintained operational at all times. Electric gate operators are required when serving five or more residential lots, Assembly occupancies, Hazardous occupancies, Institutional occupancies, and Storage occupancies and shall be listed in accordance with UL 325. Gates intended for automatic operation shall be designed, constructed and installed to comply with the requirements of ASTM F-2200. Access keypads shall be provided that are coded with the fire department emergency access code as specified. Plans and specifications shall be submitted for review and approval by the Fire Prevention Bureau prior to installation. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.160 - Chapter 5, Section 505.3, Map/Directory, added. 
A lighted directory map, meeting current Fire Department standards, shall be installed at each driveway entrance to a multiple unit residential project and mobile home parks, where the number of units in such projects exceeds 15. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.170 - Chapter 5, Section 507.1.2, Required Water Supply, added. 
Group R Division 3 Occupancies (Residential one and two family dwellings, mobile homes, manufactured housing, or modular home) shall comply with the fire flow requirements of Appendix "B". Fire Flow may be reduced to 750 GPM at 20 PSI for two hours when the unit is fully protected in accordance with NFPA 13D and there are no exposures of other buildings within twenty (20) feet of each other; otherwise the minimum required water supply capability will be in accordance with Appendix "B". In no case shall the water supply capability be less than 1000 GPM at 20 PSI for two hours within the requirements found in Appendix "B". The required water supply for a detached "U" occupancy accessory to a Residential one and two family dwelling is not required to meet the water supply requirements of Appendix "B" if the "U" occupancy is less than 1500 square feet and separated from the dwelling unit by a minimum of 20 feet. If both requirements cannot be met then the requirements of Appendix "B" will apply. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.180 - Chapter 5, Section 510.6.1 Testing and proof of compliance, added. 
5. At the conclusion of the testing, a report, which shall verify compliance with Section 510.5.4, shall be submitted to the fire code official. In addition, one complete copy of the report shall be posted in the building, on the wall immediately adjacent to the Fire Alarm Control Panel. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.190 - Chapter 9, Section 901.4.2, Non-required Fire Protection Systems, amended. 
Any fire protection system not required by this code or the California Building Code shall be allowed to be furnished for complete protection only provided such installed system meets the requirements of this code and the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.200 - Chapter 22, Section 2306.2.3, Aboveground Storage Tanks, amended. 
The storage of class I, II, and III liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited in all areas of the Town except in areas zoned as Industrial Services (I.S.). 
Exception: The installation of approved listed above ground storage tanks shall be allowed in areas zoned for commercial purposes. Such tanks shall meet with State and County Environmental codes, and the California Fire and Building Code requirements. Aggregate quantities and type(s) of liquid(s) to be stored shall not exceed 2,000 gallons. Tanks shall be located outside of buildings and in accordance with the requirements of the California Fire and Building Codes. On those rare occasions when there may be need for additional tank capacity beyond the 2,000 gallons, the applicant can submit a written request to the Fire Marshal. The Fire Marshal, after evaluating the circumstances, shall have the authority to modify the conditions to the installation of such tanks. Above ground storage tanks used only for heating fuels to heating appliances in areas zoned residential shall meet the requirements of the California Fire Code and the Town of Paradise Administrative policy but in no case shall tanks exceed 250 gallons. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.210 - Chapter 56, Fireworks, deleted, amended. 
Refer to Paradise Municipal Code Title 8 Chapter 8.44 for prohibition on fireworks. 
The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the limits of the Town of Paradise, except for temporary storage between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. for use in connection with blasting operations approved by the Fire Marshal. This prohibition shall not apply to stock of small arms ammunition and supplies for retail or approved manufacturing facilities as outlined under the California Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.220 - Appendix B, Section B105.2, Exception 1, Reduced Fire Flow, amended. 
A reduction in required fire flow of 50 percent is allowed when the building is provided with an approved automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with section 903.1.1 or 903.3.1.2. The resulting fire flow shall not be less than 1,500 GPM at 20 PSI for prescribed hours provided for in Table B105.1. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.230 - Appendix C, Table C105.1, Footnote "f," Distribution of Fire Hydrants, added. 
Buildings or structures fully protected by an automatic fire sprinkler system and classified as a single-two-family dwelling or a "U" occupancy in accordance with the California Building Code shall provide a fire hydrant within 750 feet of the building or structure by an approved path of travel. All other occupancies must meet the requirements provided for in this table. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
15.09.240 - Appendix D, Table D103.4, Requirements for Dead-End Access, amended. 
Table D103.4, Requirements for Dead End Access and Turn Around requirements shall be used as a guide only. The Town of Paradise Fire Department Administrative Policy for turn-around requirements shall be complied with as though set forth in this amendment. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.10 - 2016 CALIFORNIA EXISTING BUILDING CODE (TITLE 24, PART 10)[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.10, § 15.10.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.10 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.10 pertained to 2013 California Existing Building Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.10.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 10, California Existing Building Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.11 - 2016 CALIFORNIA GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE (TITLE 24, PART 11)[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.11, § 15.11.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.11 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.11 pertained to 2013 California Green Building Standards Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.11.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11, California Green Building Standards Code, including Appendices A4 and A5, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.12 - 2016 CALIFORNIA ADMINISTRATIVE CODE (TITLE 24, PART 1)[12] 

Footnotes: 
--- (12) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.12, § 15.12.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.12 pertained to 2013 California Administrative Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.12.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 1, California Administrative Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.13 - 2016 CALIFORNIA REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE (TITLE 24, PART 12)[13] 

Footnotes: 
--- (13) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 563, § 1, adopted Oct. 11, 2016, effective Jan. 1, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.13, § 15.13.010, and § 2 of said ordinance enacted a new Ch. 15.13 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.13 pertained to 2013 California Referenced Standards Code and derived from Ord. No. 533, § 2, adopted Nov. 12, 2013; and further prior derived from Ord. No. 508, §§ 1, 2, 12-14-2010. 
 
15.13.010 - Adoption. 
The 2016 California Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 12, California Referenced Standards Code, as published and adopted by the California Building Standards Commission, is adopted by reference and incorporated herein as if fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 563, § 2, 10-11-2016, eff. 1-1-2017)  
Chapter 15.14 - SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS 
 
15.14.010 - Purpose. 
A.  California Government Code Section 65850.5 provides that every city, county, or city and county shall adopt an ordinance that creates an expedited, streamlined permitting process for small residential rooftop solar energy systems. 
B.  California Government Code Section 65850.5 provides that in developing an expedited permitting process, the city, county, or city and county shall develop a checklist of all requirements with which small rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. The building official is hereby authorized and directed to develop such checklist. 
(Ord. No. 557, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
15.14.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the town and Civil Code Section 714(c)(iii), as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
B.  "Solar energy system" has the same meaning set forth in Civil Code Section 801.5(a)(1) and (2), as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 557, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
15.14.030 - Review process. 
A.  The checklist shall be published on the town's internet web site. An applicant may submit the permit application and associated documentation to the town's building division in person or mailed together with any required permit processing and inspection fees. 
B.  Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall: 
1.  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the installation and the maintenance thereof; and 
2.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads, 
C.  For a small residential rooftop solar energy system eligible for expedited review, only one inspection shall be required, which shall be done in a timely manner. If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however, the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this subsection. 
D.  An application that satisfies the information requirements in the checklist, as determined by the building official, shall be deemed complete. Upon receipt of an incomplete application, the building official shall issue a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance. 
E.  Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval shall not include any necessary approval or permission by a local utility provider to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the provider's electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider. 
(Ord. No. 557, § 1, 10-13-2015)  
Chapter 15.36 - LANDSCAPE MATERIALS 
 
15.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the placement and installation of water-efficient, fire-resistant landscaping for specified development projects within the town and to maintain the rural, wooded atmosphere of the community. (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.020 - Scope. 
This chapter applies to all development projects proposed to be established within the town requiring formal review and approval by the planning commission or the planning director and new or expanded commercial, professional, multifamily, public, quasi-public, industrial and mobile home park developments which may not require formal review and approval by the planning commission or the planning director. (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.025 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following development project applications: home occupation permits; temporary use permits; day care permits; administrative permits for sign structures, livestock animals, reverse vending machines, small collection recycling facilities, and/or other similar land uses as determined by the planning director; zoning variances; certificates of compliance; parcel mergers; boundary line modifications; reversions to acreage; commercial agricultural land uses and single-family residential land divisions. (Ord. 332 §1, 1999: Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.030 - Definitions. 
The following words or phrases have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
"Developed area" means the area within a parcel of land which is altered from its natural state to accommodate a development and the appurtenant uses, including, but not limited to, structures, parking lots, lawns and landscaping. 
"Development" means the placement or erection of any solid material or structure on land or in water; change in the density or intensity of use of land; construction, reconstruction, demolition or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public, or municipal utility; including grading, dredging, mining, or other significant earthwork. 
"Development project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development, including a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction. 
"Drought tolerant plants" means any plant species which exhibit water-conserving characteristics and will survive and become established with the application of limited or temporary irrigation. 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by an irrigation valve or a set of valves with the same schedule. 
"Invasive plants" means those plants with the ability to become established in the landscape and to displace and disrupt native plant communities. 
"Landscape committee" means a committee composed of two members of the Paradise planning commission and a representative of the major local water purveyor appointed by its board of directors or comparable legislative body. The planning commission shall annually select its two representatives to serve upon the landscape committee, who may serve consecutive terms. 
"Landscape materials" means any plant, rock, soil, lumber, lighting or irrigation device used for aesthetic enhancement of real property. 
"Landscaped area" means the developed area of the parcel, as defined in this section, less the building footprint, driveways, nonirrigated areas of parking lots and nonporous areas such as decks and patios, but including existing vegetation to be retained as an integral part of the landscape plan. 
"Native plant" means any indigenous tree, shrub or herb existing before european settlement. 
"Planning director" means the director of the planning division of the community development department or a designee thereof. 
"Structure" means that which is built or constructed, or an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of having parts joined together in some definite manner. 
"Top dressing" means any material such as leaves, bark, straw, or other materials left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation and erosion. 
"Turf" means a surface layer of earth containing mowed grass with its roots. (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.040 - Regulations. 
All development projects subject to the requirements of this chapter or conditioned to submit and receive approval of landscape plans shall comply with the regulations set forth in this section: 
A.  Two copies of landscape plans shall be submitted to the community development department. 
B.  Landscape plans shall include at a minimum: 
1.  Designated trees to be removed, including size, location on the lot and species of trees; 
2.  Existing landscaping, including but not limited to natural vegetation, rock outcroppings and water features to be retained as an integral part of the landscape plan; 
3.  Proposed landscaping with both common and botanical names, showing variety, size (gallons or box) and location of plants; 
4.  Irrigation plan showing size, location and types of valves (manual or automatic), types of spray heads and pipe type and size, if applicable; 
5.  Landscape lighting plan, if proposed, showing size, type and location of landscaping lighting; 
6.  Location, size, model and name of automatic controller, if proposed; 
7.  Location and proposed shielding of garbage containers, if any proposed; 
8.  A calculation of the total landscaped area in square feet; 
9.  Property lines, setback areas and street names; 
10.  Streets, driveways, walkways and other paved areas; 
11.  Existing and proposed structures, fences and retaining walls; 
12.  North arrow, scale and plan preparer's name; 
13.  Soil preparation details (fertilizers, tilling, etc.) and any other applicable planting and installation details. 
C.  A landscape plan shall be formally reviewed by the planning director within ten days of receipt of the required processing fee and a landscape plan application deemed complete for processing by the town. 
D.  The planning director, using the standards identified in this chapter, shall make a final determination regarding the landscape plan not later than twenty days from the date the landscape plan is deemed complete for processing. 
E.  No final building inspection shall be performed by the town building official or a designee thereof for any development project required to submit a landscape plan until the landscape plan has been formally approved by the planning director and the landscape materials have either been placed or constructed in accordance with the approved landscape plans or a bond guaranteeing the same action is appropriately posted with the town. 
F.  The planning director may deny a landscape plan if it is found that the landscaping proposed is inadequate to buffer the development from surrounding uses, that the proposed landscaping is aesthetically inappropriate for the development or that the proposed landscape plan does not comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  Any decision of the planning director regarding approval, conditional approval or denial of a landscape plan may be appealed to the landscape committee within seven days of the date of the planning director's decision. All appeals shall be in written form, accompanied by the required appeal fee and submitted to the community development department. The landscape committee shall consider the appeal within thirty days of the filing of written appeal with the community development department. The decision of the landscape committee may be appealed to the town council within seven days of the date of the committee's decision by filing a written appeal and accompanying appeal fee with the office of the town clerk. The town council shall consider the appeal within forty days of the written appeal to the council. (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.045 - Design criteria. 
A.  Landscaping. 
1.  Plants having similar water use shall be grouped together in distinct hydrozones. 
2.  A top dressing of at least two inches in vertical depth shall be applied to and maintained in all planting areas except turf and areas immediately surrounding plant species that are intolerant to mulch. Areas to which a top dressing will be applied should be properly edged and scarified to retain top dressing. 
3.  For drought tolerant or native plantings only, temporary irrigation systems may be utilized and removed once plantings have become well-established (eighteen to twenty-four months after planting). 
4.  Turf areas shall be limited to thirty-five percent of the total landscaped area. This provision shall not apply to athletic fields and other recreational playing fields, community gardens, cemeteries and other land uses deemed to be similar by the planning director. The planning director may authorize a not-to-exceed turf area of one thousand square feet per unit as landscape materials within multiple residential land use developments. 
5.  All planting islands within parking areas shall be planted with drought-tolerant plant species. 
6.  Native plant species shall be protected and preserved to the maximum extent feasible. 
7.  Landscaped areas shall be designed and maintained in a manner that prevents the accumulation of dry grass, dead trees, cut limbs or branches that when dry constitute a fire hazard. 
B.  Irrigation. 
1.  All irrigation systems, with the exception of temporary irrigation systems, shall be controlled automatically with cycling capacity and shall be designed to avoid irrigation of unplanted surfaces. 
2.  All planting areas where drought-tolerant plants are used or where any one dimension is five feet or less shall utilize drip/trickle/bubble or microsprinklers. 
3.  Irrigation systems serving landscaped areas exceeding four hundred square feet in size (total size of all irrigated areas as shown on the landscape plan submitted for approval) shall utilize a rain-sensing device to avoid overwatering during periods of wet weather. 
4.  Recirculating water shall be used for decorative water features. 
5.  All irrigation systems shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways or structures. 
6.  Whenever possible, landscape irrigation shall be scheduled to avoid irrigating during times of high wind or temperature (contact the local water purveyor for suggested or mandated watering periods). (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.050 - Suggested plants. 
A.  The following plants are representative of the vegetation the planning director will consider in the evaluation of landscape plans: 
1.  Turf. Hybridized fescues, bluegrasses, lippia grass and bent grasses. 
2.  Groundcovers. Dwarf periwinkle ( Vinca minor ), Aaron's beard ( Hypericum calycinum ), rock rose ( Cistus ), California lilac ( Ceanothus horizontalis ), sun rose ( Helianthemum nummularium ), bush morning glory ( Convulvulus cneorum ) trailing rosemary ( Rosemarinus officinalis prostratus ) and low-spreading junipers ( Juniperus ). 
3.  Shrubs. California lilac ( Ceanothus horizontalis ), Italian buckthorn ( Rhamnus alaternus ), Texas privit ( Lingustrum texanum ), oleander ( Nerium ), juniper ( Juniperus ), wheelers dwarf mock orange ( Pittosporum tobira ), purple hopseed ( Dodonaea viscosa ), English laurel ( Prunus lauocerasus ), hawthorn ( Ralphiolepis indica ), Oregon grape ( Mahionia aquifolium ), Italian cypress ( Cupressus semperviriens ) and Arizona cypress ( Cupressus arizonica ). 
4.  Trees. Indigenous conifers, red maple ( Acer rubum ), Norway maple ( Acer platanoides ), sugar maple ( Acer saccharum ), liquidambar, valley oak ( Quercus lobata ), red oak ( Quercus rubra maxima, Quercus borealis ), black oak ( Quercus kelloggi ), almond, mimosa, albizia, dogwood ( Cornus Florida, Cornus nuttallii ), chinese pistachio ( Pistachia chinensis ), raywood ash ( Fraxinus oxycarpa ), Colorado blue spruce ( Picea pungens ), smoke tree ( Cotinus coggygria ), giant sequoia ( Sequoiadendron gigantum ), and western redbud ( Cercis occidentalis ). 
5.  Perennials. Yarrow ( Achillia ), Coreopsis grandiflora, blanket flower ( Gaillardia grandiflora ), redhot poker ( Kniphofia uvaria ), Lobelia laxiflora, Penstemon, dusty miller ( Senecio cineraria ), sage ( Salvia ), and California fuchsia ( Zauschneria ). 
B.  Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection A of this section, the planning director may consider other plant species which exhibit water-conserving characteristics in the evaluation of landscape plans. Examples of additional plant species which may be considered include but are not limited to rye grass, twin peaks ( Baccharis pilularis ), boxwood ( Buxux microphylla japonica ), English holly ( Iiex aquifolium ), Photinia fraseri or serrulata, candy tuft ( Iberis ), English lavender ( Lavandula-Officinalis ), pineapple guava ( Feijoa selloviana), Pyracantha and heavenly bamboo ( Nandenia domestica ). (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.055 - Invasive plants. 
The following plants are extremely invasive and should not be planted in areas where they may compete with more desirable native and introduced vegetation: 
A.  Tree of heaven ( Ailanthus altissima ); 
B.  Giant reed ( Arundo donax ); 
C.  Scotch broom ( Cytisus scoparius ); 
D.  French broom ( Cytisus monspessulanus ); 
E.  Easter broom ( Cytisus spachianus ); 
F.  Spanish broom ( Spartium junceum ). (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.060 - Required percentage of landscaping. 
A.  The following types of land use developments, which are required to submit landscape plans to the planning director shall have the minimum percentage of landscaping area listed in items 1 through 5 of this subsection within the developed area of the approved development project: 
1.  Mobile home parks: ten percent; 
2.  Multiple-family developments: ten percent; 
3.  Commercial/professional office: ten percent; 
4.  Public/quasi-public developments: ten percent; 
5.  Industrial developments: five percent. 
B.  The planning director, the landscape committee or the town council may vary the percentage of landscaping area required per the regulatory provisions of Section 15.36.040 if the subject property contains topographical, access, soil or land use features which would create undue hardship if the requirements of this section are strictly applied. (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.070 - Maintenance. 
A.  Each development project which receives approval for its landscape plan, as provided in this chapter, shall have its landscape materials maintained by the property owner(s) in good condition and shall abide by the approved landscape plan. The property owner(s) shall replace any landscape material of the same or similar type or function when the material is not functioning (in the case of irrigation equipment) or dead, dying or diseased (in the case of plant material). 
B.  If in the judgment of the planning director, the landscape materials are not maintained to such level as is consistent with the approved landscape plan, then the planning director shall notify the property owner as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll (or to a subsequent property owner if the name and address are known by the director) that the landscape materials must be maintained to the level shown on the approved landscape plan. The planning director shall provide a maximum period of sixty days to the property owner during which to comply with the provisions of the approved landscape plan. This compliance period may be extended if, in the determination of the planning director, extenuating circumstances linked to inclement weather temporarily prevent compliance with the approved landscape plan within the sixty-day period. (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
15.36.080 - Violation—Penalty. 
Whenever any act is prohibited by this chapter, or is made or declared to be unlawful, or an offense, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment; provided, nevertheless, that any such aforesaid violation or offense may be deemed an infraction as defined by Section 19(c) of the California Penal Code and charged as such in the discretion and at the election of the town prosecuting attorney, in which event the punishment therefor shall not be imprisonment but a fine not to exceed the amounts specified by Government Code Section 36900 as then in effect. Every day any violation of any provision of this chapter continues constitutes a separate offense. (Ord. 222 §3(part), 1993)  
Title 16 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior history: County code Ch. 20; Ord. 16 §1(P) as amended by 75 and 78. 
 
Chapter 16.01 - SHORT TITLE 
 
16.01.010 - Short title. 
This title may be called the subdivision ordinance for the town. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
16.02.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose and intent of these regulations are to provide for regulation and control of design and improvement of subdivisions with proper consideration of its relation to surrounding areas, to permit orderly, reasonable, and beneficial growth, to discourage overdevelopment, to protect and enhance in every way possible the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens, to conserve the outstanding resources of land, water, air, forest, scenic beauty, and to require the subdivider to do original work placing streets in proper condition before maintenance thereof is taken over by the town, and to relieve the public to this extent of burden that would otherwise exist. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.02.020 - Scope. 
The provisions of this title are adopted to regulate the subdivision of land and real property within the town for the purposes of sale, lease or financing in all instances except those which are exempt under the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California as set forth in Title 7 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.02.030 - Effect of Map Act provisions. 
The provisions of the Subdivision Map Act of the state of California shall govern all matters regarding the subdivision of land and/or real property in the town not otherwise provided for in this title. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.03 - DEFINITIONS 
 
16.03.010 - Definitions. 
A.  The purpose of the following definitions is to promote consistency with the general plan and increase precision and interpretation of this title. 
B.  The following words or phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates differently. 
1.  Access, Approved. "Approved access" means a right of vehicular travel to a public street. 
2.  Access Rights. "Access rights" means the rights to vehicular and/or pedestrian entry onto a public street from private property, and rights to solar access. 
3.  Advisory Agency. "Advisory agency" means the Paradise planning commission and/or the Planning Director. Both are charged with the duty of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property; the imposing of requirements or conditions thereon, or having the authority by this title to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove maps. (G.C. 66415) 
4.  Alley. "Alley" means a thoroughfare twenty feet or less in width, which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property. 
5.  Appeal Board. "Appeal board" means the town council. It may hear and make determinations on appeals of those actions of the advisory agency relating to divisions of real property or conditions associated with such land divisions, or the design thereof as described in this title, except those conditions required by Chapter 13.04 of this code. The appeal board may add or delete conditions imposed by the advisory agency. (G.C. 66416) 
6.  Applicant. "Applicant" means the record owner, or his representative, of real property proposed to be subdivided, modified, merged, or reverted to acreage. 
7.  Bond. "Bond" means any form of security, including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the town. All bonds shall be approved by the town council whenever a bond is required by this title. 
8.  Boundary Line Modification. "Boundary line modification" means a minor shift of existing property lines or other adjustment not creating a greater number of parcels than originally existed. 
9.  Building. "Building" means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons, animals or property. 
10.  Certificate of Compliance. "Certificate of compliance" means a certificate recorded by the town which determines that the subdivision of real property complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and town ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. A recorded final map or parcel map shall also constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
11.  Condominium. "Condominium" means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial, or commercial building on the real property, such as an apartment, office, or store. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of the real property. 
12.  Conversion. "Conversion" means the creation of separate ownership of existing real property together with a separate interest in space of residential, industrial, or commercial buildings. 
13.  Covenant. "Covenant" means a binding agreement between a developer and the town in which the developer agrees to perform or have performed certain obligations as specified in the agreement. The covenant shall run with the land and be binding on subsequent owners of the property. 
14.  Cul-de-sac. "Cul-de-sac" means a street or series connection of streets that is closed on one end. 
15.  Dedication. "Dedication" means a grant to a public agency for the right to use a portion of real property for public purposes by the fee owner of the real property. The town may require the grant of real property to be in fee title. 
16.  Design. "Design" means (a) street alignments, grades, and widths; (b) drainage and sanitary facilities and utilities, including alignments and grades thereof; (c) location and size of all required easements and rights-of-way; (d) fire roads and firebreaks; (e) lot size and configuration; (f) traffic access; (g) grading; (h) land to be dedicated for park and recreation purposes; (i) such other specific physical requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary to ensure consistency with, or implementation of the general plan, or any applicable specific plan. (G.C. 66418) 
17.  Developer. "Developer" means the applicant for a subdivision, certificate of compliance, reversion to acreage, or boundary line modification. 
18.  Development. "Development" means uses to which the land which is the subject of a map shall be put, the buildings to be constructed on it, and all alterations of the land and construction incident thereto. (G.C. 66418) 
19.  Easement. "Easement" means authorization by a property owner for the use by another, for a specified purpose, over any designated part of his property. 
20.  Environmental Impact Report (EIR). "Environmental impact report (EIR)" means a detailed statement setting forth the environmental effects and considerations pertaining to a project as specified in Section 22100 of the California Environmental Quality Act, and may mean either a draft or final EIR. 
21.  Frontage. "Frontage" means a portion of a parcel or lot that abuts one side of a street or road which allows the primary access. 
22.  Frontage, Double. "Double frontage" means the situation of a lot or parcel abutting two streets or roads which do not intersect at the property and having the right of access to both streets or roads. 
23.  General Plan. "General plan" means the general plan of the town or any element, section, or portion thereof. 
24.  Grade. "Grade" means the lowest horizontal elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving, or sidewalk at a point where height is to be measured. 
25.  Improvement. "Improvement" means street or road work and utilities to be installed, or agreed to be installed, by the subdivider on the land to be used for public or private streets, roads, ways, or easements as are necessary for the general use of lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final map thereof. In addition, "improvement" shall mean other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, or by any other entity approved by the town or any combination thereof, deemed necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to, or implementation of, the general plan or an adopted specific plan of the town. (G.C. 66419) 
26.  Licensed Surveyor. "Licensed surveyor" means a land surveyor properly licensed and registered in the state of California. 
27.  Lot. "Lot" means an area of real property with a separate number or other designation shown on a recorded parcel map, subdivision map, record of survey, or a land area legally created pursuant to applicable regulations in effect prior to the effective date of the state Subdivision Map Act or any local ordinance enacted pursuant thereto. 
28.  Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot situated adjacent to the intersection of two or more streets or roads. 
29.  Lot Depth. "Lot depth" means a minimum horizontal distance between the front and rear property lines measured along the median between the two side property lines. 
30.  Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot having no side property lines abutting a street, road, or road easement. 
31.  Lot Line, Front. "Front lot line" means the property line abutting the street or road on an interior lot. On a corner lot, the shorter property line abutting a street or the line designated as the front lot line by a subdivision or parcel map. On a lot with double frontage, the lot line abutting the street or road providing primary access to the lot. On a flag lot, the interior lot line designated as a front lot line by a recorded map, or the line determined by the town engineer to be the front lot line. 
32.  Lot Line, Rear. "Rear lot line" means a lot line not defined as a front or side lot line. For irregularly shaped lots, or lots bounded by only three lot lines, a line within the lot having a length of ten feet, parallel to and most distant from the front lot line shall be interpreted as the rear lot line for the purpose of determining required yards and setbacks pertaining to rear lot lines. 
33.  Lot Lines. "Lot lines" means the lines bounding a lot or parcel. 
34.  Lot Width. "Lot width" means the distance between side lot lines, measured along the front setback line, except lots facing cul-de-sacs which shall have a lot width equal to the arc distance measured along the front setback line of the cul-de-sac. 
35.  Map, Final Subdivision. "Final subdivision map" means a map prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and presented for recording. The map shall conform to an approved tentative subdivision map and meet the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
36.  Map, Parcel. "Parcel map" means a map prepared by a registered civil engineer or a licensed surveyor and presented for recording. The map shall conform to an approved tentative parcel map and meet the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
37.  Map, Plot. "Plot map" means a map drawn to scale showing the accurate boundaries of real property, and all structural improvements thereon, including, but not limited to, buildings, septic systems and ponds. 
38.  Map, Preliminary. "Preliminary map" means a map submitted to the planning department for recommendations prior to submission of the tentative map. 
39.  Merger. "Merger" means the joining of two or more contiguous parcels of land under one ownership into one parcel. 
40.  Notice of Violation. "Notice of violation" means a certificate recorded by the town which determines that real property has been divided or has resulted from a division in violation of this title or the Subdivision Map Act. 
41.  Offsite. "Offsite" means any premises not located within the area of the property to be subdivided, whether or not in the same ownership of the applicant for subdivision or parcel map approval. 
42.  Owner. "Owner" means any person, group of persons, firm or firms, corporation or corporations, or any legal entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary interest in the land sought to be divided under this title. 
43.  Parcel. "Parcel" means a lot or an area not shown on any recorded parcel or subdivision map, which was lawfully created and contains the minimum square footage and frontage as required by the subdivision ordinance and zoning district at the time the parcel was created. 
44.  Pedestrian Way. "Pedestrian way" means a path designated for use by pedestrians, equestrians, and/or bicyclists, and not intended for use as a way for motor driven vehicular traffic. 
45.  Planning Commission. "Planning commission" means the town planning commission charged with the responsibility of performing the function and duties of the advisory agency. 
46.  Public Water Supply. "Public water supply" means a water supply provided by a local agency, publicly owned corporation or approved utility company, or any supply subject to provisions of the Health and Safety Code. 
47.  Record of Survey. "Record of survey" means a survey map prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor defining the points, land boundaries and property lines of a particular piece of real property. 
48.  Registered Engineer. "Registered engineer" means an engineer properly licensed and registered by the state of California. 
49.  Reimbursement Agreement. "Reimbursement agreement" means a written agreement between the town and a subdivider to reimburse the subdivider for that portion of the cost of improvement equal to the difference between the amount it would have cost the subdivider to install such improvements to serve the subdivision only and the actual cost of such improvements. 
50.  Remainder. "Remainder" means that portion of an existing parcel which is not included as a part of the subdivided land. 
51.  Repeat Subdivision. "Repeat subdivision" means the redivision, one or more times, of any certain real property, either by the original subdivider or subsequent subdividers, regardless of any changes in the equalized county assessment roll regarding the subject property. Redivision means a substantial change in street/roadway alignment, lot design or drainage. 
52.  Right-of-way. "Right-of-way" means the portion of real property granted to the town to utilize the property for public street and drainage purposes. This grant includes the right for use by public utilities. 
53.  Road. "Road" means a right-of-way, easement, or other lot, privately owned which affords the primary means of access to abutting property. 
54.  Road Standard. "Road standard" means a type and design of a road or street as adopted by the town council to be used within the town. 
55.  Same Ownership. "Same ownership" means ownership by the same person, corporation, firm, entity, partnership, or unincorporated association; or ownership by different corporations, firms, partnerships, entities, or unincorporated associations, in which a stockholder, partner, or associate, or a member of his immediate family owns an interest in each corporation, firm, partnership, entity, or unincorporated association. 
56.  Setback Line. "Setback line" means a line within a parcel parallel or concentric to, and measured from, a corresponding street or road centerline, property line, or right-of-way line, forming the interior boundary of a required yard and governing the placement of structures and uses on the lot. 
57.  Street, Private. "Private street" means a right-of-way, easement, or other lot, privately owned which affords the primary means of access to abutting property. 
58.  Street, Public. "Public street" means a dedicated or publicly accepted and maintained thoroughfare affording the primary means of access to abutting property. The term "street" includes all land within the right-of-way thereof. 
59.  Subdivider. "Subdivider" means a person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association who proposes to divide, divides, or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for oneself or for others; except that employees and consultants of persons or entities, acting in such capacity, are not "subdividers." (G.C. 66423) 
60.  Subdivision. "Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units of improved or unimproved contiguous land or any portion thereof shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, whether immediate or in the future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easements, or railroad rights-of-way. "Subdivision" includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code or a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. "Subdivision" includes any division of land by gift or inheritance (probate). 
Any conveyance of land to a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to that public utility for rights-of-way shall not be considered a division of land for purposes of computing the number of parcels. (G.C. 66424) 
61.  Subdivision Improvement Standard. "Subdivision improvement standard" means standard specifications and plans, and other standards approved by the town engineer that shall govern the improvements to be constructed or installed pursuant to this title and the Subdivision Map Act. 
62.  Subdivision Map Act. "Subdivision Map Act" means state of California Government Code Sections 66410 to 66499. 
63.  Temporary Improvement. "Temporary improvement" means improvements built and maintained by a subdivider during construction of the subdivision and prior to release of the performance bond. 
64.  Tentative Map. "Tentative map" means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvements of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property. (G.C. 66424.5) 
65.  Through Street. "Through street" means a street connected on both ends to the town street system such that all points in town can be accessed from either end of the street. 
66.  Vesting Tentative Map. "Vesting tentative map" means a map which meets the requirements of definition 64 above and Section 66452 of the California Government Code. 
(Ord. 223 §§2—4, 1993; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.04 - RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
16.04.010 - Town attorney. 
The town attorney shall be responsible for approving as to form all subdivision improvement agreements, bonds, or securities. 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.04.020 - Town council. 
The town council shall have final jurisdiction in the approval of final maps, improvement agreements, covenants, and the acceptance by the town of lands and/or improvements as may be proposed for on-site dedication to the town for all subdivisions of land. The town council shall act as the appeal board for hearing appeals of the approval, conditional approval, or denial of tentative subdivision maps and tentative parcel maps by the advisory agency. 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.04.030 - Town engineer. 
The town engineer shall be responsible for: 
A.  Establishing design and construction details, standards and specifications; 
B.  Determining if proposed subdivision improvements comply with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act and reporting the findings together with recommendations for approval, or conditional approval, of the tentative map to planning director for all subdivisions; 
C.  The processing and certification of final maps, reversion to acreage maps, and amended maps; the processing and approval of subdivision improvement plans, lot line adjustments, mergers, and certificates of compliance; 
D.  Examining and certifying that final maps are in substantial conformance with the approved tentative map; 
E.  The inspection and approval of subdivision improvements; 
F.  The acceptance of: 
(a)  Dedications and improvements for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels, 
(b)  Offsite dedications lying outside a subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed; 
G.  The certification of completion of private improvements not to be maintained by the town; and 
H.  The processing of, and the approval, conditional approval, or denial of, boundary line modifications, including the collection of all required deposits and fees. 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.04.040 - Community development department. 
The community development department shall be responsible for the processing of preliminary and tentative parcel maps, revisions to acreage, map modifications, time extensions and for the collection of all required deposits and fees. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 1, 4-13-2004; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.04.045 - Planning director. 
The planning director shall be responsible for approving, conditionally approving, or denying those tentative parcel maps that are noncontroversial and do not involve significant policy issues, as well as time extensions related to said tentative parcel maps. 
(Ord. No. 501, § 1, 6-8-2010; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.04.050 - Planning commission. 
The planning commission shall be responsible for approving, conditionally approving, or denying the application for major map modification(s), time extensions, tentative subdivision maps, and those tentative parcel maps that are controversial or which involve significant policy questions. 
(Ord. No. 417, § 1, 4-13-2004; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.05 - MAPS REQUIRED 
 
16.05.010 - Application of chapter. 
The necessity for preliminary, tentative, final, and parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.05.020 - Division of land—Five or more lots. 
In order to create five or more parcels, all applicants for a land division of five or more parcels, five or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the state Civil Code, a community apartment project containing five or more parcels, or for the conversion of a dwelling to a stock cooperative containing five or more dwelling units, shall: 
A.  Submit a tentative subdivision map to the community development department and pay appropriate fee; 
B.  Submit a final map to the town engineer which meets the requirements of this title; 
Except where: 
1.  The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the legislative body; or 
2.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of twenty acres or more and has an approved access to a maintained public street or highway; or 
3.  The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for commercial or industrial development, and which has the approval of the town engineer as to street alignments and widths; or 
4.  Each parcel created by the division has a gross area of not less than forty acres or is not less than a quarter of a quarter section. 
A parcel map shall be required for those subdivisions described in subdivisions 1, 2, 3, and 4 of this subsection. (G.C. 66426) 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, § 1, 12-14-2004)  
16.05.030 - Division of land—Four or fewer parcels. 
A tentative map and parcel map shall be required to create four or fewer parcels, including property given as a result of gift deed(s), except no parcel map shall be required for land conveyed to, or from, a governmental agency, public entity, or public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to the public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map. (G.C. 66428) 
Inapplicability. Tentative and final parcel maps shall not be required for lot line adjustments; mineral, oil or gas leases; land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code; and records of survey. (G.C. 66412) 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, § 2, 12-14-2004)  
16.05.040 - Lot Line Adjustments. 
A plot map, with copies to the public works department, in form as required by the town engineer, shall be required for all lot line adjustments and shall be approved, conditionally approved, or denied by the town engineer after the appropriate application fee has been paid and map submitted to the department. Appeals of the town engineer's decision regarding a lot line adjustment shall be made to the planning commission which shall conduct a hearing on the appeal, provided that such hearing need not be noticed nor conducted as a public hearing; provided, however, that appeals to a denial based on the town's sewage disposal requirements must follow the procedures set forth in Chapter 13.04 of this code. A plat map and associated deed(s) shall be required to record lot line adjustments, except when the town engineer requires, because of the complexity of the adjustment, monumentation and a record of survey or parcel map to be recorded. A record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment if required by Section 8762 of the Business and Professions Code. (G.C. 66412 (d)) 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, § 2, 12-14-2004)  
16.05.045 - Record of survey. 
A.  The record of survey shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth, or polyester base film, eighteen by twenty-six inches. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. A one-inch blank margin shall be left on each edge of the map. 
B.  The record of survey shall be prepared in conformity with the generally accepted practice of land surveying and shall include the following information: 
1.  All monuments found, set, reset, replaced or removed, describing their kind, size and location, and giving other data relating thereto; 
2.  Bearing or witness monuments, basis of bearings, bearing and length of lines, and scale of map; 
3.  Name and legal designation of tract or grant in which the survey is located and ties to adjoining tracts; 
4.  Memorandum of oaths; 
5.  Certificates as required by the town engineer; 
6.  Any other data necessary for the intelligent interpretation of the various items and locations of the points, lines and areas shown. (B.P.C. 8762, 8763, 8764) 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.05.050 - Fees. 
All persons submitting maps as required by this title shall pay all fees and/or deposits as provided by the town's resolution establishing fees and charges. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.06 - ACCESS EASEMENT WIDTHS/CUL-DE-SAC LENGTH REQUIREMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 203. 
 
16.06.010 - Newly created access easement or right-of-way width requirements. 
The following table prescribes the minimum required access easement width to be established for land divisions of real property to be served access by newly created access easements or rights-of-way: 
TABLE 16.06.010 
Newly Created Access Easement or Right-of-Way Width Requirements 
Total Number or Potential Number of Lots Served by Road or Street 	Minimum Access Width Required (feet) 
5+ 	60 (public street)* 
	50 (private street)** 
4 	40 
3 	30 
2 	25 
1 	20 
 
* Access width of fifty feet may be acceptable to town engineer if underground utilities are installed. 
** Unless special circumstances warrant a sixty-foot access width, as determined by town engineer. 
(Ord. 223 §5(part), 1993)  
16.06.020 - Width requirements—New access easements or rights-of-way. 
A.  All access easements or rights-of-way must connect directly or indirectly, via private road(s) if necessary, with a publicly maintained street. The easements or rights-of-way used for access to a publicly maintained street must contain the minimum access width required for their entire length from the subject property, including the property's frontage along the easement or right-of-way. 
B.  All newly created private access easements or rights-of-way shall be fifty feet in width except as indicated in Table 16.06.010. Any applicant for a subdivision may request a width of less than fifty feet for a privately maintained road but not less than the minimum widths shown in the table above for the number of lots served, or potentially served, by the easement or right-of-way to be established. All requests must be accompanied by a written explanation describing the circumstances which warrant the lesser access easement or right-of-way width. 
C.  If a request for a lesser access easement width is made in writing accompanying the application for a subdivision, then the planning director shall determine the appropriate access width considering the potential for future land divisions to be served via the subject access, or future connection to another road or street. The minimum width as determined by the planning director shall be commensurate with the number of actual or potential parcels which are or could be served by the access easement or right-of-way serving the land division, as required in Table 16.06.010. 
(Ord. 223 §5(part), 1993)  
16.06.025 - Existing access easement or right-of-way width requirements. 
Not withstanding the requirements of Table 16.06.010, land divisions of real property abutting private road easements or rights-of-way in existing single-family residential neighborhoods may be proposed if the existing access easement or right-of-way allows sufficient space to construct the appropriate road standard (as adopted by resolution) and provide for necessary utility services. Table 16.06.025 provides minimums of access easement or right-of-way widths for road standards adopted by town resolution. In the circumstance of topography requiring cut or fill, unusual drainage or unique public utility requirements, the town engineer may request of the applicant design information sufficient to determine necessary minimum easement or right-of-way width. 
TABLE 16.06.025 
Access Easement or Right-of-Way Width Requirements for Divisions of Land Using Existing Easements 
Total Number or Potential Number of Lots Served by Road or Street 	Minimum Road Standard as Set Forth by Town Resolution 	Minimum Access Width 
Required (feet) 
5+ 	A-3 	30 
2—4 	A-2 	28 
1 	A-1 	20 
 
(Ord. 223 §5(part), 1993)  
16.06.040 - Maximum cul-de-sac length requirements. 
A.  Newly created cul-de-sac. In conjunction with the design of a land division project (either via parcel map or subdivision map), any newly created cul-de-sac shall not exceed 1,320 lineal feet (1/4 mile length) as measured from its intersection with a through street (or road) to the farthest point of its terminus. 
B.  Existing cul-de-sac. Whenever a land division of real property is designed to be provided access by an existing cul-de-sac or an existing cul-de-sac with a proposed extension added thereto, the length of the affected cul-de-sac as measured from its intersection with a through street (or road) to the farthest point of its terminus shall not exceed 1,800 lineal feet. 
C.  Exceptions. Land divisions of real property provided access by a cul-de-sac that exceeds the maximum length requirement of subsection "B" of this section may be approved if the planning commission or the Town Council (in cases of appeal) receives substantial evidence of public record to support adopting two of the following required findings: 
1.  The affected cul-de-sac will not provide access to more than twenty-four (24) lots or parcels; or 
2.  The land division includes the designed establishment and assured maintenance of alternative improvement features located onsite and off-site that includes Town Fire Chief deemed accepted wildland fire suppression tactics, strategies and provisions for firefighter and civilian safety. Such features may include, but are not limited to: fuel reduction, building codes(s), greenbelts, roadway width turnout(s) and other mitigations to make the land division area safe during a wildland fire; or 
3.  The affected cul-de-sac is specifically identified as the only means of planned access serving the real property proposed for land division within either a Town of Paradise adopted General Plan Circulation Element, a "Specific Plan" established in accordance with Government Code sections 65450 et. seq., or a "Master Road Plan". 
(Ord. 223 §5(part), 1993; Ord. No. 417, § 4, 4-13-2004)  
Chapter 16.07 - SUBDIVISION OF FIVE OR MORE LOTS 
 
16.07.010 - Preliminary maps. 
A.  The contents, form, and submittal of preliminary maps shall be governed by the provisions of this title. 
B.  Prior to the filing of an application for a tentative map for a subdivision of five or more parcels (other than condominium conversions), the subdivider may submit plans and data related to the design, layout, grading and other features proposed for the development as required by the planning director, the town engineer, and other agencies as determined appropriate by the community development department. Within twenty-eight days after such submittal, the community development department shall report to the applicant any comments or changes to the proposed plan it deems appropriate as a result of its preliminary review. 
C.  After receiving comments from the community development department, the subdivider shall prepare a tentative map pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, § 3, 12-14-2004)  
16.07.020 - Tentative maps. 
A.  The contents and form, submittal and approval or denial of tentative maps shall be governed by the provisions of this title. The tentative map shall be prepared in a manner acceptable to the community development department and shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor. 
B.  Written consent shall be required from the legal owner of the real property prior to any application being deemed complete for processing. The tentative map shall be a minimum of eighteen by twenty-six inches, but not larger than twenty-four by thirty-six inches; sheets shall all be the same size per application and shall be clearly and legibly drawn and contain not less than the following: 
1.  A title which shall contain the subdivision name, and type of subdivision; 
2.  Name and address of legal owner, subdivider, and person preparing the map, including registration or license number; 
3.  Sufficient bearings and distances to define the boundary of the proposed subdivision; 
4.  Date, north arrow, scale, contour interval, and source and date of existing contours; 
5.  Existing and proposed land use, including names of all proposed streets and roads; 
6.  Existing topography of the proposed site and at least one hundred feet beyond its boundary, and other features including but not limited to: 
a.  On sites where topography is not critical to the design, percents and directions of slope, including any grade breaks at the ten, twenty, and thirty percent slopes shall be shown. Where topography is critical to the design of the site, lots, or drainage, then existing contours at ten-foot intervals shall be shown, 
b.  Type and diameter of existing trees eight inches or greater in diameter measured fifty-four inches above grade level, which may be affected by the proposed development. Any trees proposed to be removed shall be so indicated, 
c.  The approximate location and outline of existing structures located both onsite and within one hundred feet of site boundary, identified by type. Structures to be removed shall be marked, 
d.  The approximate location of all areas subject to inundation or stormwater overflow and the location, width, and direction of flow of each watercourse, 
e.  The location, pavement, and right-of-way width, grade, and name of existing streets or roads affecting the property, 
f.  The width, location, and size of any existing septic systems, water mains, storm drains, and french drains, 
g.  The location of all lava outcroppings, natural and manmade watercourses, including swales, 
h.  The location of all fire hydrants within three hundred feet of the subject property; 
7.  A vicinity map sufficient to show the relation to the local community; 
8.  The assessor's parcel number(s); 
9.  A preliminary title report concerning the proposed site shall be also submitted with the tentative map; 
10.  Proposed improvements shall be shown, including but not limited to: 
a.  The location and radius of all curb returns and cul-de-sacs, 
b.  The location, grade, centerline radius and arc length of curves, pavement, right-of-way width and names of all streets. Typical sections of all streets shall be shown, 
c.  The location, width, and purpose of all easements, including solar easements, 
d.  The angle of intersecting streets or roads if such angle deviates from a right angle by more than four degrees, 
e.  The appropriate lot layout and the appropriate dimensions and size of each lot. If deemed necessary, the town engineer or health officer may require the applicant to supply finished grade data, 
f.  A grading plan, which may be on a separate map than the tentative map, for lots which contain slopes exceeding ten percent, 
g.  Proposed recreation sites, trails, and parks for private or public use, 
h.  Proposed common areas to be dedicated for public open space, 
i.  Proposed location and size of unsuitable septic system layout areas, proposed water main, storm drains, and french drains, 
k.  Remainder lots which shall not be divided for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing; 
11.  The name(s) of any geologist or soil engineer whose services were used in the preparation of the design of the tentative map; 
12.  All lettering shall be one-eighth inch minimum; 
13.  If the subdivider plans to develop the site in phases, the proposed phases and their proposed sequence of construction shall be shown; 
14.  The community development department may waive any of the above tentative map requirements if the type of subdivision does not need to comply with these requirements, or that other circumstances justify a waiver. The community development department may require other drawings, data, reports, or information as deemed necessary; 
15.  The tentative map shall be accompanied by the following data or reports; 
a.  Title Report. A preliminary title report, showing the legal owners at the time of filing the tentative map, 
b.  Any other data or reports deemed necessary by the community development department, 
c.  Environmental review data; 
16.  The tentative map shall be reviewed by the community development department for compliance to all applicable town ordinances and the state Subdivision Map Act. Within thirty days of the receipt of an application for a tentative map, the community development department shall determine in writing if the application is complete and shall transmit the determination to the applicant. The tentative map application shall be considered complete only when such a map conforms to the requirements of this title, and when all accompanying data or reports, as required by this title, have been submitted and accepted by the department. The subdivider shall file with the department the number of tentative maps the director may deem necessary. (G.C. 65943/PRC 2108 and 21087 (CEQA 15101); 
17.  The community development department shall forward copies of the tentative map to affected public agencies and utilities which may, in turn, forward their findings and recommendations to the department. Public agencies and utilities shall certify that the subdivision can be adequately served; 
18.  Within ten days of the filing of a complete application for a tentative map, the community development department shall send a notice to the governing board of the Paradise Unified School District. The notice shall also contain information concerning the location of the proposed subdivision, the number of units, density, and any other information which would be relevant to the school district. The governing board may review the notice and may send a written report to the department. The report shall indicate the impact of the proposed subdivision on the school district and shall make recommendations as the governing board of the district deems appropriate. If the school district fails to respond within twenty working days from the mailing of the notice, the community development department shall deem such failure to mean that the school district has no comment regarding the tentative map. (G.C. 66455.7); 
19.  Upon completion of review by the department and prior to the date the tentative map is scheduled for planning commission action, the community development department may hold a subdivision conference on its own initiative or at the request of the subdivider. Written notice of the subdivision conference shall be given at least five working days prior to the conference to the subdivider or his agent and all affected agencies or public utilities. The results of the subdivision conference shall be reported to the planning commission, along with the staff report concerning the tentative map. A copy of the report shall be given to the subdivider along with the staff report concerning the tentative map at least five days prior to any hearing or action on the map by the planning commission. (G.C. 66452.3); 
20.  Any requests for exception to the various conditions to be considered by the planning commission shall be filed, in writing, with the community development department not later than the third working day following the subdivision conference. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, §§ 4, 5, 12-14-2004)  
16.07.030 - Planning commission action. 
A.  Notice. 
1.  After receipt of a valid application, completion of the subdivision conference, and after preparation of the staff report, a public hearing shall be set before the planning commission to consider the tentative map. At least ten calendar days before the public hearing, a notice shall be given of the time, date, and place of the hearing which includes a general explanation of the project to be considered and a general location of the subject property. 
2.  The notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the town. 
3.  In addition to the notice by publication, the community development department shall mail or deliver a notice of the hearing to all property owners as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll for those properties located within three hundred feet of the property on which the tentative map has been filed. 
4.  In the case of the proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project, notice shall be given as required by Section 66451.3 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
5.  The town shall also mail the public hearing notice to the property owner as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll. 
6.  The planning commission shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map within fifty days after the tentative map has been accepted as complete by the community development department, unless an EIR or negative declaration regarding environmental effect is required for preparation and adoption. If an EIR or negative declaration is adopted, the time limits of Section 66452.1, 65950, 65950.1 and 65952.1 (a) and (b) of the California Government Code shall apply. (G.C. 66452.1 (b) and (c) ) 
B.  Findings for Approval 
1.  In approving, or conditionally approving, the tentative map, the planning commission shall find that the proposed subdivision, together with its provisions for its design and improvements, is consistent with the town's general plan, state Subdivision Map Act, and town's subdivision ordinance. 
2.  The planning commission may modify, or delete any condition recommended by the town staff except conditions required by town ordinance or resolution, or by the town engineer, related to public health, safety, or welfare, or to standards approved by resolution of the town council. The planning commission may add conditions of approval to the tentative map. All engineering/surveying conditions imposed on a tentative map or parcel map for which a tentative map was not required, shall be reviewed by the town engineer/town surveyor to determine compliance with generally accepted engineering practices.(G.C. 66474.10) 
C.  Findings for Denial. 
1.  The tentative map may be denied by the planning commission on any grounds provided by town ordinances or the Subdivision Map Act. The planning commission shall deny approval of the tentative map if it makes any of the following findings: 
a.  That the proposed map is not consistent with the town's general plan or applicable specific plan adopted by the town council; 
b.  That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the town's general plan or applicable specific plan adopted by the town council; 
c.  That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development; 
d.  That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development; 
e.  That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements is likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
f.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems; 
g.  That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public-at-large, for access through, or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. If the planning commission finds that alternate easements for access or other use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to the ones previously acquired by the public, then the planning commission may approve the tentative map. (This subsection shall only apply to easements of record or to easements established by a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction and no authority is granted herein to the town to determine that the public-at-large has acquired easements for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision.) 
D.  Appeal. Any interested person adversely affected by the decision of the planning commission regarding the tentative map or any conditions imposed on the map, may appeal the decision in writing to the town council within ten calendar days (not including holidays) of the decision by the planning commission. (G.C. 66452.5(d)) 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, § 6, 12-14-2004)  
16.07.040 - Town council action. 
A.  The council shall determine at a public hearing whether the individual appealing is directly affected by the planning commission's decision. If a public hearing is to be conducted by the town council, it shall set the public hearing for a date not to exceed thirty days from the date of the filing of the appeal. (G.C. 66452.5) 
B.  The town council shall give notice in the same manner as set forth in Section 16.07.030 of this title. 
C.  If the town council does not act upon the appeal within seven days following the conclusion of the public hearing, the decision of the planning commission shall stand. (G.C. 66452.5) 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.07.050 - Extension of time for planning commission or town council. 
Any time limits set forth in Government Code Section 66451.1 et seq. may be extended by mutual written consent of the subdivider and the planning commission or the town council, whichever may apply. (G.C. 66451.1(a)) 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.07.060 - Expiration of time limits for approved or conditionally approved tentative maps. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative subdivision map shall expire thirty-six months beyond the date of its approval or conditional approval. The planning commission may extend such approval for an additional time period not exceeding a total of six years. Such extension application of the subdivider shall be filed in writing prior to the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. Prior to the expiration of the approved tentative map, upon receipt by the community development department of a complete application to extend the map, the tentative map approval shall automatically be extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. The planning commission may approve, at its discretion, any portion of the additional six-year time extension for any tentative subdivision map. In order to approve an extension application the planning commission must find evidence before them verifying that the subdivider has exhibited good faith in attempting to satisfy the conditions of the approved tentative subdivision map. 
B.  If the planning commission denies the subdivider's application for a time extension, pursuant to subsection A, the subdivider may appeal the denial to the town council within fifteen days after the denial action. (G.C. 66452.6) 
C.  The periods of time specified above shall not include any period during which a lawsuit involving the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction, if the stay of the time period is approved by the town council pursuant to this section. 
D.  After service of the initial petition or complaint in the lawsuit upon the town, the subdivider may file a written request with the planning director that a stay in the time period begin. Within forty days after receiving the application requesting a stay in the time period, the town council shall either stay the time period for up to six years or deny the requested stay. (G.C. 66452.6) 
E.  Once the stay of the time period is lifted, the tentative map shall be valid for the remaining time period prior to the lawsuit. (G.C. 66452.6) 
F.  The period of time specified in this section shall not include any period during which a development moratorium is in effect according to Section 66452.6(b) of the Subdivision Map Act. When a moratorium has ended, the subject map shall be valid for the remaining period of time prior to the date of the imposition of the moratorium. However, if the remaining time is less than one hundred twenty days, the subject map shall be valid for one hundred twenty days following the termination of the moratorium. (G.C. 66452.6) 
G.  Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision map shall terminate all proceedings and no final map of all or any portion of the real property included in the tentative subdivision map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative subdivision map. (G.C. 66452.6) 
(Ord. No. 501, § 2, 6-8-2010; Ord. 368 §1, 2001; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.07.065 - Expiration of time limits for approved or conditionally approved tentative maps involving $125,000 or more offsite improvements. 
A.  If a subdivider is subject to a requirement of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars or more to construct, improve or finance the construction or improvement of public improvements outside the property boundaries of the tentative map, excluding improvements of public rights-of-way which abut the boundary of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of that property, each filing of a final map authorized by Section 66456.1 of the California Government Code shall extend the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved tentative map by thirty-six months from the date of its expiration, or the date of the previously filed map, whichever is later. The extensions shall not extend the tentative map more than ten years from its approval or conditional approval date. However, a tentative map on property subject to a development agreement authorized by Section 65864 et seq. of the Government Code may be extended for the period of time provided for in the agreement, but not beyond the duration of the agreement. The number of phased maps which may be filed shall be determined by the planning commission at the time of the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map. (G.C. 66452.6) 
B.  The amount of one hundred twenty-five thousand dollars shall be increased by the registrar of contractors according to the adjustment for inflation set forth in the statewide cost index for Class B construction, as determined by the state Allocation Board at its January meeting. The adjustment by the registrar of contractors shall be effective on the first day of the month occurring more than thirty calendar days after the registrar of contractors makes that adjustment. The adjusted amount shall apply to tentative and vesting tentative maps whose applications were received after the effective date of the adjustment. (G.C. 66452.6 (a)) 
C.  The time periods regarding moratoriums, lawsuits, or other proceedings as set forth in Section 66452.6 of the California Government Code shall apply. 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.07.070 - Amendments. 
A.  Minor changes to an approved or conditionally approved tentative subdivision map may be approved by the community development department upon application by the subdivider, provided: 
1.  No lots, units, or building sites are added; 
2.  Such changes are consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval; 
3.  There are no resulting violations of town ordinances. 
B.  Any revision shall be approved by the planning director upon concurrence from the town engineer. The amendment shall be indicated on the approved map and certified by the planning director and the town engineer. 
C.  Other changes to the tentative map shall be presented to the planning commission for approval. Processing shall be in accordance with Section 16.07.020 of this title. 
D.  Any approved amendment shall not alter the expiration date of the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 7, 12-14-2004; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.07.080 - Final maps. 
A.  The form, contents, accompanying data, and filing of the final map shall conform to the provisions of this section. The final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a registered engineer or licensed land surveyor. 
B.  The filing of a final map on a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall not invalidate any part of the tentative map. Each final map which constitutes a part or unit of the approved tentative map shall have a separate subdivision number. Any subdivision improvement agreement executed by the subdivider shall provide for the construction of improvements as required to constitute a logical and orderly development of the entire subdivision. 
C.  Multiple final maps of an approved or conditionally approved tentative map may be filed by the subdivider. 
D.  An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, alleys, and easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be included in the survey. (G.C. 66434) 
At the time of making the survey for the final map, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient durable monuments to conform with standards described in Section 16.07.080(F)(6) and Section 8771 of the Business and Professions Code. At least one exterior boundary line shall be monumented prior to recording the final map. Other monuments shall be set as required by the town engineer. (G.C. 66495) 
E.  The form of the final map shall conform to Section 66434 of the Subdivision Map Act and as follows: 
1.  The final map shall be legibly drawn, printed or reproduced by a process guaranteeing a permanent record in black on tracing cloth or polyester base film. Certificates, affidavits and acknowledgments may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility. 
2.  The size of each sheet shall be eighteen inches by twenty-six inches. A marginal line shall be drawn completely around each sheet, leaving an entirely blank margin of one inch. The scale of the map shall be not less than one inch equals one hundred feet, or as may be necessary to show all details clearly, and enough sheets shall be used to accomplish this end. The particular number of the sheet and the total number of sheets comprising the map shall be stated on each of the sheets, and its relation to each adjoining sheet shall be clearly shown. When four or more sheets including the certificate sheet are used, a key sheet shall be included. 
3.  All printing or lettering on the map shall be of one-eighth inch minimum height and of such shape and weight as to be readily legible on prints and other reproductions made from the original drawings. 
4.  The final form of the final map shall be as approved by the town engineer. 
F.  The contents of the final map shall conform to Section 66434 the Subdivision Map Act and as follows: 
1.  The boundary of the subdivision shall be designated by a heavy black line in such a manner as not to obliterate figures or other data. 
2.  Each sheet shall have a title showing the subdivision number and name and the location of the property being subdivided with reference to maps which have been previously recorded, or by reference to the plat of the United States Survey. The following words shall appear in the title: "Town of Paradise, County of Butte." 
3.  Certificates. The following certificates shall appear only once on the cover sheet: 
a.  Owner's Certificate. A certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having record title interest in the land subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the map and offering for dedication to the public certain specific parcels of land or easements. Exceptions are those parties having rights-of-way, easements, or interests which cannot result in a future fee, or as provided in Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act. 
b.  Trustee's Certificate. A certificate which may be included in the owner's certificate, signed and acknowledged by any trustees of record at the time of town council approval of the final map, consenting to the recording of the map and any offers of dedications. 
c.  Engineer's Certificate. A certificate by the engineer or surveyor responsible for the survey and final map shall appear on the map. The certificate shall give the date of the survey, state that the survey and final map were made by or under the direction of the engineer or surveyor, and that the survey is true and complete as shown. 
The certificate shall also state that all the monuments are of the character and occupy the positions indicated, or that they will be set in such positions on or before a specified later date. The certificate shall also state that the monuments are, or will be, sufficient to enable the survey to be retraced. (G.C. 66441) 
The certificate shall state that the map complies to the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title. 
d.  Certificate of Soils and Geologic Report. When a soils report, a geologic report, or soils and geologic reports have been prepared specifically for the subdivision, such fact shall be noted on the final map, together with the date of such report or reports, and the name of the engineer making the soils report and geologist making the geologic report and the location where the reports are on file. (G.C. 66434.5) 
e.  Town Engineer's Certificate. A certificate by the town engineer stating that the map has been examined and that it is substantially the same as the tentative map and any approved alterations, that it complies with the Subdivision Map Act and the provisions of this title and is technically correct. (G.C. 66442) 
f.  Town Clerk's Certificate. A certificate for execution by the town clerk stating the date and number of the resolution adopted by the town council approving the final map and stating that the town council accepted, subject to improvement or rejected on behalf of the public, any real property offered for dedication for public use in conformity with the terms of the offer of dedication. (G.C. 66440) 
g.  County Recorder's Certificate. A certificate to be executed by the county recorder stating that the map has been accepted for filing; that the map has been examined and that it complies with the provisions of state laws and local ordinances governing the filing of final maps. (G.C. 66466(c)) 
The certificate shall show who requested the filing of the map, the time and date the map was filed and the book and page where the map was filed. 
4.  Scale, North Point, and Basis of Bearings. There must appear on each map sheet the scale, the north point and the basis of bearings. 
5.  Linear, Angular, and Radial Data. Sufficient linear, angular, and radial data shall be shown to determine the bearings and lengths of monument lines, street centerlines, the boundary lines of the subdivision, the boundary lines on every lot and parcel which is a part of the subdivision, and ties to existing monuments used to establish the boundary. Arc length, radius and total central angle and radial bearings of all curves shall be shown. "Ditto" marks shall not be used in the dimensions and data shown on the map. 
6.  Monuments. The location and description of all existing and proposed monuments shall be shown. Standard town monuments shall be set at, or on, town engineer approved offsets from the following locations: 
a.  The intersection of street centerlines; 
b.  Beginning and end of curves or intersection of tangents on centerlines; 
c.  At other locations as may be required by the town engineer; 
7.  Lot Numbers. Lot numbers shall begin with the number one in each subdivision and shall continue consecutively with no omissions or duplications except where contiguous lands, under the same ownership, are being subdivided in successive units, in which event lot numbers may begin with the next consecutive number following the last number in the preceding unit. Each lot shall be shown entirely on one sheet of the final map, unless approved by the town engineer. 
8.  Adjoining Properties. The adjoining corners of all adjoining subdivisions shall be identified by subdivision number, or name when not identified by official number, and reference to the book and page of the filed map showing such subdivision; and if no such subdivision is adjacent then by reference to the recorded deed by book page number for the last recorded owner of such adjacent property. 
9.  Town Boundaries. Town boundaries which cross or join the subdivision shall be clearly designated. 
10.  Street Names. The names of all streets, roads, alleys, or highways within or adjoining the subdivision shall be shown. 
11.  Easements. Easements for roads or streets, paths, stormwater drainage, sanitary sewers or other public use as may be required, shall be dedicated to the public for acceptance by the town or other public agency, and the use shall be specified on the map. If at the time the final map is approved, any streets, roads, paths, alleys or storm drainage easements are not accepted by the town council, the offer of dedication shall remain open and the town council may, by resolution at any later date, accept and open the streets, roads, paths, alleys, or storm drainage easements for public use, which acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
The town engineer shall accept any dedications lying outside the subdivision boundary which require a separate grant deed. The acceptance shall be recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
All easements of record shall be shown on the map, together with the name of the grantee and sufficient recording data to identify the conveyance, (e.g., recorder's serial number and date, or book and page of official records). 
Easements not disclosed by the records in the office of the county recorder and found by the surveyor or engineer to be existing, shall be specifically designated on the map, identifying the apparent dominant tenements for which the easement was created. 
The sidelines of all easements of record shall be shown by dashed lines on the final map with the widths, lengths, and bearings of record. The width and location of all easements shall be approved by the town engineer. 
G.  Preliminary Submittal. The subdivider shall submit two prints of the final map to the town engineer and two prints to the health department for checking accompanied by the appropriate checking fee. The following data, plans, reports, and documents shall be required in a form as approved by the town engineer. 
1.  Improvement Plans. Improvement plans as required by resolution of the town council. An improvement plan being processed in conjunction with either an approved tentative, parcel or final map shall be proposed by a registered civil engineer. (G.C. 66456.2(a)) 
2.  Title Report. A title report showing the legal owners at the time of submittal of the final map. 
3.  Improvement Bond Estimate. The improvement bond estimate shall include all improvements within public rights-of-way, easements, or private common areas and utility trench backfill as provided by the developer, except for those utility facilities installed by a utility company under the jurisdiction of the California Public Utilities Commission. 
4.  Deeds for Easements or Rights-of-Way. Deed for offsite easements or rights-of-way required for road or drainage purposes which have not been dedicated on the final map. Written evidence acceptable to the town in form of rights-of-entry or permanent easements across private property outside of the subdivision permitting or granting access to perform necessary construction work and permitting the maintenance of the facility. 
5.  Traverse Closures. Traverse closures for the boundaries of blocks, lots, easements, street centerlines and monument lines. 
6.  Hydrology and Hydraulic Calculations. Complete hydrology and hydraulic calculations of all storm drains. 
7.  Organization Documents. The submittal of the final map or parcel map shall include the proposed declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions, and all other organizational documents for the subdivision in a form as prescribed by Section 1353, et seq, of the Civil Code of the state of California. All documents shall be subject to review by the town engineer and town attorney. 
8.  Any additional data, reports or information as required by the town engineer. 
H.  Review by Town Engineer. The town engineer shall review the final map and the subdivider's engineer or surveyor shall make corrections and/or additions until the map is acceptable to the town engineer. 
I.  Approval by Town Engineer. The subdivider's engineer or surveyor shall submit the original tracing of the map, corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map, to the town engineer. 
The town engineer shall sign the appropriate certificates and transmit the original to the town clerk. 
J.  Approval by town council. The final map, upon execution by the town engineer and planning director, together with any subdivision improvement agreement, shall be placed on the council agenda for its approval. The town council shall consider the final map for approval within ten days after filing with the town clerk, or at its next regular meeting, whichever is later. The town council shall have approved any subdivision improvement agreement before approving the final map. (G.C. 66458(a) and (b)) 
If the subdivision improvement agreement or final map is unacceptable, the town council shall make their recommended corrections, instruct the town engineer to draft a new agreement or revise the final map and defer approval until an acceptable agreement or final map has been resubmitted. 
K.  Denial by the Town Council. The town council shall deny approval of the final map upon making any of the findings contained in Section 16.07.030(C) of this title. 
The town council shall not deny approval of the final map if it has previously approved a tentative map for the proposed subdivision and if it finds that the final map is in substantial compliance with the previously approved tentative map. (G.C. 66448 and 66458(b)) 
L.  Filing with the County Recorder. Upon approval of the final map by the town council, the town clerk shall execute the appropriate certificate on the certificate sheet and forward the map, or have an authorized agent forward the map to the county recorder. (G.C. 66464) 
M.  Additional Information. The planning commission, or the town council, may require additional information concerning the final or parcel map to be filed or recorded simultaneously with a final or parcel map. The additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its separate relationship to the final or parcel map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect the recorded title interest. Additional survey and map information may include, but need not be limited to: building setback lines; flood hazard zones; seismic lines and setbacks; geologic mapping; archaeological sites; limit to the number of bedrooms on specific parcels; water supply provisions; road and access status. (G.C. 66434.2) 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.08 - SUBDIVISIONS OF FOUR OR FEWER PARCELS 
 
16.08.010 - Tentative parcel map. 
A. The form, contents, submittal, and approval of tentative parcel maps shall conform to this chapter. The tentative parcel map may be prepared by the property owner, a registered civil engineer, or a licensed land surveyor. The tentative parcel map shall be clearly and legibly drawn on one sheet. The map scale shall be approved by the town engineer and all lettering shall be one-eighth inch minimum in height. The final form shall be approved by the town engineer. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 417, § 4, 4-13-2004)  
16.08.020 - Submittal of tentative parcel map. 
A. Any person making a division of land within the corporate boundaries of the town, for which a parcel map is required shall, in accordance with the provision of this title, file the required number of prints of the tentative parcel map, together with any fees as may be required, to the community development department. 
B.  Any requests for exceptions to the various conditions to be considered by the planning commission or the planning director shall be filed in writing with the community development department at the time of submittal of the tentative parcel map. Such request shall state the reason(s) for the exception. All requests for sewage disposal variances shall be made as set forth in Chapter 13.04 of this code. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 417, § 6, 4-13-2004)  
16.08.030 - Staff review of tentative parcel maps. 
A. The tentative parcel map shall be reviewed by the community development department for compliance with all applicable town ordinances and the Subdivision Map Act. Within thirty days of the receipt of an application for a tentative parcel map, the community development department shall determine in writing if the application is complete and shall transmit the determination to the applicant. The tentative parcel map shall be considered complete only when such a map conforms to the requirements of this title, and when all accompanying data or reports, as required by this title have been submitted and accepted by the community development department. The subdivider shall file with the department the number of tentative parcel maps the planning director deems necessary. 
B.  The community development department shall distribute to the appropriate agencies or departments requests for review of the completed application. The agencies or departments shall respond in writing within fourteen days of the receipt of the review request. If the department receives no answer within fourteen days, the department will assume the agency or department has no comment on the project. 
C.  After receipt of the reviews from the appropriate agencies or departments, the community development department shall conduct an initial study to determine if any adverse environmental effect may be created by the project. If an environmental impact report is prepared for the tentative parcel map, the planning commission or the planning director shall render its decision within one year of the date the application was deemed complete for processing. If a negative declaration is adopted, the planning commission or the planning director shall render its decision within six months of the date the application was deemed complete for processing. A ninety-day extension to either of the above time limits may be granted by the planning commission if the applicant agrees to the extension. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 417, § 7, 4-13-2004)  
16.08.040 - Notice of public hearings. 
Upon completion of staff review and comment, the planning director or planning staff shall set a planning director action date or a public hearing before the planning commission. A public hearing before the planning commission shall be required if the planning director determines that the tentative parcel map is controversial or if major policy questions are at issue. 
A.  Action by the Planning Director. If action is to be taken on a tentative parcel map by the planning director, pursuant to this section, notice of the application shall be given by the mailing of notice to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred feet of the property which is the subject of the application. Such notice shall be mailed at least ten calendar days prior to the date that the planning director is to take action on the tentative parcel map. The notice shall contain a general description of the proposed division of real property, including its location, and shall include the date and place of the action on the application. 
B.  Action by the Planning Commission. If action is to be taken on a tentative parcel map by the planning commission, pursuant to this section, notice of the public hearing shall be given at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall be mailed first class or delivered to all real property owners shown on the latest equalized assessment roll for properties located within three hundred feet of the property proposed for development. The notice shall include a general explanation of the project, a general description of the area of the project location, the street address of the subject property (if any), and the time, date and place of the public hearing. In addition to the notice by mail, the notice shall be published once, at least ten calendar days, prior to the hearing date, in a newspaper of general circulation, published and circulated in the town. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.08.050 - Findings. 
Any decision of the planning director or planning commission regarding the tentative parcel map (except hearing continuances) shall be based on findings of consistency with the town's general plan, any applicable specific plan, town ordinances, resolutions, or with the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.08.060 - Parcel map improvements. 
A.  For a division of land for which a tentative parcel map is required, improvements shall include the dedication of rights-of-way and easements and the construction of reasonable on-site and off-site improvements for the parcels being created. No other improvements shall be required. 
B.  An improvement plan shall be submitted and approved pursuant to the requirements of the town engineer. 
C.  Fulfillment of the construction requirements shall not be required until the time a permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel is issued by the town, or until the time the construction of the improvements is required pursuant to an agreement between the subdivider and the town. In the absence of an agreement, the town may require fulfillment of the construction requirements within a reasonable time following approval of the parcel map and prior to the issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for the development of a parcel, upon a finding based on substantial evidence of the planning commission or planning director, as appropriate, that fulfillment of the construction requirements is necessary for either of the following reasons: 
1.  Fulfillment is necessary to protect public health and safety. 
2.  The required construction is a necessary prerequisite for the orderly development of the surrounding area. 
(Ord. No. 489, § 1, 11-18-2008; Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.08.070 - Appeals of planning director or planning commission decision. 
A.  Any person adversely affected by a decision of the planning director or planning commission regarding a tentative parcel map or the conditions of approval of a tentative parcel map may appeal the decision within ten days of the decision to the town council. Such appeal shall be in writing and filed with the town clerk. The town council shall consider the appeal at a public hearing within thirty days of the filing of the appeal. Notice of the public hearing shall be given pursuant to this title. The town council shall render its decision on the appeal within ten days of the conclusion of the public hearing. 
B.  The council may sustain, modify, reject, or overrule any decision of the planning director or planning commission regarding the tentative parcel map and any condition of approval. In its decision, the council shall make findings consistent with the town's general plan, the Subdivision Map Act, and this title. 
C.  Any tenant of the property being subdivided in the case of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment or stock cooperative project may appeal any action of the planning director or planning commission pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and this title. 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.08.080 - Expiration of approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a tentative parcel map shall expire thirty-six months from the date of its approval or conditional approval. 
B.  Expiration of an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map shall terminate all proceedings and no final parcel map of all or any portion of the real property included in the tentative parcel map shall be filed without first processing a new tentative parcel map. (G.C. 66463.5) 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.08.085 - Extensions. 
A.  The planning director or the planning commission may extend an approved tentative parcel map for an additional time period not exceeding a total of six years. Such extension application shall be filed by the subdivider in writing prior to the expiration date of the approved tentative parcel map. Prior to the expiration of the approved tentative parcel map, upon receipt by the community development department of a complete application to extend the map, the tentative parcel map approval shall automatically be extended for sixty days or until the application for the extension is approved, conditionally approved, or denied, whichever occurs first. The planning director or the planning commission may approve, at its discretion, any portion of the additional six-year time extension for any tentative parcel map. In order to approve an extension application the planning director or the planning commission must find evidence before them verifying that the subdivider has exhibited a good faith effort in attempting to satisfy the conditions of the approved tentative parcel map. 
B.  If the planning director or the planning commission denies the application for a time extension, pursuant to subsection A, the subdivider may appeal the denial to the town council within fifteen days after the denial action. (G.C. 66463.5) 
(Ord. No. 501, § 3, 6-8-2010; Ord. 368 §2, 2001; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.08.090 - Effect of lawsuit. 
A.  The periods of time specified above shall not include any period during which a lawsuit involving the approval or conditional approval of the tentative parcel map has been filed and is pending in a court of competent jurisdiction, if the stay of the time period is approved by the town council pursuant to this section. After service of the initial petition or complaint in the lawsuit upon the town, the subdivider may file a written request with the community development department that a stay in the time period begin. 
B.  Within forty days after receiving the application requesting a stay in the time period, the town council shall either stay the time period for up to five years, or deny the requested stay. 
C.  Once the stay of the time period is lifted, the tentative parcel map shall be valid for the remaining time period prior to the lawsuit. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 8, 12-14-2004; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.08.095 - Effect of moratorium. 
The periods of time specified in this chapter shall not include any period of time during which a development moratorium, imposed after approval of the tentative map, is in existence; provided, however, that the length of such moratorium does not exceed five years. Once such a moratorium is terminated, the map shall be valid for the same period of time as was left to run on the map at the time that the moratorium was imposed; provided, however, that if such remaining time is less than one hundred twenty days, the map shall be valid for one hundred twenty days following the termination of the moratorium. (G.C. 66463.5) 
(Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.08.100 - Amendments. 
A.  Minor changes to an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map may be approved by the planning director upon application to the community development department by the subdivider or on its own initiative provided that: 
1.  No lot, units, or building sites are added; 
2.  Any change is consistent with the intent of the original tentative map approval; 
3.  There are no resulting violations of the town's municipal code; 
4.  No new easements are granted or created not shown on the approved map. 
B.  All amendments shall be reviewed by the town engineer. Any revision to the tentative parcel map shall be noted on the tentative parcel map or in writing to the subdivider, whichever is appropriate. Any amendment shall not affect the expiration date of the approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map. 
C.  If the requested amendment(s) is a substantial change, in the opinion of the planning director, the director may require a new tentative parcel map application in lieu of the procedure set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 430, § 9, 12-14-2004; Ord. 203 §2 (part), 1990)  
16.08.110 - Final parcel maps. 
The form, content, submittal, approval, and filing of final parcel maps shall conform to the provisions of this section and the Subdivision Map Act. 
A.  An accurate and complete survey of the land to be subdivided shall be made by a registered civil engineer or licensed surveyor. All monuments, property lines, centerlines of streets, roads, alleys, or easements adjoining or within the subdivision shall be tied into the survey. 
B.  The form of the final parcel maps shall conform to the final map requirements as specified in Section 16.07.080 of this title. 
C.  The contents of the final parcel map shall conform to the final map content requirements of Section 16.07.080 of this title, except Section 16.07.080(C). 
1.  Certificates shall conform to Section 66449 of the Government Code. A certificate shall also be required from the town clerk, if approval of the map is by the town council. 
2.  Parcels shall be designated by numerals commencing with number one. 
D.  The subdivider shall submit prints of the final parcel map to the town engineer and health department for checking. The map shall be accompanied by copies of the data, plans, reports, and documents as required for final maps by Section 16.07.080. The town engineer may waive any of the requirements if the location and nature of the proposed subdivision does not need to comply with the requirements of final maps for subdivisions of more than four lots as required by this title. (G.C. 66428, 66490, 66491) 
E.  The town engineer shall review the parcel map and the subdivider's engineer or surveyor shall make corrections or additions until the map is acceptable to the town engineer. 
F.  The subdivider's engineer or surveyor shall submit the original tracing of the map to the town engineer corrected to its final form and signed by all parties required to execute the certificates on the map. 
G.  The town clerk shall transmit the approved parcel map directly to the county recorder. (G.C. 66464) 
H.  The requirement for a parcel map may be waived by the planning director if the land involves: 
1.  A division of property resulting from the conveyance of land or interest to or from the town, public entity or public utility for a public purpose, such as school sites, or rights-of-way or easements for streets, sewers, utilities, drainage, etc., or, 
2.  A division of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation defined by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code, which are created by short-term leases. 
3.  The planning director may waive the parcel map upon making a finding that the proposed division of land complies with requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of this title, local ordinance, and the Subdivision Map Act. (G.C. 66428(a)) 
Upon waiving the parcel map requirement, the planning director may cause to be filed with the county recorder a certificate of compliance for the land to be divided and a plat map showing the division. 
A parcel map waived by the planning director may be conditioned to provide for payment of park land dedication fees, drainage fees, and other fees by a method approved by the town engineer. (G.C. 66499.35(c) and (d)) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.08.120 - Additional information. 
At his discretion, the town engineer may require additional information to be filed or recorded simultaneously with a final or parcel map. The additional information shall be in the form of a separate document or an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the final or parcel map, and shall contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title interest. The document or additional map sheet may also contain a notation that the additional information is derived from public records or reports, and does not imply the correctness or sufficiency of those records or reports by the preparer of the document or additional map sheet. Additional survey and map information may include, but need not be limited to: building setback lines; flood hazard zones; seismic lines and setbacks; geologic mapping; archaeological sites; limit to the number of bedrooms allowed on specific parcels of a land division; water supply provisions; and road and access status. (G.C. 66434.2) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.09 - DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS 
 
16.09.010 - Dedication of streets, alleys, and other public rights-of-way/easements. 
As a condition of approval of a final map or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets and/or alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public greenways, scenic easements, public utility easements, solar easements, bicycle paths, and other public easements, in accordance with Section 66475, et seq. of the state Subdivision Map Act. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets and/or alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements, solar easements, and other public easements. Improvements shall be constructed or placed in accordance with the provisions of this title. (G.C. 66475, et seq.) 
A.  The town may require as a condition of approval of any subdivision the waiver of direct access rights to proposed or existing streets or roads from any property within or abutting the subdivision. 
B.  The waiver shall become effective in accordance with its provisions and shall be contained in the owner's certificate of the final map or parcel map. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.020 - Park land dedication. 
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision or parcel map, the town shall require the subdivider to dedicate land, pay an in-lieu fee thereof, or both, at the option of the town based on the formula below, for park and recreation purposes. Such dedication or fee shall be required at the time of recordation of such map, according to the following formula and standards: 
Amount of land to be dedicated = Average number of persons per new dwelling unit × Park acreage standard/1,000 population. 
Note: "Average number of persons per new dwelling unit" equals 2.33 for single-family dwellings or 2.00 for multiple-family dwellings and "Park acreage standard" equals three acres. 
Or: 
For single-family dwellings: 2.33/d.u. × 0.003 acres = 0.007 acres/d.u. 
For multiple-family dwellings: 2.00/d.u. × 0.003 acres = 0.006 acres/d.u. 
The 0.007 or 0.006 acres/d.u. is used to determine the acreage, or value of acreage, for each subdivision required to meet this requirement. (G.C. 66477) 
Example: Ten lots valued at $20,000/acre = 0.007/d.u. × 10 = 0.07 acres required for dedication, or $1,400 of in-lieu fees ($20,000/acre × 0.07 acres). 
For the purposes of this section, the number of proposed dwelling units shall be determined as follows: In areas zoned for one dwelling unit per lot or parcel, the number of dwelling units shall equal the number of parcels indicated on the tentative subdivision or parcel map. When all or part of the subdivision is located in an area zoned for multiple dwelling units per parcel, the number of proposed dwelling units in the area so zoned shall equal the maximum number of dwelling units allowed under that zone. For residential condominium projects, the number of dwelling units shall be the number of condominium units on the tentative subdivision or parcel map. The term "new dwelling unit" does not include dwelling units lawfully in place prior to the date on which the tentative subdivision or parcel map is approved. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.030 - Subdivision requirement for in-lieu fees. 
Subdivisions of less than fifty lots shall be required to pay an appropriate in-lieu fee. The in-lieu fee shall be equal to the value of the land necessary to provide three acres of park area per one thousand persons residing within the town as of the first day of January of the year the tentative subdivision or parcel map was approved. (G.C. 66477(b); 66477(g)) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.040 - Determination of land or fee. 
Unless otherwise requested by the town recreation and park district, all division of land within the town shall be required to pay an in-lieu fee as provided for by this title. No dedication of land will be required unless specific request by the town recreation and park district is made in writing to the planning department prior to the first administrative action or public hearing of the subject tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.045 - Town determination final. 
The determination by the town whether land shall be dedicated or an in-lieu fee charged shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.050 - Timing of dedication or payment of fee. 
At the time of filing of the final or parcel map, the subdivider shall dedicate land or pay the in-lieu fee as required by the town to the town recreation and park district. Open space covenants for private park or recreational facilities shall be submitted to the planning department prior to recordation of the final or parcel map, and shall be recorded along with the final or parcel map. (G.C. 66477(b) (2)) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.060 - Amount of fee in-lieu of park land dedication. 
When a fee is required to be paid in-lieu of park land dedication, the amount of the fee shall be based upon the average estimated fair market value of the unimproved land being subdivided or the value of the land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated according to Section 16.09.020 and shall be determined per the formula contained therein. The fair market value shall be the assessed value of the subject property as shown in the latest equalized assessment roll of Butte County. The in-lieu fee shall be paid by the subdivider to the town recreation and park district prior to recordation of the final or parcel map. A copy of the receipt of payment of the in-lieu fee shall be delivered to the town engineer prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map. (G.C. 66477(i)) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.062 - In-lieu fee regulations. 
All in-lieu fees for park and recreational purposes shall be used by the town recreation and park district for the construction or improvement of a local park or recreational facility at an appropriate time which serves the residents of the area being subdivided. The money collected shall be used for the purpose of providing park or recreation facilities reasonably related to serving the subdivision. The money shall be committed within five years after the date of payment or the issuance of building permits on one-half of the lots created by the subdivision, whichever occurs later. If the money is not committed within this time period, it shall be distributed and paid to the then recorded owner(s) of the lots of the subdivision in the same proportion the size of each lot bears to the total area of all lots in the subdivision. (G.C. 66477(f)) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.095 - Procedure for land dedication. 
For all subdivisions, appropriate land dedication as set forth in Section 16.09.020 may be required as a condition of approval. The land dedicated shall be granted to the town recreation and park district by grant deed(s) from the subdivider. Such grant shall be deeded prior to the recordation of the subject map. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.096 - Certification and reconveyance of dedications. 
A.  If property is dedicated to the town in fee for public purposes, or for making public improvements or constructing public facilities, other than for open space, parks or schools, shall record a certificate with the county recorder in the county in which the property is located. The certificate shall be attached to the map and shall contain all of the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property; 
2.  A legal description of the real property dedicated; 
3.  A statement that the town shall reconvey the property to the subdivider if the local agency makes a determination pursuant to this section that the same public purpose for which the property was dedicated does not exist, or the property or any portion thereof is not needed for public utilities, as specified in subsection (C) of this section. 
B.  The subdivider may request that the town make the determination that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required still exists, after payment of a fee which shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to make the determination. The determination may be made by reference to a capital improvement plan as specified in Section 65403 or 66002, an applicable general or specific plan requirement, the subdivision map, or other public documents that identify the need for the dedication. 
C.  If the town has determined that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required does not exist, it shall reconvey the property to the subdivider or the successor in interest, as specified in subsection (A) of this section, except for all or any portion of the property that is required for that same public purpose or for public utilities. 
D.  If the town decides to vacate, lease, sell or otherwise dispose of the dedicated property, the town shall give at least sixty days' notice to the subdivider whose name appears on the certificate before vacating, leasing, selling or otherwise disposing of the dedicated property. This notice is not required if the dedicated property will be used for the same public purpose for which it was dedicated. 
E.  This action shall only apply to property required to be dedicated on or after January 1, 1990. (G.C. 66477.5 (a)) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.099 - Land dedication regulation. 
All land dedicated for recreational purposes shall remain in perpetuity to the town recreation and park district for use as determined by the board of directors of the district. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.100 - Credit for private recreation or open space. 
Where substantial private park and recreational area is provided in a proposed subdivision and such space is to be privately owned and maintained by the future residents or owner(s) of the subdivision, partial credit, not to exceed fifty percent, may be given against the requirement of land dedication or payment of fees in-lieu thereof, if the town recreation and park district finds that it is in the public interest to do so and that all the following standards are met: (G.C. 66477(i)) 
A.  That yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and regulations shall not be included in the computation of such private open space; 
B.  That the private ownership and maintenance of the open space is adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, conveyance, or restrictions; 
C.  That the use of the private open space is restricted for park and recreational purposes by recorded covenant, which runs with the land in favor of the future owners of property and which cannot be defeated or eliminated without the consent of the town or its successor; 
D.  That the proposed private open space is reasonably adaptable for use for park and recreation purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location; 
E.  That facilities proposed for the open space are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreational element of the general plan. 
F.  That the open space for which credit is given is a minimum of two acres. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.140 - Nonapplicability. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to industrial subdivisions, condominium conversion projects or stock cooperatives which consist of the subdivision of airspace in an existing apartment building. (G.C. 66477(i)) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.09.200 - Other dedications. 
The town reserves the right to require dedications or reservation for uses or facilities other than for park and recreation uses, (e.g. fire stations). Such dedications or reservations shall follow the applicable procedures and regulations of this chapter. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.10 - CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION 
 
16.10.010 - Purposes. 
A.  To establish criteria for the conversion of the existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives, and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing. 
B.  To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of apartments to condominiums by providing for procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation. 
C.  To assure that purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical conditions of the structure which is offered for purchase. 
D.  To insure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety and is consistent with the goals of the town. 
E.  To provide a reasonable balance of ownership and rental housing in the town and a variety of choices of tenure, type, price, and location of housing. 
F.  To maintain a supply of rental housing for low and moderate income persons. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.10.020 - Requirements and procedures. 
In addition to the requirements and procedures as set forth in Chapters 16.07 and 16.08 of this title, conversions of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, stock cooperatives, and any other subdivision which is a conversion of existing rental housing shall be subject to the additional requirements provided by this chapter, except that a limited equity housing cooperative, as defined in Section 33007.5 of the Health and Safety Code, shall be exempt from these additional requirements. 
A.  A report prepared by a registered engineer or architect or licensed qualified contractor describing the physical elements of all structures and facilities shall be submitted with the tentative subdivision or parcel map. The report shall include, but not be limited to: 
1.  A report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property including foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, walls, roofs, ceilings, windows, recreational facilities, parking facilities, and appliances. Regarding each such element, the report shall state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built, the condition of each element, when any element was replaced, the approximate date any element will require replacement, the cost of replacing any element, and any variation of the physical condition of any element from the current town ordinances or codes. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed; 
2.  A report from a licensed structural pest control operator, approved by the town, on each structure and each unit within the structure; 
3.  A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider on the structure; 
4.  A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions which would be applied on behalf of any and all owners of condominium units within the project; 
5.  Specific data regarding the project, including, but not limited to, square footage and number of rooms in each unit, proposed sale price of units, and names and addresses of all tenants; 
6.  Signed copies from each tenant of NOTICE OF INTENT TO CONVERT, as specified in Section 66427.1 of the Government Code. The subdivider shall submit evidence that a letter of notification was sent to each tenant for whom a signed copy of the notice is not submitted; 
7.  Any other information requested by the planning director which will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this title. 
B.  Acceptance of Reports. The final form of the physical elements report and other documents shall be as approved by the town. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the community development department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the planning commission. 
C.  Public Hearing. Prior to tentative map approval, for a condominium conversion, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing. In the event of a proposed conversion of residential real property to a condominium, community apartment, or stock cooperative project, notice shall be sent by first class mail to each tenant of the subject property, and shall also include notification of the tenant's right to appeal and be heard, and any person who has requested notification of any hearing regarding the project. The request shall be honored for one year from the date of the request. The town may require a reasonable fee for such notification to recover the cost of mailing. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, § 10, 12-14-2004)  
16.10.025 - Waiver provision for mobile home parks. 
A.  Waiver Provision. When at least two-thirds of the owners of mobile homes who are tenants in the mobile home park sign a petition indicating their intent to purchase the mobile home park for purposes of converting it to tenant owned, condominium ownership interest, the requirement for a parcel map or a tentative and final map specified by Section 66426 of the Government Code shall be waived unless any of the following exist: 
1.  There are significant design or improvement requirements necessitated by health or safety concerns. 
2.  There is a need to perform field surveys on the exterior boundaries of the parcel or parcels appearing on the face of the map. 
3.  The existing lot or lots were not created by a recorded parcel or final map. 
4.  The conversion would result in the creation of additional parcels. (G.C. 66428(b)) 
B.  Procedure for Waiver Application. A letter, formally requesting waiver from the requirements for a parcel map or a tentative and final map specified by Section 66426 of the California Government Code, shall be submitted to the planning director with a petition signed by at least two-thirds of the owners of mobile homes who are tenants in the mobile home park, as indicated in subsection (A) of this section. 
C.  Action on the Waiver Application. After the waiver application is deemed complete pursuant to Section 65943 of the California Government Code, the planning director shall approve or deny the application within sixty days. 
D.  Appeal of Decision on Waiver Application. Any person directly affected by the decision of the planning director regarding the waiver application, may appeal the decision in writing to the town council within ten calendar days of the decision of the planning director. (G.C. 66428(b)) 
All other provisions regarding the waiver of parcel, tentative and final maps detailed in Section 66428(b) of the California Government Code shall apply. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.10.030 - Tenant provisions. 
A.  Notice of Intent. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1 (a), a notice of intent to convert shall be delivered by the subdivider to each tenant at least sixty days prior to filing of the tentative map. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. The form of the notice shall be in the form outlined in Government Code Section 66452.9 and approved by the community development department and will inform the tenants of all rights provided under this title and state law. 
B.  Notice of Public Report. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(a), each tenant shall receive ten days written notice that an application for a public report will be or has been submitted to the department of real estate, and that such report will be available upon request. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. 
C.  Notice of Final Map Approval. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(b), each tenant shall receive written notification within ten days of approval of a final map for the proposed conversion. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. 
D.  Tenant's Right to Purchase. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(d), any present tenant shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective unit upon the same terms and conditions that such unit will be initially offered to the general public or terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. 
E.  Vacation of Units. Each tenant not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he or she occupies the unit, shall be given one hundred eighty days' written notice of intention to convert his or her unit prior to termination of tenancy. The subdivider shall notify each tenant immediately prior to the time of final map approval of the anticipated date required to vacate the unit and when the one hundred eighty day period will begin. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted prior to approval of the final map. The written notices to tenants required by this section shall be deemed satisfied if such notices comply with the legal requirements for service by mail. (G.C. 66452.50) 
F.  Notice to New Tenants. Beginning at a date not less than sixty days prior to the filing of the tentative map, the subdivider or his or her agent shall give notice of such filing in the form outlined in Government Code Section 66452.8(b) to each person applying after such date for rental of a unit prior to acceptance of any renter deposit. If the subdivider, or his or her agent fails to give notice pursuant to this section, he or she shall pay to each prospective tenant who becomes a tenant and who was entitled to such notice and who does not purchase his or her unit an amount equal to two times monthly rent for moving expenses. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, § 11, 12-14-2004)  
16.10.040 - Findings. 
The planning commission shall not approve an application for conversion unless the planning commission finds that: 
A.  All applicable provisions of this title have been met; 
B.  The proposed conversion is consistent with the town's general plan or any specific plan; 
C.  The proposed conversion will conform to the town's municipal code in effect at the time a completed application is received by the community development department. 
(Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990; Ord. No. 430, § 12, 12-14-2004)  
Chapter 16.11 - SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS 
 
16.11.010 - Subdivision improvements required. 
A.  The subdivider shall construct all required improvements both onsite and offsite according to approved standards. No final map shall be presented to the town council for approval nor any parcel map approved for recordation by the town engineer until the subdivider either completes the required improvements or enters into an agreement with the town agreeing to do such work. (G.C. 66419 and 66462(a)) 
B.  All improvements as may be required as conditions of approval of the tentative map or by this code, together with but not limited to those listed in this title, shall be required for all subdivisions. 
C.  Requirements for construction of onsite and offsite improvements for subdivisions of four or fewer parcels shall be noted on the parcel map, or waiver of parcel map or the subdivision improvement agreement recorded prior to or concurrent with the parcel map. 
D.  Completion of improvements shall be in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.11.020 - Improvements which may be imposed. 
A.  Storm Drainage. Storm water runoff from the subdivision shall be collected and conveyed in a manner consistent with the "Master Storm Drainage Study and Facilities Plan" adopted by the town and with the requirements of the town engineer. 
B.  Sewage Disposal. Each lot or unit within the subdivision shall meet the requirements of the town regarding sewage disposal as set forth in Chapter 13.04 of this code. 
C.  Water Supply. Each lot or unit within the subdivision shall have adequate water for domestic use. 
D.  Utilities. Each lot or unit within the subdivision shall be made accessible to service for gas, electric, telephone, and cable television facilities unless exempted by the planning commission. 
E.  Underground Utilities. For subdivisions of five (5) or more lots, all utilities within the subdivision and along peripheral streets or roads shall be placed underground except where exempted by the public utilities commission regulations or the planning commission. Subdivisions of four (4) or fewer parcels shall not be required to install underground utilities upon approval of the planning commission. 
F.  Deferred Improvement Agreements. All subdivisions shall abide by the regulations set forth in Chapter 12.20 of this code. 
G.  Design. The design and layout of all required improvements both onsite and offsite, private and public, shall conform to generally accepted engineering standards and to such standards as approved by the town engineer. 
1.  The subdivision shall have approved access to a public street. Each lot or unit within the subdivision shall have an approved access to a public street or private road which accesses a public street. 
2.  Where practicable, the subdivision shall be designed to provide for future access to property adjoining the subdivision. 
3.  Reserve strips, or nonaccess at the end of a street or road or at the boundaries of subdivisions, shall be dedicated unconditionally to the town when required. 
H.  Improvement Plans. Improvement plans shall be prepared under the direction of and signed by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state of California. Improvement plans shall include but not be limited to: grading; storm drains; landscaping; streets; roads; and related facilities. (Government Code Section 66456.2) 
1.  Form. 
a.  Plans, profiles, and details shall be legibly drawn, printed, or reproduced on twenty-four (24) by thirty-six (36) inch sheets. A border shall be made on each sheet providing one-half (½) inch at the top, bottom and right side and one and one-half (1½) inches on the left side. 
b.  A suitable title block shall be placed in the lower right corner or along the right edge and provide adequate space for approval by the town engineer and for approval of plan revisions. 
c.  Plan and profiles shall be drawn to the scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet or larger unless approved by the town engineer. Details shall be drawn to such scale that clearly shows the facility being constructed. The scales for various portions of the plans shall be shown on each sheet. 
d.  A vicinity map shall be shown on the first sheet of all sets of plans. 
e.  A north arrow shall be shown on each sheet when applicable. 
f.  Plans shall be laid out to orient north to the top or right edge of the sheet unless approved otherwise by the town engineer. 
g.  All lettering shall be one-eighth (?) inch minimum height. 
h.  If the plans include three (3) or more sheets, a cover sheet showing the streets, lots, easements, storm drains, index and vicinity map shall be included. 
i.  The form of all plans shall conform to additional requirements as may be established by the town engineer. The final form of all plans shall be approved by the town engineer. 
2.  Contents. The improvement plans shall show complete plans, profiles, and details for all required improvements to be constructed, both public and private, including common areas. Reference to town standard plans may be made in lieu of duplicating the drawings. 
3.  Supplementary Plans and Calculations. Hydrology, hydraulic plans and calculations, bond estimates and any structural calculations as may be required, shall be submitted with the improvement plans to the town engineer. All calculations shall be legible, systematic and signed and dated by a registered civil engineer licensed by the state of California and in a form approved by the town engineer. 
4.  Review by Town Engineer. The subdivider shall submit the improvement plans and all computations to the town engineer for review. Upon completion of the review, one set of the preliminary plans, with the required revisions indicated, will be returned to the subdivider's engineer. 
5.  Approval by Town Engineer. An improvement plan being processed in conjunction with either an approved tentative, parcel or final map shall be acted on by the town engineer within sixty (60) working days of its submittal, except that at least fifteen (15) working days shall be provided for reviewing and processing any resubmitted improvement plan. The sixty (60) working day period shall not include any days during which the improvement plan has been returned to the applicant for correction, has been subject to review by other than the local agency or following that review, has been returned to the applicant for correction. The time limits specified in this section for acting on improvement plans may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant/subdivider and the town, pursuant to Government Code Section 66456.2. 
After completing all required revisions, the subdivider's engineer shall transmit the originals of the improvement plans to the town engineer for signature. Upon finding that all required revisions have been made and that the plans conform to all applicable town ordinances, design review requirements, and conditions of approval of the tentative map, the town engineer shall sign and date the plans. The originals will be returned to the subdivider's engineer. Approval of the improvement plans shall not be construed as approval of the sanitary sewer, water, or gas and electric service construction plans. Approval by the town engineer shall in no way relieve the subdivider or the subdivider's engineer from responsibility for the design of the improvements and for any deficiencies resulting from the design or from any required conditions of approval of the tentative map. (Government Code Section 66456.2) 
6.  Revisions to Approved Plans. 
a.  By Subdivider. Requests by the subdivider or the engineer for revisions to the approved plans appearing necessary or desirable during construction shall be submitted in writing to the town engineer or authorized representative and shall be accompanied by revised drawings showing the proposed revision. If the revision is acceptable, the originals shall be submitted to the town engineer's office for initialing. The originals shall be maintained by the town engineer and any revised plans shall be immediately transmitted to the town engineer. Construction of any proposed revision will not be permitted to commence until revised plans have been received and forwarded to the town engineer. 
b.  By Town Engineer. When revisions are deemed necessary by the town engineer to protect public health and safety, or as field conditions may require, a request in writing shall be made to the subdivider and engineer. The subdivider's engineer shall revise the plans and transmit the originals to the town engineer. Upon receipt of the initialed originals, the subdivider's engineer shall immediately transmit revised drawings to the town engineer. Construction of all or any portion of the improvements may be stopped by the town engineer until revised drawings have been submitted and reviewed. The subdivider may appeal revisions required by the town engineer to the town council by filing an appeal with the town clerk within two (2) working days following receipt of the request to revise the plans. The town council shall consider the appeal within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal; provided, however, that appeals to sewage disposal requirements shall be made as set forth in Chapter 13.04 of this code. 
7.  Plan Checking and Inspection Costs for Revisions. Costs incurred by the town for the checking of plans or calculations or inspection as a result of revisions to the approved plans shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost. A deposit, when required, shall be submitted with the revised prints and applied toward the actual costs. 
I.  Improvement Agreement. The agreement shall be prepared and signed by the town engineer and approved as to form by the town attorney. The agreement shall provide for: 
1.  Construction of all improvements according to the approved plans and specifications on file with the town engineer; 
2.  Completion of improvements within the time specified within the agreement; 
3.  Right by town to modify plans and specifications; 
4.  Warranty by subdivider that construction will not adversely affect any portion of adjacent properties; 
5.  Payment of inspection fees in accordance with the town's resolution establishing fees and charges; 
6.  Payment of in-lieu fees for park land dedication; 
7.  Payment of drainage district or area fees; 
8.  Improvement security as required by this title; 
9.  Maintenance and repair of any defects or failures and causes thereof; 
10.  Release of the town from all liability incurred by the development and payment of all reasonable attorney's fees that the town may incur because of any legal action arising from the development; 
11.  Any other deposits, fees, or conditions as required by town ordinance or resolution and as may be required by the town engineer. 
J.  Improvement Security. Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Subdivision Map Act, for which security is required, shall be secured in accordance with Government Code Section 66499 and as provided below. No final map or parcel map shall be signed by the town engineer or recorded until all improvement securities required by this title have been received and approved. 
K.  Form of Security. The form of security shall be one or the combination of the following at the option and subject to the approval of the town. 
1.  Bond(s) by one or more duly authorized corporate sureties in accordance with Government Code Sections 66499.1, 66499.2, 66499.3 and 664994.4; 
2.  An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to regulation by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment; 
3.  A deposit, either with the town or a responsible escrow agent or trust company, at the option of the town, of money or negotiable bonds of the kind approved for securing deposits of public moneys. 
4.  Any other form of security as provided in Government Code Section 66499. 
L.  Amount of Security. A performance bond or security in the amount of one hundred (100) percent of the estimated construction cost to guarantee the construction or installation of all improvements shall be required of all subdivisions. An additional amount of fifty (50) percent of the estimated construction cost shall be required to guarantee the payment to the subdivider's contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment for the construction or installation of improvements. (Government Code Sections 66499(a)(3) and 66499.3) 
The estimate of improvement costs shall be as approved by the town engineer and shall provide for: 
1.  Not less than five (5) percent nor more than ten (10) percent of the total construction cost for contingencies; 
2.  Increase for projected inflation computed to the estimated midpoint of construction; 
3.  All utility installation costs or a certification acceptable to the town engineer from the utility company that adequate security has been deposited to ensure installation; 
4.  In addition to the full amount of the security, there shall be included costs and reasonable expenses or fees, including attorney's fees, incurred in enforcing the obligation secured. 
M.  Warranty Security. Upon acceptance of the subdivision improvements by the town, the subdivider shall provide security in the amount as required by the town engineer to guarantee the improvements throughout the warranty period. The amount of the warranty security shall be not less than ten (10) percent of the cost of the construction of the improvements, including the cash bond which shall be retained for the one-year warranty period. 
N.  Reduction in Performance Security. The town engineer may authorize in writing the release of a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the satisfactory completion of a part of the improvements as the work progresses upon application by the subdivider, but in no case shall the security be reduced to less than ten (10) percent of the total improvement security given for faithful performance. The amount of reduction of the security shall be determined by the town engineer; however, in no event shall the town engineer authorize a release of the improvement security which would reduce security to an amount below that required to guarantee the completion of the improvements and any other obligation imposed by this title, the Subdivision Map Act, or the improvement agreement. (Government Code Section 66499.17) 
O.  Release of Improvement Securities. 
1.  Performance Security. The performance security shall be released only upon acceptance of the improvements by the town and when an approved warranty security has been filed with the town engineer. If warranty security is not submitted, performance security shall be released twelve (12) months after acceptance of improvements and correction of all warranty deficiencies. (Government Code Section 66499.7) 
2.  Material and Labor Security. Security given to secure payment to the contractor, subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment may, six (6) months after the completion and acceptance of the improvements by the town council, be reduced to an amount equal to the amount of all claims therefor filed and of which notice has been given to the town council. The balance of the security shall be released upon the settlement of all such claims and obligations for which the security was given. 
3.  Warranty Security. The warranty security shall be released upon satisfactory completion of the warranty period provided: 
a.  All deficiencies appearing on the warranty deficiency list for the subdivision have been corrected and not less than twelve (12) months have elapsed since the acceptance of the improvements by the town council. 
P.  Construction. The construction methods and materials for all improvements shall conform to the standard plans and specifications of the town and any applicable public utility. The general provisions of the town's standard specifications shall apply to the subdivider where applicable. Construction shall not commence until required improvement plans have been approved by the town engineer. 
Q.  Construction Inspection. All improvements are subject to inspection by the town engineer or authorized personnel in accordance with the town's standard specifications. 
R.  Preconstruction Conference. Prior to commencing any construction, the subdivider shall arrange a preconstruction conference with the town engineer. 
S.  Final Inspection and Deficiency List. Upon completion of the subdivision improvements, the developer shall apply in writing to the town engineer for a preliminary final inspection. A deficiency list shall be compiled during the inspection, noting all corrections or any additional work required. When the preliminary final inspection has been completed, a copy of the deficiency list shall be transmitted to the subdivider for correction. Upon having completed all correction or additional work as outlined by the deficiency list, the subdivider shall certify in writing that all corrections have been completed satisfactorily and request a final inspection. The town engineer or authorized representative shall then make a final inspection. 
Upon finding that all items on the deficiency list have been corrected and receipt of as-built improvement plans, any subdivision of five (5) or more lots shall be placed on the town council agenda for acceptance. 
The completion of corrections indicated by the deficiency list shall not relieve the subdivider from the responsibility of correcting any deficiency not shown on the list that may be subsequently discovered. 
T.  Completions of Improvements. 
1.  Subdivisions of Five or More Lots. Any public improvements required by the town for a subdivision shall be completed by the subdivider within twenty-four (24) months of the recordation of the subject map, or such time as approved by the town engineer, not to exceed a period of forty-eight (48) months, unless an extension is granted by the town council, in accordance with subsection (T)(3) of this section. Should the subdivider fail to complete the improvements within the specified time, the town may, by resolution of town council and at its option, cause any or all uncompleted improvements to be completed and the parties executing the surety or sureties shall be firmly bound for the payment of all necessary costs. (Government Code Section 66462) 
2.  Subdivisions of Four or Fewer Parcels. The completion of improvements may be required by a specified date by the town when the completion of such improvements is found to be necessary for public health or safety or for the orderly development of the surrounding area. This finding shall be made by the town engineer or authorized representative. The specified date, when required, shall be stated in the subdivision improvement agreement. Improvements shall be completed prior to the final building inspection or occupancy of any unit within the subdivision. 
3.  Extensions. The completion date may be extended by the town council for subdivisions of five (5) or more lots and by the town engineer for subdivisions of four (4) or fewer parcels upon written request by the developer and the submittal of adequate evidence to justify the extension. The request shall be made not less than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the subdivision improvements agreement. The subdivider shall enter into a subdivision improvement agreement extension with the town. For subdivisions of five (5) or more lots the agreement shall be prepared and signed by the town engineer, approved as to form by the town attorney, executed by the subdivider and surety and transmitted to the town council for its consideration. If approved by the town council, the mayor shall execute the agreement on behalf of the town. 
In consideration of a subdivision improvement agreement extension, the following may be required: 
a.  Revision of improvement plans to provide for current design and construction standards when required by the town engineer. 
b.  Revised improvement construction estimates to reflect current improvement costs as approved by the town engineer. 
c.  Increase of improvement securities in accordance with revised construction estimates. 
d.  Inspection fees may be increased to reflect current construction costs but shall not be subject to any decrease or refund. 
U.  Additional Council Requirements. The town council may impose additional requirements deemed necessary as a condition of approving any time extension for the completion of improvements consistent with the provisions of Government Code Sections 66474.2 and 65961. The costs incurred by the town in processing the agreement shall be borne by the subdivider at actual cost. (Government Code Sections 66474.2 and 65961) 
V.  Acceptance of Improvements. When all improvement deficiencies have been corrected and as-built improvement plans filed, the subdivision improvements shall be considered by the town for acceptance. Subdivisions of five (5) or more lots must be accepted by the town council. The town engineer or authorized representative shall be responsible for the acceptance of subdivisions of four (4) or fewer parcels. Acceptance of the improvements shall imply only that the improvements have been completed satisfactorily and that public improvements have been accepted for public use. 
W.  Notice of Completion. If the subdivision has been accepted by the town, the town engineer shall cause a notice of completion to be filed with the county recorder. 
X.  Acceptance of a Portion of the Improvements. When requested by the subdivider in writing, the town may consider acceptance of a portion of the improvements as recommended by the town engineer. The improvements will be accepted by the town only if it finds that it is in the public interest and such improvements are for the use of the general public. Acceptance of a portion of the improvements shall not relieve the subdivider from any other requirements imposed by this title. 
(Ord. No. 567, § 1, 1-9-2018; Ord. No. 430, § 13, 12-14-2004; Ord. 203 § 2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.12 - REVERSION TO ACREAGE 
 
16.12.010 - Requirements. 
Subdivided property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to provisions of this title and the state Subdivision Map Act. This chapter shall apply to final and parcel maps. (G.C. 66499.11) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.12.020 - Initiation of proceedings. 
A.  By Owners. Proceedings to revert subdivided property to acreage may be initiated by petition of all of the owners of record of the property. The petition shall be in a form prescribed by the town engineer. The petition shall contain the applicable information required by Section 16.07.020 and any other information as required by the town engineer. (G.C. 66499.12 and 66499.13) 
B.  By Town Council. The town council, at the request of any person or on its own motion may, by resolution, initiate proceedings to revert property to acreage. The town council shall direct the town engineer to obtain the necessary information to initiate and conduct the proceedings. The petition shall contain but not be limited to the following: 
1.  Evidence of title to the real property; and, 
2.  Evidence of the consent of all the owners having an interest in the property; or, 
3.  Evidence that none of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later; or, 
4.  Evidence that no lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such final or parcel map was filed for record; 
5.  A tentative map in the form prescribed by Section 16.07.020 or Section 16.08.010 of this title as is applicable; 
6.  A final or parcel map in the form prescribed by Section 16.07.080 or Section 16.08.110 of this title as is applicable which delineates dedications which will not be vacated and dedications required as a condition to reversion. Final or parcel maps shall be conspicuously designated with the title, "The purpose of this Map is a Reversion to Acreage." 
7.  A deposit as required by the town engineer toward processing and plan checking costs in accordance with the town's fee schedule. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.12.030 - Submittal of petition to the town engineer. 
The final or parcel map for the reversion together with all other data as required by this title shall be submitted to the town engineer for his review. Upon finding that the petition meets with all the requirements of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, the town engineer shall submit the final or parcel map, together with his report and recommendations of approval or conditional approval of the reversion to acreage, to the town council for its consideration. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.12.040 - Town council action—Findings and conditions. 
A public hearing shall be held by the town council on all petitions for initiations for reversions to acreage. Notice of the public hearing shall be given as provided in Section 16.08.040. The town engineer may give such other notice that it deems necessary or advisable. (G.C. 66499.15, 66499.16 and 66499.17) 
A.  Findings. The town council may approve a reversion to acreage only if it finds and records by resolution that: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication to be vacated or abandoned by the reversion to acreage are unnecessary for present or prospective public purposes; and, 
2.  Either: 
a.  All owners of an interest in the real property within the subdivision have consented to the reversion, or, 
b.  None of the improvements required to be made have been made within two years from the date the final or parcel map was filed for record, or within the time allowed by agreement for completion of the improvements, whichever is later, or, 
c.  No lots shown on the final or parcel map have been sold within five years from the date such map was filed for record. 
B.  Conditions. The town council shall require as conditions of the reversion: 
1.  Dedications or offers of dedication necessary to comply with the purpose, scope and policy of this title; 
2.  Retention of all previously paid fees if necessary to accomplish the purpose, scope and policy of this title; 
3.  Retention of any portion of required improvement security or deposits if necessary to accomplish the purpose, scope and policy of this title. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.12.050 - Filing with county recorder. 
Upon approval of the reversion to acreage, the town clerk shall transmit the final or parcel map, together with the town council resolution approving the reversion to the county recorder for recordation. Reversion shall be effective upon the final map being filed for record by the county recorder. Upon filing, all dedications and offers of dedication not shown on the final or parcel map for reversion shall be of no further force or effect. (G.C. 66448, 66458(b), 66464 and 66499.18) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.13 - PARCEL MERGERS 
 
16.13.010 - Mergers not required. 
Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land which have been subdivided under the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act shall not merge by virtue of the fact that the contiguous parcels or units are held by the same ownership. No further proceedings under this title shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing, except as provided by this title. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.13.020 - Mergers required. 
If any one of two or more contiguous parcels or units held by the same owner does not conform to existing zoning regulations so as not to permit its development, and at least one parcel or unit has not been developed with a building for which a building permit is required, then these parcels shall be considered as merged for the purpose of this title. The method of merger shall be consistent with the provisions of Article 1.5 (merger of parcels) of the state Subdivision Map Act. (G.C. 66451.10, et seq.) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.13.030 - Notice of merger. 
If the town engineer or an authorized representative has knowledge that real property has merged pursuant to this title, a notice of merger shall be filed for record with the county recorder. At least thirty days prior to recording of notice, the owner of the parcels or units shall be advised in writing of the intention to record such notice. The notification to the owner shall specify a time, date, and place at which the owner may present evidence as to why the notice should not be recorded. 
The notice of merger to be recorded shall specify the names of the record owners and describe the property to be merged. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.13.040 - Request by property owner. 
Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the town engineer or authorized representative may approve the merger of the property. The request shall be in writing and shall be accompanied by data and documents as required by the town engineer's office. Upon approval, a notice of merger shall be filed with the county recorder. The form and content of the notice shall be as required by the town engineer. In approving a merger the town may impose reasonable conditions. The reasonableness of conditions may be appealed within ten days of written notice of the conditions to the town council in accordance with Section 16.07.030(d) of this title. The town council shall consider the appeal within thirty days of the receipt of the appeal letter. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.13.050 - Fee. 
A fee to be charged at actual cost shall be charged to the applicant for processing such merger. A deposit may be required to be applied toward this fee. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.14 - CORRECTIONS AND AMENDMENTS OF MAPS 
 
16.14.010 - Requirements. 
After a final or parcel map is filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be amended by a certificate of correction or an amending map (G.C. 66469): 
A.  To correct an error in any course or distance shown thereon; 
B.  To show any course or distance that was omitted therefrom; 
C.  To correct an error in the description of the real property shown on the map; 
D.  To indicate monuments set after the death, disability, or retirement from practice of the engineer or surveyor charged with responsibilities for setting monuments; 
E.  To show the proper location of any monument which has been changed in location, or character, or originally was shown at the wrong location or incorrectly as to its character; 
F.  To correct any other type of map error or omission as approved by the town engineer, which does not affect any property right. Errors and omissions may include, but need not be limited to, lots and numbers, acreage, street names and identification of adjacent record maps. Error does not include changes in courses or distances from which an error is not discernible from the date shown on the final or parcel map; 
G.  To make modifications when there are changes which make any or all of the conditions of the map no longer appropriate or necessary and that the modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property, and if the modifications do not alter any right, title, or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map. The modification shall be set for public hearing by the town engineer or planning commission according to Section 16.07.030. The town engineer or planning commission shall confine the hearing to consideration of, and action on, the proposed modification. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.14.020 - Form and content. 
The amending map or certificate of correction shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor. The form and contents of the amending map shall conform to the requirements of Section 16.07.080 for a final map, or Section 16.08.110 for a parcel map. The certificate of correction shall set forth in detail the corrections made and show the names of the present fee owners of the property affected by the correction. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.14.030 - Submittal and approval by the town engineer. 
The amending map or certificate of correction, complete as to final form, shall be submitted to the town engineer for his review and approval. The town engineer shall examine the amending map or certificate of correction and if only changes made are those set forth in Section 16.14.010, this fact shall be certified on the amending map or certificate of correction. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.14.040 - Filing with the county recorder. 
The amending map or certificate of correction certified by the town engineer shall be filed in the office of the county recorder in which the original map was filed. The original map shall be deemed to have been conclusively so corrected and shall impart constructive notice of all the corrections in the same manner as though upon the original map. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.14.050 - Fee. 
The fee for checking, processing and recording the amended map or certificate of correction shall be in accordance with the town's resolution establishing fees and charges. A deposit to be applied toward this fee may be required by the town engineer upon submittal of the amended map or certificate of correction for his review. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.15 - ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS 
 
16.15.010 - Prohibition. 
A.  No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, or financing except for model home, or allow occupancy for which a final map is required by this title or the Subdivision Map Act, until a map, in full compliance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed with the county recorder. (G.C. 66499.30) 
B.  No person shall sell, lease, or finance any parcel or parcels of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, or finance, except for model homes, or all occupancy for which a parcel map is required by this title or the Subdivision Map Act, until a map, in full compliance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed with the county recorder. 
C.  Conveyances of any part of a division of real property for which a final or parcel map is required shall not be made by parcel number, letter, or other designation, unless and until the map has been filed with the county recorder, except conveyances to public utilities. 
D.  This section does not apply to any parcel or parcels of a subdivision offered for sale or lease, contracted for sale or lease, or sold or leased in compliance with or exempt from any law regulating the design and improvement of subdivisions in effect at the time the subdivision was established. 
E.  Nothing contained in subsections (A) and (B) of this section shall prohibit an offer or contract to sell, lease, or finance real property or to construct improvements where the sale, lease, or financing, or the commencement of construction is expressly conditioned upon the approval and filing of a final or parcel map. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.15.020 - Remedies. 
A.  Any deed of conveyance, sale, or contract to sell real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act, is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, any heir, personal representative or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of discovery of the violation. The deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any successor in interest of the grantee, buyer, or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor, or person contracting to sell, or any assignee, heir, or devisee. (G.C. 66499.32) 
B.  Any grantee, or successor in interest, of real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act may, within one year of the date of discovery of such violation, bring an action in the Superior Court to recover any damages suffered by reason of the division of property. The action may be brought against the person who divided the property in violation and against any successors in interest who have actual or constructive knowledge of such division of property. 
C.  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the conveyance of any parcel of real property identified in a certificate of compliance filed pursuant to Section 16.15.030 or identified in a recorded final or parcel map, from and after the date of recording. The provisions of this section shall not limit or affect in any way the rights of a grantee or successor in interest under any other provision of law. 
D.  This section does not bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the town or other public agency, or any person, firm, or corporation may otherwise be entitled, and the town or other public agency, or any person, firm or corporation may file a suit in the Superior Court of Butte County to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision for sale, lease, or financing in violation of this title. (G.C. 66499.33) 
E.  The town shall not issue a permit or grant any approval necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act if it finds that development of the real property is contrary to the public health or the public safety. The authority to deny a permit or approval shall apply whether the applicant was the owner of the real property at the time of the violation or whether the applicant is the current owner or a vendee of the current owner of record pursuant to a contract of sale of the real property with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of interest in the real property. The town, in issuing a permit or granting approval for the development of any real property illegally subdivided, may impose those additional conditions which would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property. If the property has the same owner of record as at the time of the initial violation, the town may impose conditions applicable to a current division of the property. If a conditional certificate of compliance has been filed for record, only those conditions stipulated shall be applicable. (G.C. 66499.34 and 66499.35) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.15.030 - Certificate of compliance. 
A.  Any person owning real property or a vendee of the current owner of record pursuant to a contract of sale may request the town engineer to determine whether the real property complies with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. 
B.  Upon making a determination, the town engineer shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed for record with the county recorder. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property and shall state that the division of land complies with applicable provisions of this code and the Subdivision Map Act. 
C.  If the town engineer determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this code or the Subdivision Map Act, the town engineer may, as a condition to granting a certificate of compliance, impose conditions that could have been imposed at the time the applicant acquired his/her interest in the property, except that where the applicant was the owner of record at the time of the initial violation, then conditions may be imposed that are applicable to a current division of the property. Upon making a determination and establishing conditions, the town engineer or authorized representative shall file a conditional certificate of compliance for record with the county recorder. The certificate shall serve as notice to the property owner who has applied for the certificate, a grantee of the property owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property, that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required prior to subsequent issuance of a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property. Compliance with the conditions shall not be required until a permit or other grant of approval for development of the property is issued. (G.C. 66499.35(b)) 
D.  A recorded final or parcel map shall constitute a certificate of compliance with respect to the parcels of real property described therein. 
E.  A fee to be charged at actual cost shall be charged to the applicant for making the determination and processing the certificate of compliance. A deposit may be required to be applied toward this fee. 
F.  Any sale, lease, or financing of designated remainder lots created pursuant to Government Code Section 66424.6 shall require the application and approval of a certificate of compliance or a conditional certificate of compliance from the town as set forth in this title. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.15.040 - Notice of violation. 
If the town engineer or authorized representative has knowledge that real property appears to have been divided in violation of the provisions of this title or the Subdivision Map Act, a notice of intention to record a notice of violation shall be sent by certified mail to the current property owner, describing the real property in detail, naming the owners, and describing the violation and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence. The notice shall specify a time, date, and place at which the owner may present evidence as to why a notice of violation should not be recorded. If, after the owner has presented evidence, a determination is made that there has been no violation, a clearance letter shall be mailed to the then current owner of the property. If, however, after the owner has presented evidence, the town planning commission or town council determines that the property has in fact been illegally divided, the town shall record the notice of violation with the county recorder. If, within fifteen days of receipt of the notice of intention, the owner of the real property fails to inform the town of his/her objection to recording the notice of violation, the town shall record it with the county recorder. A notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in the property. All procedures for mailing a notice of intention to record a notice of violation, and for recording a notice of violation shall be consistent with Section 66499.36 of the state Subdivision Map Act. (G.C. 66499.36) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.16 - SEVERABILITY 
 
16.16.010 - Invalidity or unconstitutionality of sections. 
If any portion of this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such determination shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of this title. The town council expressly declares that this title and each portion thereof would be adopted irrespective of the fact that any other portion of this title may be found invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.17 - ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES, AND LEGAL PROCEDURE 
 
16.17.010 - Scope of provisions. 
All departments and employees of the town vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title; and any such permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.17.020 - Investigations of violations. 
All alleged violations of this title shall be investigated by the engineering department. The engineering department will then complete a written report and distribute it to the town attorney and town manager within seven days of the ending of the investigation. The engineering department shall also inform the owner and occupant of the site on which the violation is alleged to have occurred or to be occurring of its findings within seven days of the ending of the investigation. If the report indicates that a violation does exist, the engineering department shall commence action to prosecute the violator(s) and to abate the violations. (G.C. 66499.30 and 31) (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
16.17.030 - Penalties. 
Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent, or employee violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Such person, firm, or corporation shall be deemed to be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this title is committed or continued by such person, firm, or corporation. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.18 - PRIOR REGULATIONS 
 
16.18.010 - Prior divisions legally established. 
Nothing in this title shall affect maps or deeds creating lots or parcels or conditions imposed in accordance with regulations in force at the time of the approval of the maps or deeds by the County of Butte or the town. (Ord. 203 §2(part), 1990)  
Chapter 16.19 - VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS 
 
16.19.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish local procedures to implement the provisions of Chapter 4.5, Division 2 of Title 7 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 66498.1) which address the development rights conferred upon the approval or conditional approval of "vesting tentative maps." (G.C. 66498.8). (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.015 - Application. 
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to and authorize the approval, conditional approval, or denial of vesting tentative maps for subdivisions. Whenever the provisions of this title require the filing and approval of a tentative map for a subdivision to be developed, such tentative map, at the option of the subdivider, may be filed and approved as a vesting tentative map in the manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.020 - Filing of a vesting tentative map. 
Vesting tentative maps shall be filed for processing with the community development department and shall be in the form, contain the information, and be accompanied by all drawings, documents, reports and data as well as filing fees, required by this title for tentative maps other than vesting tentative maps. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, such map shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words "vesting tentative map." (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.030 - Review and approval or denial of vesting tentative map. 
Vesting tentative maps shall be reviewed and approved, conditionally approved or denied in the same manner and within the same time required by this title for the review and approval, conditional approval or denial of tentative maps other than vesting tentative maps. Notwithstanding any provision of California Government Code Section 66498.3 to the contrary, a vesting tentative map filed for a subdivision whose intended development is inconsistent with zoning regulations adopted by and pursuant to Title 17 of this code shall be disapproved. (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.035 - Rights conferred upon approval of vesting tentative map. 
A.  The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development of the property subject to the map in substantial compliance with the provisions of this code and all policies and standards of the town which, as described in California Government Code Section 66472.2, were in effect on the date it was determined that the application for approval of such map was complete. 
B.  In the event that Section 66472.2 of the California Government Code is repealed, then the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right to proceed with the development of the property subject to the map in substantial compliance with the provisions of this code and all policies and standards of the town in effect at the time that the map was approved or conditionally approved. 
C.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement for development on property subject to a vesting tentative map may be denied or conditionally approved if either of the following determinations are made: 
1.  That a failure to deny or conditionally approve such permit, approval, extension or entitlement would place residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety, or both; 
2.  That the denial or conditional approval of such permit, approval, extension or entitlement is required in order to comply with state or federal law. (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.040 - Expiration of rights conferred. 
The rights conferred upon the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire at the same time provided by this title for the expiration of tentative maps other than vesting tentative maps or, if a final map or parcel map is timely filed following the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map, two years beyond the date of recordation of such final map or parcel map, whichever last occurs. Where multiple final maps are filed following the approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map for a phased development, then the rights conferred by the vesting tentative map for each phase of development shall expire two years following the date of recordation of the final map for such phase of development. (G.C. 66498.5) (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.050 - Extension of rights conferred. 
A.  The rights conferred by an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map shall be automatically extended beyond the date such rights normally expire under the following circumstances: 
1.  If, prior to the date an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map would normally expire, a complete application is filed for a grading permit and/or the architectural review of development on the property subject to such map and the time for processing such application exceeds thirty days, then the rights conferred by such vesting tentative map shall also be extended for a period of time equal to that required for the processing of such grading permit and/or architectural review. 
2.  If, prior to the date an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map would normally expire, a complete application is filed for a permit to construct a building or structure on the property subject to such vesting tentative map, then the rights conferred by such vesting tentative map shall be extended until such building permit or any extension thereof expires. 
B.  The rights conferred by an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map may, at the discretion of the planning commission, be extended for a period of one year provided the date such map would normally expire an application for such extension is filed in the office of the community development department. If the extension application is denied by the planning commission, the subdivider may appeal the denial to the town council within fifteen days after the denial action. 
C.  An approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map and the rights conferred thereunder shall not be subject to any extensions other than those expressly provided for in this chapter. (G.C. 66498.5) (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.060 - Amendments to an approved vesting tentative map. 
Amendments may be processed and made to an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.07.070 of this title and provided an application for such amendment is filed in the office of the community development department. (G.C. 66498.2) (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.070 - Final vesting maps. 
All final vesting maps shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of Section 16.07.080 of this title. (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
16.19.080 - Alternate approvals on vesting tentative maps. 
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter to the contrary, a property owner (or his or her designee) subject to an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map may seek approvals, permits or entitlements for development on such property which are authorized by the current provisions of this code and/or the current policies and standards of the town even though such current codes, policies or standards depart from the vested rights conferred by such approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map. (G.C. 66498.4) (Ord. 368 §4 (part), 2001)  
Title 17 - ZONING  
Chapter 17.01 - SHORT TITLE 
Section: 
 
17.01.010 - Short title. 
The chapters set out in this title may be called the "zoning ordinance for the town of Paradise." 
(Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.02 - BASIC PROVISIONS 
 
17.02.100 - Purpose. 
The zoning ordinance is enacted for the following purposes: 
A.  To promote and ensure the public health, safety and general welfare of the town and its residents; 
B.  To attain and implement the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan by providing a precise delineation of permitted land uses, precluding land-use conflicts, and by establishing general site development standards. 
(Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.02.200 - Consistency with general plan. 
The intent of the town is that this title be consistent with the general plan, and with any supplemental land use and community development policies which may be adopted by the town council. If this title becomes inconsistent with the general plan or such supplemental policies by reason of new or amended plans or policies, the intent of the town council is that this title be amended within a reasonable time so as to become or remain consistent with the new or amended plans or policies. 
(Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.02.300 - Conflicting provisions. 
This title shall be held to be the minimum requirement for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. The zoning ordinance is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties. When this title imposes a greater restriction upon the use of land or buildings than are required by other ordinances, rules or regulations, or by easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of this title shall control. 
(Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.02.500 - Relief from other provisions. 
Except as specifically provided, no provision of this title shall be construed as relieving any party to whom any permit, variance, or other authorization is issued from complying with any provision of state or federal law, or from any provision, ordinance, or regulation of the town requiring a license, franchise, or permit to conduct a particular business, activity or use. 
(Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.02.600 - Severability. 
If any portion of this title is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such determination shall not affect the validity or constitutionality of the remaining portions of the title. The town council expressly declares that this title and each portion thereof would have been adopted irrespective of the fact that any other portion of it may be found invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.04 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.04.100 - Application. 
The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply throughout this title, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. 
(Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.04.200 - Construction of language. 
The following general rules of language construction shall apply to the text of this title: 
A.  Headings. Section headings shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify, or otherwise affect the scope or intent of any provision of this title. 
(Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.04.300 - Terminology. 
A.  All public officials, agencies and regulations referenced in this title are those of the town unless otherwise indicated. 
B.  "Building official" means the person designated by the Uniform Building Code, as adopted by the town, as responsible for enforcement and administration of the building code. 
C.  "Chapter" means a numbered division of this title containing the basic provisions of a general topic; e.g., the zoning ordinance basic provisions. 
D.  "Commission" or "planning commission" means the planning commission of the town. 
E.  "Council" or "town council" means the town council of the town. 
F.  "County" means the county of Butte, state of California. 
G.  "Department" means the community development department of the town. 
H.  "Director" means the planning director of the town, or a designee thereof. 
I.  "Federal" means the government of the United States. 
J.  "General plan" means the Paradise general plan as adopted by the town council, and includes any specific plans adopted by the council pursuant to state law. 
K.  "Section" means a numbered division of a chapter contained within this title, unless otherwise indicated. 
L.  "State" means the State of California. 
M.  "Title" means this title, unless otherwise indicated. 
(Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.04.400 - Use classifications—Generally. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the use classifications is to provide a consistent set of terms encompassing and defining uses permitted or conditionally permitted in various zones. This chapter provides a method of determining to which use classification a specific use belongs if such a use is not clearly included within a use classification. 
B.  Determination of Classification. The planning director shall determine the appropriate use classification of any use not specifically listed in this title, subject to the right of appeal pursuant to Section 17.45.600. 
C.  Criteria for Determination. In making a determination of classification, the planning director shall consider the typical site development, structure requirements, and the operating characteristics of the particular use in question, and shall consider any function, product, service, or physical facility requirements common or similar to uses cited as examples of use classification. 
D.  Written Findings. Each determination of classification shall be made in writing, and shall include a statement of all factors considered by the planning director in making the determination. 
E.  Supplemental Listing. The planning director or designee shall maintain a list of all use determinations, and shall periodically recommend to the planning commission revisions to the use classification as set forth in this title to reflect contemporary terminology and minimize ambiguity. 
(Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.04.500 - General definitions. 
A.  Any words or phrases not defined within this section shall be defined as set forth in current dictionaries. 
B.  Words or phrases in capital letters are also defined within this section. 
C.  For purposes of this title, the words and phrases set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
"Abandoned sign" means any sign or sign structure which identifies a USE which has not occupied the SITE on which it is located for a period of ninety (90) days, does not clearly identify any land use for a period of ninety (90) days, or has been in a state of disrepair or poor condition for a period of ninety (90) days. 
"Abutting" or "adjoining" means having common LOT lines, PARCEL lines, or DISTRICT boundaries in common. 
"Accessory dwelling" means a DWELLING UNIT accessory to a nonresidential principal use on the same SITE, intended for occupancy by a person employed on the site for security, maintenance or management purposes. 
"Accessory uses" means USES which are necessarily and customarily associated with and subordinate to the permitted or conditional permitted principal use. Accessory uses and structures are subject to the same regulations as apply to principal uses in each zoning district, except as may be otherwise provided. 
"Addition" means any construction which increases the size of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE in terms of SITE coverage, HEIGHT, length, width, or GROSS FLOOR AREA. 
"Administrative permit" means an entitlement authorizing a development project and granted by the planning director or an appointed designee, involving very little or no personal subjective judgment or discretion. The decision-making process involves the use of fixed standards and criteria, and a determination as to whether or not the project complies with existing statutes, ordinances, regulations and policies. 
"Administrative services" means offices, administrative, clerical, or public contact services of public agencies that deal directly with the citizen, together with incidental storage and maintenance of necessary vehicles. Typical uses include federal, state, county, town and special district offices. 
Adult Business. For "adult business" see Section 9.14.020 of this code. 
"Advertising" means printed matter that calls the public's attention to things for sale. 
"Advertising display" means any sign, billboard, signboard, poster, placard, pennant, banner, graphic display, mural, or similar device that is used to advertise or promote a product. 
"Agent of owner" means any person showing written verification that he or she is acting for, and with the knowledge and consent of, a property owner. 
"Agricultural building" means a structure designed and constructed to house farm implements, hay, grain, poultry, livestock, or horticultural products, which is not designed for human habitation. 
"Agricultural employee housing" means housing consisting of no more than thirty-six (36) beds in group quarters or twelve (12) units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household as described in California Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.6 and 17008. 
"Agricultural employee housing, limited residential" means housing providing accommodations for six (6) or fewer employees as described in California Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17008. 
"Agricultural processing" means the processing, treatment or remanufacture of agricultural products on a commercial basis. Typical uses include wineries, packing and canning plants, feed lots, and livestock auction yards. 
"Agricultural sales and service" means sale of feed, grains, fertilizers, pesticides, and similar agricultural products, or provision of related agricultural services. Typical uses include feed and grain stores and agricultural supply services. 
"Alteration" means any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE, or a change in the relative position of buildings or structures on a SITE, or a substantial change in appearance of any building or structure. 
"Animal production" means raising of animals or production of animal products such as eggs or dairy products. Typical uses include grazing, ranching, dairy farming, and poultry farming. Animal production shall not include the keeping and raising of BACKYARD CHICKENS AND RABBITS in accordance with Section 17.35.250. 
"Attached" means joined in any manner to any structure. 
"Auto body repair" shall mean any use or activity involving body, frame, fender straightening or repair, or the overall painting and undercoating of motor vehicles. Auto body repair shall not include the rebuilding of vehicles beyond repair as determined by an insurance company or the dismantling or storage of wrecked or junked vehicles. 
"Auto repair" shall mean any motor vehicle repair such as tire, brake, engine, radiator, transmission, tune-up, electrical, battery, exhaust system, suspension, air conditioning, smog, auto detailing, glasswork, window tinting, upholstery, and shall include car stereo, car alarm, and cellular phone maintenance, repair or installation, and not including the work of auto body repair. 
"Auto sales" shall mean the display and sale of new or used motorized vehicles and/or parts related thereto. The sale and/or rental of light trucks, vans, motorcycles, trailers, recreational vehicles or auto parts is considered auto sales and may include preparation or minor repair work conducted as ACCESSORY USE. Auto sales are typically either primarily an "indoor" or "outdoor" land use activity. 
"Automotive dismantling." For "automotive dismantling" see definition assigned to SCRAP AND SALVAGE SERVICES. 
"Average slope" means the average amount of fall or rise of property between its setback lines. 
"Aviation facilities" means landing fields, and related aircraft parking and service facilities, including aircraft servicing, fueling, repair, storage, charter, sales and rental. 
"Backyard chickens and rabbits" means the long-term keeping and raising of up to two chickens (excluding roosters) and up to two rabbits as a permitted ACCESSORY USE on the same SITE as an ESTABLISHED residential land USE as household pets and in accordance with Section 17.35.250. 
"Bed and breakfast" means any BUILDING or establishment or portion thereof, the primary purpose of which is for the providing of guest bedrooms for a lodging fee and which may include providing limited meal service such as light or continental breakfasts, evening snacks, etc., and which is clearly incidental to the principal use of the property as a DWELLING UNIT. 
"Body piercing shop" means any place or establishment which is operated for the purpose of piercing the skin or creating an opening in the body of a human being for the purpose of inserting jewelry. This includes, but is not limited to, the piercing of an ear, lip, tongue, nose or eyebrow. 
"Building" means a structure having a roof supported by columns or walls, for the shelter, support or enclosure of persons or property. 
"Building site" means the usable area of a LOT. This area excludes land exceeding thirty (30) percent slope, drainage ways, easements or similar areas where septic systems or STRUCTURES cannot be installed or constructed. 
"Business office" means an office where work is performed in the buying and selling of commodities or service or an administrative office. 
"Business or trade school" means a USE providing education or training in business, commerce, language, or other activity, and not otherwise defined as a home occupation, college or university, or public or private educational facility. Typical uses include business schools and barber or beauty colleges. 
"Business services" means sale, rental or repair of equipment, or provision of services and supplies typically used by other commercial or industrial uses. Typical uses include janitorial and building maintenance services, office and commercial equipment supply firms, and printing shops. 
Cabinet Shop. See definition assigned to MANUFACTURING, LIGHT. 
"Campground" means facility of two (2) or more spaces providing camping; and including PARKING FACILITIES or incidental services for travelers in RECREATIONAL VEHICLES or tents. Typical uses include recreational vehicle parks. 
"Cargo container" means a container, with or without axles, originally designed to haul, store or transport freight or cargo. Cargo containers may also be referred to as storage containers, temporary storage containers, portable storage containers, containerized storage devices, semi-trailers or truck-trailers. 
"Carport" means a GARAGE enclosed or partly enclosed by no more than one side. 
"Carwashing" means washing and cleaning of automobiles and similar vehicles and equipment. Typical uses include self-service and mechanical car washes and equipment cleaning facilities. 
"Cemetery" means land used for the burial of the dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums, crematoriums, mausoleums, and mortuaries when operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery. 
"Change of use" means the replacement of an existing USE by a new use, or a change in the nature of an existing use, but not including a change of ownership, tenancy, name, or management, or a change in product or service within the same use classification where the previous nature of the use, line of business, or other function is substantially unchanged. 
"Club" or "lodge" means assembly, recreational, social, and administrative facilities for a private or nonprofit association, primarily for use by members and guests. Typical uses include fraternal organizations and private social clubs. 
"Cocktail lounge" means a USE licensed by the state for preparation and sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises, including taverns, bars, cocktail lounges, and similar businesses. 
"Combining district" means an area depicted on the zoning map which is regulated by a base zone and another zone which is specifically added to a base district as prescribed by this title. 
"Commercial composting" means a site location that is used for the collection and COMPOSTING of organic material for a commercial purpose. 
Commercial Recreation, Indoor. "Indoor commercial recreation" means establishments primarily engaged in sports, entertainment, amusements or recreation services, conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include bowling alleys, billiard parlors, amusement arcades, skating rinks, health or sports clubs, motion picture theaters, meeting halls and dancehalls. 
Commercial Recreation, Outdoor. "Outdoor commercial recreation" means establishments primarily engaged in provision of sports, entertainment, amusement, or recreation, conducted in open or partially enclosed facilities. Typical uses include miniature golf, driving ranges, and golf courses, swimming and tennis facilities, sports arenas, and similar outdoor activities. 
"Commercial timber harvesting" means the harvesting of twelve (12) or more trees defined as a QUALIFYING TREE from one legal parcel during any twelve (12) consecutive month period for a commercial purpose. As used in this definition, "commercial purpose" means the trees are primarily being harvested for financial reasons and the specific tree felling and removal activity is not associated with a town approved development permit or entitlement authorizing the establishment or expansion of a legally permitted land use. Tree felling and removal activities in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.12 of this code shall not constitute commercial timber harvesting except as set forth in Code Section 8.12.090(B)(3). 
"Common area" means an area held, designed and designated principally for the use by all the owners or occupants of a MOBILE HOME PARK, cluster subdivision, condominium, or other unified development project. 
"Community care facility" means any facility, place or building which is maintained and operated to provide nonmedical residential care, adult day care, child day care, intermediate care, congregate living, health care, or home-finding agency services for children, adults, or children and adults, including but not limited to the physically handicapped, mentally impaired or incompetent persons and does not include drug recovery facilities. 
Community Care Facility, Limited Residential. "Limited residential community care facility" means a community care facility which provides service for six (6) or fewer persons, with the residents and operators of the facility being considered a family. 
"Composting" means a controlled microbial degradation of organic waste yielding a humus-like product of potential value as a soil conditioner. 
"Conditional use permit" means a discretionary permit issued by the town which is required for certain projects that are allowable by special permit only. A conditional use permit imposes conditions on a project which are designed to assure compatibility with the town general plan, the town zoning ordinance, and to minimize impacts to neighboring land uses. 
"Construction sales and services" means sale of building and construction materials, or provision of contracting and construction services. Typical uses include building materials centers, lumberyards, tool and equipment rental services, and contracting services. 
"Consumer repair services" means repair services primarily serving individuals and households, but excluding automotive and equipment use types. Typical uses include appliance repair, watch or jewelry repair, electronic and musical instrument repair, shoe repair, and tailor or seamstress shops. 
"Convalescent services" means provision of bed care and inpatient services for persons requiring regular medical attention, but excluding surgical and emergency medical services, care for alcoholism, drug addiction, mental disease, or communicable disease. 
"Convenience storage" means storage facilities primarily for storing personal effects and household goods, generally within enclosed or screened storage areas, but excluding uses such as workshops, hobby shops, MANUFACTURING, or other commercial activity. Typical uses include mini-storage and mini-warehousing. 
Coverage, Building. "Building coverage" means the area of a LOT covered by BUILDINGS or roofed areas, but excluding incidental projecting eaves, balconies, or similar features, and also excluding ground-level paving, LANDSCAPING, or outdoor recreational facilities. 
Coverage, Impervious. "Impervious coverage" means the area of a lot defined as BUILDING COVERAGE, plus the area occupied by impervious structures or features such as pavement, walkways, or swimming pools. 
"Crop production" means growing and harvesting of tree, row or field crops, or horticultural specialties, including incidental packing and processing. Typical uses include orchards, vineyards and wholesale plant nurseries. 
"Cul-de-sac" means a street or series connection of streets that is closed on one end. 
"Cultural services" means a library, museum, art gallery or similar nonprofit use affording preservation and exhibition of objects of artistic, scientific or historic interest. 
"Day care facility" means a facility that provides nonmedical day care to children under eighteen (18) years of age on less than a twenty-four (24) hour basis. Day care facility includes day care centers, infant centers, preschools, employer-sponsored child care centers, and family day care homes. 
"Day care home, large family" means a family day care home facility in the providers own residence which provides family day care for seven (7) to fourteen (14) children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside at the home. (Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78). 
"Day care home, small family" means a family day care home facility in the provider's own residence which provides family day care for eight (8) or fewer children, including children under the age of ten (10) years who reside at the home. (Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78). 
"Density" means the number of dwelling units per gross acre. 
"Detached" means fully separated from any other BUILDING or STRUCTURE, or joined to a building or structure only by structural members not constituting an enclosed or covered space. 
"Development" means the placement of any solid material or STRUCTURE; change in the DENSITY or INTENSITY, as defined in this section, of use of land; and construction, reconstruction, demolition or alteration of the size of any structure, including any facility of any private, public or municipal utility; including grading, dredging, mining or other significant earthwork. 
"Discretionary permit or project" means a permit or project which requires the use of judgment or deliberation when the town decision-making body decides to approve or disapprove a particular activity, as distinguished from situations where the decision-making body merely has to determine whether there has been conformity with applicable statutes, codes or regulations. 
"District" or "zoning district" means a specific land area delineated on the ZONING MAP assigned and regulated by an established ZONE. 
"Drive-in service" means a feature or characteristic of a land use involving the sale of products or provision of services directly to occupants in vehicles, including drive-in windows and drive-through services such as mechanical automobile washing. 
"Driveway" means a surface area providing vehicular access between a STREET and an OFF-STREET PARKING or LOADING SPACE. 
"Dwelling unit" means a residential BUILDING or portion thereof providing complete, independent living facilities for one FAMILY, including permanent provisions of living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. 
"Educational facilities" means an elementary, secondary or higher learning facility, whether public, private or parochial in ownership, which offers instruction in branches of learning required to be provided in public educational facilities of the State of California. 
"Electric generation" means the conversion of various forms of energy to electricity. 
Electric Generation, Limited. "Limited electric generation" means ELECTRIC GENERATION by the use of water or of resources immediately available on the premises. 
"Emergency shelters" means facilities providing emergency shelter to homeless individuals or others in need of shelter. These accommodations include lodging and may include as ancillary uses: meals, laundry facilities, bathing, counseling and other support services. 
Emergency Shelters, Temporary. "Temporary emergency shelters" means existing facilities such as churches, public or quasi-public buildings that provide temporary, emergency shelter to homeless individuals or others in need of shelter. These accommodations include lodging and may include as ancillary uses: meals, laundry facilities, bathing, counseling and other support services. 
"Enclosed" means a roofed or covered space fully surrounded by walls, including windows, doors, and similar openings or architectural features, or an open space of less than one hundred (100) square feet fully surrounded by a building or walls more than eight (8) feet in height. 
"Enlargement" means an addition to the FLOOR AREA of an existing BUILDING, or an addition of another BUILDING on a LOT or PARCEL. Enlargement also includes an increase in the number of adult livestock on a lot or parcel. 
"Equipment repair" means repair of trucks, tractors, construction equipment, agricultural implements and similar equipment. Typical uses include truck repair, tractor and farm implement repair services, and machine shops, but exclude dismantling or salvage operations. 
"Establish" means the originating, founding, instituting or creating of any USE consistent with this title on a LOT or PARCEL. Typically, uses requiring the receipt of a building permit for construction and for which substantial costs have been incurred by the permittee shall be deemed established. Uses not requiring a building permit are deemed established when the use is legally placed on the subject property, e.g., in the case of a use permit authorizing the keeping of livestock animals, the use is established when the animal is legally placed on the property. 
"Family" means an individual, or two (2) or more persons living together as a single household within a DWELLING UNIT. 
"Fence" means any barrier or structure consisting of any material, including a gate. 
"Financial services" means establishments primarily providing financial and banking services. Typical uses include banks, savings and loan institutions, credit and lending services, and similar services. 
Floor Area, Gross. "Gross floor area" means the total enclosed area of all floors of a BUILDING, measured to the surfaces of exterior walls, including halls, stairways, elevator shafts, service and mechanical equipment rooms, light wells, courts, and basement, cellar or attic areas deemed usable by the building official or habitable by the Uniform Building Code. 
Floor Area, Net. "Net floor area" means the total interior floor surface of a DWELLING UNIT or other unit of BUILDING area, measured to the interior surfaces of the bounding walls of the unit, excluding hallways, stairwells, service areas, and utility and mechanical equipment rooms not exclusive to the unit. 
"Floor area ratio" means the ratio of GROSS FLOOR AREA on a LOT to the GROSS LOT AREA. 
"Food sales" means retail sale of foods or household products predominately for home consumption. Typical uses include groceries, delicatessens, meat markets, retail bakeries and candy shops. 
"Fuelwood sales" means the sale and incidental storage of wood products to be primarily used as an indoor source of heat. 
"Funeral home" means the provision of undertaking and funeral services, including preparation for burial, cremation, and conduct of funeral services, but excluding cemeteries or mausoleums. 
"Garage" means a building or portion of a building constructed for the primary use of the noncommercial storage of motor vehicles. 
"General vehicle/equipment storage" means a facility that is not completely enclosed within a building and which primarily provides for the storage of recreational vehicles, boats, snowmobiles, trailers, construction equipment and/or other motorized and nonmotorized devices for more than seventy-two (72) hours. Typical uses include recreational vehicle storage lots and construction equipment yards. 
"Grade" means the lowest horizontal elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk at a point where HEIGHT is to be measured. 
"Guest house" means an accessory BUILDING containing a SLEEPING UNIT without kitchen facilities, and used to house occasional visitors which are nonpaying guests of the occupants of a DWELLING UNIT on the same SITE; and containing a FLOOR AREA of six hundred forty (640) square feet or less. 
Guidance Services, General. "General guidance services" means provision to seven (7) or more individuals of counseling, guidance, vocational or recuperative services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addiction or similar condition, either on a residential or DAY CARE basis. 
Guidance Services, Limited. "Limited guidance services" means provision to six (6) or fewer individuals of counseling, guidance, vocational or recuperative services to persons requiring rehabilitation assistance as a result of mental illness, alcoholism, detention, drug addition or similar condition, either on a residential or DAY CARE basis. 
"Hazardous waste" means a waste, or combination of wastes which due to its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may either: 
a.  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; 
b.  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. (Government Code Section 66714.8) 
"Hazardous waste facility" means any structure, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land, and all contiguous land, used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal or recycling of HAZARDOUS WASTE. (Health and Safety Code Section 25117.1) 
"Heavy processing recycling facility" means a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of RECYCLABLE MATERIALS occupying an area greater than forty-six thousand (46,000) square feet of gross area and averaging more than two (2) outbound truck shipments per day. 
"Height" means the vertical distance from GRADE to the highest point of the STRUCTURE, excluding chimneys, vents and similar architectural or mechanical features. 
"Home occupation" means an accessory commercial activity or BUSINESS SERVICE, conducted on the SITE of a DWELLING UNIT by the inhabitants thereof, in a manner clearly incidental to the residential character of the site, and in accord with Chapter 17.33 of this title. It shall not include activities that are limited solely to the use of a desk, telephone and personal computer. 
"Home occupation permit" means a nondiscretionary permit issued by the planning director that authorizes a HOME OCCUPATION based upon specific standards and criteria contained in this title. 
"Horticulture" means the art or science of growing flowers, shrubs, fruits and vegetables. 
"Hospital services" means provision of medical, psychiatric or surgical services for sick or injured persons primarily on an inpatient basis, and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration and incidental services to patients, employees or visitors. 
Industry, Basic. "Basic industry" means processing of raw materials and manufacture of product predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a storage (or manufacturing) activity involving flammable or explosive materials or involving processes with potentially hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions. Typical uses include rock, sand and gravel processing and lumber mills. 
"Intensity" means the percentage of the developed area of a SITE devoted to the various land uses stored, planted, constructed or placed on the subject property. 
"Internal street" means a roadway within a private DEVELOPMENT. 
"Junk" means any used, cast-off, damaged, discarded, obsolete, salvaged, scrapped, unusable, worn out, or wrecked object, thing, material or substance, regardless of whether the same is being held for sale or storage. Examples of JUNK include, but are not limited to: any old wire, iron, brass, copper, tin, aluminum, lead, or any other scrap metals or alloys, and any rags, carpet, papers, bags, cardboard, lumber, pallets, barrels, bottles, cans, plastics, or any dismantled or wrecked vehicles or parts thereof, used vehicle parts, machinery, appliances and/or parts or portions thereof, and used household furniture or other household personal property or parts or portions thereof. 
"Junkyard" means an area containing more than two hundred (200) square feet used for the storage of JUNK. 
"Kennel" means any LOT, BUILDING, STRUCTURE, or premises whereon or wherein five (5) or more dogs or five (5) or more cats, over the age of four (4) months are kept or maintained for any purpose. Kennel definition shall not be construed as applying to a duly licensed veterinary hospital or public animal shelter. 
"Landscaped" means an area predominately developed with plant material or natural landscape features, including lawn, ground cover, gardens, trees, shrubs, or other plant materials. Landscaped areas may include supplemental features such as pools, fountains, lighting, irrigation systems and sculptural elements. 
"Large collection recycling facility" means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase of RECYCLABLE MATERIALS from the public, occupying an area of generally more than five hundred (500) square feet, and may include permanent structures. The facility may include a mobile unit, bulk REVERSE VENDING MACHINES, kiosk-type units, and unattended containers for donation purposes. 
Large Family Day Care Home. See definition assigned to DAY CARE HOME, LARGE FAMILY. 
"Large retail project" shall mean any new commercial retail project, the total gross building floor area of which equals or exceeds fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, including but not limited to mercantile uses and/or shopping center uses. Additionally, for purposes of determining building floor area, multiple buildings located closer than twenty (20) feet together shall be considered one building. 
"Laundry services" means provision of laundering, dry cleaning or dyeing services other than those classified as PERSONAL SERVICES. Typical uses include bulk laundry and cleaning plants, diaper services, and commercial linen laundry and supply services. 
"Light processing recycling facility" means a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials having less than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet of gross area and a maximum of two (2) outbound truck shipments per day. The facility shall not include shredding, compacting or baling of ferrous materials. 
"Liquor sales" means establishments licensed by the state for retail sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises. Typical uses include liquor stores, bottle shops, or any licensed sales for off-site consumption. 
"Livestock animals" means domestic animals raised for use or sale. 
"Loading space" means an area used for loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle. 
"Lot" means a PARCEL of real property with a separate number or other designation shown on a record of survey, parcel map, or subdivision map recorded by the county; or a parcel legally created pursuant to applicable regulations in effect prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. 
Lot Area, Gross. "Gross lot area" means the total area within initial bounding LOT LINES, including any easement or right-of-way located within the resultant lot lines. 
Lot Area, Net. "Net lot area" means the net area within resultant bounding LOT LINES, but excluding any portion of a flag lot providing access to a street, and excluding any public or private easement or right-of-way providing access to another lot. 
Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a LOT having front and side property lines abutting two (2) separate streets, roads or road easements. 
"Lot depth" means the distance between the midpoint of the front lot line and the midpoint of the rear lot line. 
"Lot or parcel line" means a line or series of connected line segments bounding a LOT or PARCEL. 
a.  "Front line" means any LOT LINE contiguous to a STREET from which access is provided to a LOT or PARCEL. 
b.  "Side line" means any LOT LINE which intersects a FRONT LINE. 
c.  "Rear line" means any LOT LINE which is not a FRONT LINE or SIDE LINE. 
Lot, Through. "Through lot" means a LOT having front and rear lot lines ABUTTING a street, road, or road easement. 
"Lot width" means the distance between side LOT LINES, measured along the front SETBACK LINE, except lots facing cul-de-sacs which shall have a lot width equal to the arc distance measured along the front setback line of the CUL-DE-SAC. 
"Manufacturing, custom" means on-site production of small goods and/or consumptive products by methods involving primarily the use of hand tools or power tools not exceeding seven (7) horsepower or kilns and/or ovens not exceeding twenty (20) kilowatts. Custom manufacturing may include retail sale of goods or products produced on the SITE. Typical uses include candle factories, ceramic shops, custom jewelry and lapidary shops, micro-brewery, and similar uses. 
Manufacturing, Light. "Light manufacturing" means manufacturing of finished products or parts prepared predominately from previously prepared materials, including processing, fabricating, assembly, treatment, and packaging, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, including agricultural processing but excluding basic industry. 
"Medical offices" means provision of consultations, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventative or corrective personal treatment by doctors, dentists, medical and dental laboratories, or similar practitioners of medical and healing arts licensed for such purposes by the state. 
Mining. For "mining" see definition assigned to RESOURCE EXTRACTION. 
"Mobile home" means a transportable factory built housing unit designed and equipped for use as a DWELLING UNIT with or without a permanent foundation. A mobile home may include two (2) or more sections separately transported and joined together as one integral unit. A mobile home shall not include a RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. 
"Mobile home park" means a unified residential DEVELOPMENT with two (2) or more MOBILE HOME SPACES, together with internal streets, common areas, and facilities for parking, recreation, laundry, utility, storage, or other services for the residents. 
"Mobile home space" means an area within a MOBILE HOME PARK intended as the location for one mobile home and for the exclusive use of its occupants. 
"Mobile recycling unit" means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles, which is used for the collection of RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. In addition, MRU's include bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans or trailers, and used for the collection of RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. 
"Motel" or "lodging" means a business providing overnight lodging services, including incidental food and drink. 
"Multiple-family residential" means USE of a SITE for three (3) or more DWELLING UNITS, within one or more BUILDINGS, including units intended for individual ownership together with COMMON AREAS or facilities. 
"Nonconforming parcel or lot" means a parcel or lot that was legally created prior to the adoption of the regulations of this code and which does not comply with the minimum area or width requirements of the land use regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. 
"Nuisance" means anything which is injurious to health, or is indecent or offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property, or which unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any public square, street or highway. 
"Off-street parking" means required on-site parking normally beyond all SETBACK LINES of a LOT. See Section 17.38.200(H). 
"Open space" means the undeveloped area of a PARCEL, with no use otherwise defined by the use classifications, except for incidental grazing or similar activity typically occurring on vacant or undeveloped lands. 
"Outdoor advertising" means any advertising that is located outside of the store selling a tobacco product, including but not limited to sidewalk signs, banners or signs affixed to the outside walls of the building or to utility poles or other outdoor fixtures, and advertising that is affixed to storefront windows and doors, but that is facing outward and is clearly designed to be seen from outside the store. 
"Park and recreation services" means publicly or nonprofit organization owned and operated parks, playgrounds, recreation facilities and OPEN SPACES. 
"Parking facility" means an area used for parking motor vehicles, including eight (8) or more PARKING SPACES with driveways, aisles, maneuvering areas, clearances and similar features. This term includes parking lots, GARAGES, and parking structures. 
"Parking space" or "parking stall" means an independently accessible area within a PARKING FACILITY used for parking a motor vehicle. This term does not include driveways, aisles, or other features of a parking facility. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or other legal entity. 
"Personal improvement services" means provision of informational, instructional, personal improvement or similar services of a nonprofessional nature primarily to individuals or small groups. Typical uses include photography studios, driving schools, health or fitness studios, reducing salons, dance studios, or art, music, handicraft or hobby instructions. 
"Personal services" means provision of frequently needed services of a personal nature. Typical uses include beauty shops and barbershops, seamstress, tailor, shoe repair shops, and self-service laundry or apparel cleaning services. 
"Pet services" means RETAIL SERVICES and grooming of dogs, cats, birds, fish, and similar small animals customarily used as household pets. Typical uses include pet stores or pet grooming shops. 
"Pet shop" means indoor boarding and sale of dogs, cats, birds, fish, reptiles and other small animals. The pet shop definition shall not be construed as applying to a duly licensed veterinary hospital or public animal shelter. 
"Planned development" means a land USE in which the minimum required development standards are modified to allow improved and integrated utilization of the land thereby reducing adverse economic, social or environmental impacts. 
"Postal facilities" means postal services, including post offices and mail processing or sorting centers which are either publicly or privately owned and operated. 
"Professional office" means provision of professional or technical services, including accounting, architecture, design, engineering, law, management and similar professions. 
"Promotion" means a display of any logo, brand name, character, graphic, artwork, colors, scenes, or designs that are a recognized image of a particular product brand that calls the public's attention to the product brand. 
"Public assembly" means publicly or privately owned or operated facilities for major public assembly, recreation, sports, amusements or entertainment, including civic or community auditoriums, sports stadiums, convention facilities, fairgrounds and exhibition halls. 
"Public hearing" means a meeting conducted by the planning director, planning commission, town council, or other body empowered by the town council to conduct an official meeting, open to the general public, which is for the purpose of receiving information and testimony and taking action on a matter. 
"Qualifying tree" means any woody perennial plant characterized by having one or more main stems or trunks with one stem or trunk of which measures ten (10) inches or more diameter at breast height or specifically four (4) feet, six (6) inches above natural grade as measured on the uphill side. 
"Queue line" means an area for temporary queuing or standing of motor vehicles, while waiting for a service or other activity. 
"Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle, used for temporary recreational, sleeping or sporting purposes. This term shall include but is not limited to travel trailers, pickup campers, motor homes, converted trucks and buses, boats and boat trailers. 
"Recyclable material" means reusable material including, but not limited to, metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. 
"Religious assembly" means provision of regular organized religious worship and religious education incidental thereto, in a permanent facility, but excluding uses defined as EDUCATION FACILITIES. 
"Research services" means establishments primarily engaged in research or consultation of an industrial or scientific nature in an office environment, but excluding major manufacturing or product testing facilities. Typical uses include electronics research laboratories, scientific research and development facilities, and pharmaceutical or medical research labs. 
Residential, Group. "Group residential" means residential occupancy of DWELLING UNITS or SLEEPING UNITS by groups of more than six (6) persons not defined as a FAMILY. Typical uses include rooming or boarding, dormitories, residence halls, and fraternity and sorority houses. 
"Resource extraction and mining operation" means the on-site or off-site extraction of surface or subsurface mineral or natural resource products. Typical uses are quarries, borrow pits, sand and gravel operations, oil and gas extraction, and mining operations. 
"Restaurant" means a place in which the preparation and RETAIL sale of food and beverages takes place, including incidental sale of alcoholic beverages. Typical uses include fountains, sandwich shops, restaurants, coffee shops, dinner houses, and similar establishments. 
"Retail services" means sale and incidental rental or servicing of commonly used merchandise, and/or personal or household goods but excluding a defined LARGE RETAIL PROJECT. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, department stores, apparel stores, furniture and appliance stores, and businesses providing the products or services to the general public, not including businesses primarily for wholesale trade. 
"Reverse vending machine" means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles; then issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container redemption value as determined by the state. The machine may sort and process containers mechanically, provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. 
Reverse Vending Machine, Bulk. "Bulk reverse vending machine" means a reverse vending machine larger than fifty (50) square feet and designed to accept more than one container at a time, and pays by weight rather than by container. 
"Safety services" means facilities for the conduct of public safety and emergency services, including police and fire protection services as well as ambulance services. 
"Scrap and salvage services" means businesses primarily engaged in storage, sale, dismantling, or other processing of used or waste materials which are not intended for reuse in their original forms. Typical uses include automobile wrecking, paper or metal salvage yards, junk-yards, and similar scrapping activities. 
"Screened" means shielded, concealed, or reflectively blocked from view from an ABUTTING SITE, or outside the area or feature so screened, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm, or similar architectural or landscape feature. 
"Secondary dwelling" means a DWELLING UNIT containing seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or less, and which is located on a SITE in conjunction with a single-family dwelling. 
"Senior housing" means housing meeting the definition set forth in Civil Code Section 51.3 of housing for older persons. 
"Service station" means provision for fuel, lubricants and accessories, and incidental light servicing of motor vehicles. 
"Setback line" means a line within a LOT parallel to and measured from a corresponding street centerline, lot line or right-of-way line, forming the interior boundary of a required YARD and governing the placement of STRUCTURES and uses on the lot. 
"Shooting range" means a place for practicing shooting. 
"Sign" means any surface device or display having lettered, pictorial or sculptured matter designed to convey visual information, and which is publicly displayed. It includes a display surface and all organized or related elements which together form or represent a single unit. 
Sign, Animated. "Animated sign" means a SIGN having action or motion including flashing, pulsing or blinking lights, change of color, inflated advertising symbols used to attract attention, movement of any parts or letters, rotation, fluttering, wind movement or similar motion such as with strings of streamers, pennants or reflecting devices. 
Sign, Area of. "Area of sign" means the total area included within the shortest circumferential line drawn around all words, symbols or other elements comprising each SIGN FACE; and including all background material, embellishments, arrows and similar elements, but excluding any poles or structural elements necessary to support a FREE-STANDING sign. 
Sign Area, Maximum. "Maximum sign area" means the cumulative area of all BUSINESS SIGNS on a SITE, including banner, flush, freestanding, marquee, projecting, post, portable and roof signs. 
Sign, Banner. "Banner sign" means a SIGN or string of signs composed of cloth, plastic, vinyl, paper or similar thin, flexible or elastic material. 
Sign, Billboard. "Billboard sign" means a SIGN advertising a service provided or product sold on a SITE other than that on which the service or product is provided and which is not accessory or appurtenant to a USE on the SITE. Billboard signs shall not include signs upon newspaper stands, vehicles, bus shelters, shopping carts or menus at eating establishments. Billboard signs shall also not include advertising material not legible from off the site and/or unlighted WINDOW SIGNS determined to be exempt from regulation pursuant to this Title. 
Sign, Business. "Business sign" means a SIGN advertising a service provided or a product sold on the premises by a commercial or industrial use type. 
Sign, Community Service. "Community service sign" means a SIGN giving information about community activities, including service clubs and community facilities, and erected and maintained by the town or by a community service organization with authorization from the town. 
Sign, Construction. "Construction sign" means a temporary SIGN on the SITE of an active construction project, indicating the nature of the use under construction, and related information such as the architect, engineer, contractor, or project sponsor. 
Sign, Directional. "Directional sign" means a SIGN intended to give direction, warning or safety indication, including traffic and parking signs, and similar nonadvertising signs. 
"Sign face" means the surface of a SIGN on which any advertising or identification message is placed. 
Sign, Flush. "Flush sign" means a building SIGN placed flat on the surface of a BUILDING wall, or fence, having only one SIGN FACE which is generally parallel to the surface on which the sign is placed. 
Sign, Freestanding. "Freestanding sign" means a SIGN placed directly on or in the ground or supported on a STRUCTURE standing directly on or in the ground, and fully detached from a BUILDING, wall or fence. 
Sign, Identification. "Identification sign" means a SIGN identifying a public or community use, MOBILE HOME PARK, MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT, office or shopping center, or similar use or group of uses, which sign is not designed to advertise any individual occupant or business activity. 
Sign, Illuminated. "Illuminated sign" means a SIGN having artificial lighting, either internal within the structure of the sign, or external from a light source directed toward the sign. 
Sign, Marquee. "Marquee sign" means a SIGN located beneath or on the face of an awning, marquee, canopy or covered walk. 
Sign, Monument. "Monument sign" means a FREESTANDING, self-supporting SIGN, supported by a base or foundation, which is placed on or at ground level and not attached to any BUILDING wall, fence or other STRUCTURE. 
Sign, Nameplate. "Nameplate sign" means a SIGN indicating only the name, address, occupation, or other identifying description pertaining to the occupant of a premises. 
Sign, Plaque. "Plaque sign" means an unlighted sign permanently attached to or built into a BUILDING wall giving information concerning the architect, date of construction, contractor, and similar information, or a sign identifying a structure as having architectural or historical significance. 
Sign, Pole. "Pole sign" means a FREESTANDING SIGN supported and separated from ground level by a singular upright pole, post, pylon or column which is secured to the ground and not to a BUILDING, wall, fence or other STRUCTURE. 
Sign, Political. "Political sign" means a TEMPORARY SIGN relating to a political candidate, or issue relating to an election, but not a political party. 
Sign, Portable. "Portable sign" means a SIGN not permanently affixed to a BUILDING, STRUCTURE, or to the ground, which is supported by wheels, adjustable framing, or otherwise designed for relocation, portability or movement. 
Sign, Post. "Post sign" means a FREESTANDING SIGN supported and separated from ground level by at least two (2) upright poles, posts, pylons or columns which are secured to the ground and not to a BUILDING, wall, fence or other STRUCTURE. 
Sign, Projecting. "Projecting sign" means a building SIGN extending outward from the BUILDING to which it is attached, and not otherwise defined as a ROOF SIGN or FLUSH BUILDING SIGN. 
Sign, Real Estate. "Real estate sign" means a TEMPORARY, unlighted SIGN pertaining to the sale, lease, or rental of a SITE or other premises on which it is located. 
Sign, Roof. "Roof sign" means a SIGN located on or above the roof of a STRUCTURE, or located on a BUILDING wall and extending above the top of the wall or parapet of the building. 
Sign, Window. "Window sign" means a SIGN painted on, attached to, or displayed in the window area of a BUILDING, including signs inside the building intended for view from the outside. 
"Single-family residential" means USE of a SITE for only one DWELLING UNIT and its allowed ACCESSORY USES, or for one primary dwelling unit and one SECONDARY DWELLING. 
"Site" means a LOT or group of lots used together for a unified DEVELOPMENT. 
"Site plan" means a scale drawing with complete dimensioning, showing the location of existing or proposed BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES and other SITE DEVELOPMENT features. 
"Sleeping unit" means a room or group of rooms in a group residential use, HOTEL or MOTEL, or similar land use or lodging for overnight occupancy on either a transient or long-term occupancy by one or more persons. Each two (2) persons' capacity shall be deemed a separate sleeping unit. 
"Small collection recycling facility" means a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption or purchase, of RECYCLABLE MATERIALS from the public. The facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as otherwise provided for in this title. The facility does not occupy more than five hundred (500) square feet, and may include: REVERSE VENDING MACHINES; mobile unit; BULK REVERSE VENDING MACHINES; kiosk-type units; and unattended containers placed for donation. 
Small Family Day Care Home. See definition assigned to DAY CARE HOME, SMALL FAMILY. 
"Solid waste" means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes such as, but not limited to garbage, rubbish, ashes, paper, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles, vegetable matter, wood, but excluding HAZARDOUS WASTE. (Public Resources Code Section 40191(a)) 
"Solid waste facility" means any STRUCTURE, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land, and all contiguous land, used for the treatment, transfer, storage, disposal or recycling of SOLID WASTE. 
"Solid waste transfer facility" means a SOLID WASTE FACILITY where SOLID WASTE is temporarily loaded, stored, packaged, unloaded and transported to another location. 
Stables, Commercial. "Commercial stables" means boarding, breeding or raising of horses not owned by the occupant of the premises. Typical uses include boarding stables, public stables, or riding academies. 
Stables, Private. "Private stables" means boarding, breeding or raising of horses owned by the occupant of the premises or the owner of the property. 
Street, Private. "Private street" means a right-of-way, easement or other LOT, privately owned which affords the primary means of access to ABUTTING property. 
Street, Public. "Public street" means a dedicated or publicly accepted and maintained thoroughfare affording the primary means of access to ABUTTING property. The term "street" includes all land within the right-of-way thereof. 
"Structure" means that which is built or constructed, or an edifice or BUILDING of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of having parts joined together in some definite manner. 
"Tattoo shop" means any place or establishment which is operated for the purpose of placing ink or other pigments into or under the skin or mucosa with needles or any other instruments used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. 
"Temporary sign" is defined to include any sign, banner, pennant, valance or advertising display constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, plastic, cardboard, wall board, or other light materials with or without frames, with or without letters, words, numbers or figures thereon which directs, promotes, or attracts or which is otherwise designed and used to attract attention for a limited period of time. 
"Temporary uses" means USES and activities when consistent with the purposes of this title, and are compatible with surrounding uses. See Chapter 17.32 of this title. 
"Tobacco product" means any substance containing any tobacco leaf, including but not limited to, cigarettes, bidis, clove cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, and smokeless tobacco. 
"Towing service/vehicle impound." A towing service means the business of towing motor vehicles for compensation in the town by means of a tow vehicle; and a vehicle impound means an area used for the temporary storage of towed vehicles by a towing service operator pending the return of the vehicle to its owner. 
"Transportation service" means parking, storage, dispatching or incidental servicing for motor vehicles, other than as an ACCESSORY to a PRINCIPAL USE. Typical uses include taxi or ambulance dispatching, but exclude dismantling or salvage activities, auto and trailer rental agencies, and vehicle impound activities. 
"Transportation terminal" means a facility for loading and interchange of passengers, baggage, and incidental freight or package express between modes of transportation, including bus terminals and public transit facilities. 
"Two-family residence" means USE of a SITE for two (2) DWELLING UNITS, either in the same BUILDING or in separate buildings, except when one of the dwelling units is a SECONDARY DWELLING. 
"Use" means the conduct of an activity, or the performance of a function or operation, on a SITE or in a BUILDING, STRUCTURE or facility. 
Use, Accessory. "Accessory use" means a USE or activity which is incidental to and customarily associated with a specific PRINCIPAL USE on the same SITE. 
Use, Conditional. "Conditional use" means a USE potentially allowed within a particular DISTRICT solely on a discretionary basis; and subject to review and in accord with the provisions of this title. 
Use, Legal Nonconforming. "Legal nonconforming use" means a lawful use of any land, building, or structure, that does not conform with town adopted and currently applicable land or use regulations, but which complied with the use regulations in effect at the time the use was established. 
Use, Nonconforming. "Nonconforming use" means an existing use of land or building that does not conform with the town or Butte County adopted land use regulations in effect at the time the use was established. 
Use, Permitted. "Permitted use" means an allowed USE within a particular DISTRICT and permitted within that district as a matter of right when conducted in accordance with the land use regulations of this title. 
Use, Principal. "Principal use" means a USE which fulfills the primary function of a household, establishment, institution, or other entity. 
Utility Service, Major. "Major utility service" means generating plants, electrical switching facilities and primary substations, refuse collection or disposal facilities, water and wastewater treatment plants and similar facilities of public agencies or public or private utility entities. 
Utility Service, Minor. "Minor utility service" means a facility or service installation of a public utility, municipality, special public district or private utility entity that is necessary to provide utility service to users in the general vicinity and requiring only minor structures such as lines, poles, transformers, control boxes and similar features. 
"Value" or "valuation" means the estimated cost to replace a STRUCTURE in kind, based on current replacement costs. 
"Variance" or "variance permit" means a permit that grants a minor modification or variation of the strict application of any of the provisions of this title when the strict application would deprive a property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the same vicinity, DISTRICT and ZONE. The variance definition shall not be construed as to permit those USES not permitted by the ZONE. 
"Veterinary services" means medical care for dogs, cats, birds, horses and other animals which may or may not require an overnight treatment on the premises. 
Warehousing and Distribution, General. "General warehousing and distribution" means warehousing and distribution activities conducted partially or entirely in the open. Typical USES include monument or stone yards, and contractor's service and storage yards. 
Warehousing and Distribution, Limited. "Limited warehousing and distribution" means wholesaling, bulk storage, distribution and handling of materials and equipment other than livestock, when all storage and services except parking and loading activities are conducted within a BUILDING. Typical USES include wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, and moving and storage firms. 
"Wastewater treatment/disposal utility" shall mean a "small-scale" designed [i.e. service capacity of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or less per day] wastewater collection, treatment, and reclamation or disposal system that provides service to a designated cluster of established wastewater generating land uses. This type of utility facility is typically owned and operated by a public entity. 
"Yard" means a required OPEN SPACE extending from a LOT LINE into a LOT containing only LANDSCAPING and such other USES or STRUCTURES as permitted by this title. 
"Front yard" means a required YARD extending the full WIDTH of a LOT between the front lot line and the front SETBACK LINE. 
"Rear yard" means a required YARD extending the full width of a LOT between the rear lot line and the rear SETBACK LINE. 
"Side yard" means a required YARD extending the depth of a LOT from the FRONT YARD to the REAR YARD, between the side LOT line and the side SETBACK LINE. 
"Zone" means a specific set of land USE regulations as set forth in this chapter, and legally assigned to various DISTRICTS established and delineated on the ZONING MAP of the town. 
"Zoning map" means a map adopted pursuant to the regulations of this title showing the boundaries of DISTRICTS within the Town of Paradise. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 1, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 556, § 1, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 543, § 1, 7-8-2014; Ord. No. 534, § 1, 12-10-2013; Ord. No. 505, §§ 1, 2, 9-14-2010; Ord. No. 503, § 1, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. 497, § 1, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 495, § 1, 8-25-2009; Ord. No. 460, § 1, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 444, § 1, 1-24-2006; Ord. No. 420, § 1, 6-8-2004; Ord. No. 411, §§ 1, 2, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 405, §§ 1—3, 11-12-2003; Ord. No. 395, § 1, 2003; Ord. 362, § 1, 2001; Ord. 354, § 1, 2000; Ord. 353, § 1, 2000; Ord. 351, § 1, 2000; Ord. 344, § 1, 2000; Ord. 320, §§ 1—3, 1999; Ord. 308, § 1, 1998; Ord. 302, §§ 1, 2, 1998; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 227, §§ 2, 3, 1993; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.05 - DISTRICT PROVISIONS 
 
17.05.100 - Purpose. 
Zoning and zoning districts are established to promote patterns of land use consistent with the Paradise general plan, and to establish site development regulations and land use performance standards for each zone that are appropriate to and compatible with the purposes of each district and to the land uses allowed therein. They are created to separate incompatible land uses, and to protect residents from adverse effects of other land uses common to other zones. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.05.200 - Zones established. 
The following base zones and combining zones are established as depicted in Table 17.05.200. Zoning map code symbols, chapter numbers of this title, and the general plan land use designations with which each zone is consistent are established and indicated for reference within Table 17.05.200 as follows: 
Table 17.05.200 
SPECIFIC ZONES ESTABLISHED 
Zoning 
Map 
Code 	Zone Name 	Chapter 
Number 	Consistent 
General Plan 
Designation 
	Open-Space/Agricultural Zones 		
R-C 	Resource Conservation 	17.08 	O-S/A; R 
AG-10 	Agricultural-10 Zone 	17.10 	O-S/A 
AG-20 	Agricultural-20 Zone 	17.10 	O-S/A 
	Agricultural-Residential Zones 		
AR-1 	Agricultural Residential-1 	17.11 	A-R 
AR-3 	Agricultural Residential-3 	17.11 	A-R; O-S/A 
AR-5 	Agricultural Residential-5 	17.11 	A-R; O-S/A 
	Rural-Residential Zones 		
RR-1 	Rural-Residential-1 	17.12 	R-R 
RR-2/3 	Rural-Residential-2/3 	17.12 	R-R 
RR-1/2 	Rural-Residential-1/2 	17.12 	R-R 
	Town-Residential Zones 		
TR-1 	Town-Residential-1 	17.14 	T-R 
TR-1/2 	Town-Residential-1/2 	17.14 	T-R 
TR-1/3 	Town-Residential-1/3 	17.14 	T-R 
	Multiple-Residential Zone 		
M-F 	Multiple-Family Residential 	17.17 	M-R 
	Commercial Zones 		
N-C 	Neighborhood-Commercial 	17.20 	N-C; T-C 
C-B 	Central-Business Zone 	17.20 	C-C; T-C* 
C-C 	Community-Commercial 	17.20 	T-C; C-S* 
	Industrial Zones 		
I-S 	Industrial Services 	17.23 	L-I; B-P 
	Community Facilities/Services Zones 		
C-F 	Community-Facilities 	17.26 	P-I; C-S; R; B-P 
C-S 	Community-Services 	17.26 	C-S; R; B-P; M-R* 
/PD 	Planned Development Combining 	17.29 	All designations 
/MH 	Mobile Home Combining 	17.31 	A-R; R-R; T-R; M-R 
 
* Note: Possibly consistent, subject to interpretation by the planning commission or the town council. 
(Ord. 351, § 2, 2000; Ord. 348, § 1, 2000; Ord. 326, § 1, 1999; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.05.300 - Application of zones. 
A base zone shall apply to each lot, site or parcel within the town. Portions of a site may have different base zones regulating separate areas of a site as shown on the zoning map, provided that only one base zone shall apply to the same portion of a site. A combining zone may be applied to any site, or portion of a site, in addition to its base zone. (See Chapters 17.29 and 17.31). 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.05.400 - Zoning map. 
A.  Zoning districts established by this title shall have the boundaries shown on the zoning map. The zoning map, together with all the legends, symbols, notations, references, district boundaries, and other information thereon, shall be a part of this title and is adopted concurrently herewith. (Government Code Section 65851) 
B.  District boundaries and the applicable map code symbol for each district shall be shown on the zoning map in a manner sufficient to indicate the zoning district applicable to all property within the town. Areas subject to a combining zone shall be indicated by the map code symbol for the combining zone suffixed to the map code symbol for the base zone, e.g., RR/MH. (Government Code Section 65851) 
C.  Changes in the boundaries of any district shall be made by ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of this title, and shall be reflected on the zoning map. Revisions and additions to base map data shown on the zoning map may be done administratively by the planning director or designee when such changes do not affect the designation or interpretation of district boundaries. (Government Code Section 65851) 
D.  The zoning map may be prepared in sections as required to adequately portray the district boundaries. The zoning map may include supplemental zoning maps as required by this title. (Government Code Section 65851). 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.05.500 - Interpretation of boundaries. 
A.  When a lot or parcel is divided by a district boundary, the regulations applicable to each zoning district shall apply separately to each affected portion of the site. 
B.  The following rules shall apply to the determination of district boundaries shown on the zoning map. 
1.  Where boundaries are indicated as approximately following street lines or other identifiable property or boundary lines, such lines shall be construed to be the district boundary. Where the boundaries are indicated as within street lines, right-of-way, creeks or drainways, or similar features, the centerline thereof shall be construed to be the district boundary. 
2.  Where a boundary divides a parcel, the location of the boundary shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing on the zoning map, unless indicated by dimensions. 
3.  Map codes or symbols indicating the zoning classification of property shall apply to the whole of the area within the district boundaries. 
4.  Where a public street, alley, easement, or right-of-way is vacated or abandoned, the zoning regulations applicable to abutting property shall apply equally to each half of the vacated area. 
5.  When there is uncertainty as to the location or meaning of a zoning district boundary or other feature indicated on the zoning map, the planning director or if deemed necessary, the planning commission shall determine the location or meaning. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.06 - GENERAL SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
 
17.06.100 - Purpose. 
The general site development regulations as set forth in this chapter are intended to govern the application and interpretation of the site development regulations applicable within each zone, and to establish additional regulations and exceptions thereto. (Government Code Section 65850) 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.200 - Determination of measurement. 
Distances between structures, or between a structure and a property line, right-of-way line or other line or location shall be measured to the exterior face of the nearest wall or vertical support of the structure. If a structure does not have a vertical wall or support, the point of measurement shall be determined by the planning director or designee, consistent with the purposes of this title. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.210 - Lot area and dimensions. 
A.  Purpose. Minimum lot regulations are established to ensure that sites in each district have sufficient area and dimensions to accommodate allowable uses, consistent with reasonable current standards for development for such uses and compatible with other uses in the district. 
B.  Measurement of Area. Unless as otherwise established in this title, the area of a lot for purposes of compliance with minimum site development requirements shall be the area within bounding lot lines, but excluding any area which: 
1.  Comprises the "stem" or "pole" portion of a flag or panhandle lot providing vehicular access to a street or road. 
C.  Width. Minimum lot width may include any portion of a flag lot or traversing easement providing access to another lot. 
D.  Minimum Area to be Maintained. No portion of the required area of a lot shall be used or considered as part of the required area for another lot. No lot shall be reduced in area, width or depth to less than the minimum requirement, except when such reduction results from partial acquisition for public use. 
E.  Reductions Resulting from Public Acquisition. If a portion of a lot in any zoning district is acquired for public use in any manner including dedication, condemnation, or purchase, the remainder of such lot shall be considered as a complying lot, provided: 
1.  The remainder of such lot contains a rectangular space of at least fifty (50) feet by one hundred (100) feet, usable for a principal building, excluding required yards; and such lot has a remaining area of at least seventy-five (75) percent of the minimum requirement. 
F.  Public and Utility Buildings. If a lot is devoted exclusively to public buildings and uses owned by a public agency, or to public utility facilities, and no living quarters are located on the lot, a reduced lot size may be authorized pursuant to the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. 313, § 3(part), 1998; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.300 - Residential density. 
A.  Purpose. Residential density regulations are established to coordinate the intensity and amount of residential development with existing and planned public service and utility capabilities and to ensure residential development compatible with existing and anticipated uses of nearby property. 
B.  Measurement. To determine the allowable density on a lot, the size shall contain sufficient gross or net area as required by its zone for each dwelling, and no credit shall be given for any remaining square footage less than the full amount required per dwelling unit. 
C.  Density. A secondary dwelling shall be considered accessory to and part of the single-family use for purposes of determining the required site area per dwelling unit; however, it shall not be considered in determining the density on a lot or parcel. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.400 - Floor area ratio. 
A.  Purpose. Floor area ratio provisions are established to ensure that total floor area of buildings on a site shall be compatible with the size of the site and the purpose of the zone, and shall maintain compatibility of scale and bulk with buildings on other sites in the zoning district. Maximum floor area ratio provisions are primarily applicable to nonresidential uses and buildings that are not subject to density provisions. 
B.  Measurement. Floor area shall be deemed the gross floor area of all buildings on a site, excluding the following: agricultural and horticultural greenhouses used for plant production. 
(Ord. 313, § 3(part), 1998; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.500 - Height. 
A.  Purpose. Height limitations are established to ensure that buildings and structures shall not exceed heights generally compatible with the purposes of the zoning district and other land uses therein, and shall not unnecessarily impact the privacy, views, or desirability of adjoining sites. 
B.  Height of Buildings. As applied to a building, the maximum permissible height shall be measured from an elevation derived from the average of the highest and lowest grade adjacent to the building, but not greater than five (5) feet above the lowest grade. The height of a stepped or terraced building is the maximum height of any segment of the structure. 
C.  Linear Features. The height of linear features, such as fences, walls, screen plantings, or similar features shall be the average height measured from the grade to the highest portion of such feature at all points along the feature. For purposes of applying maximum or minimum requirements, a linear feature which has an average height for its entire length in conformity with such requirement and does not exceed the requirement by more than fifteen (15) percent at any point shall be deemed to comply. 
D.  Exceptions. The following structures and features may exceed the maximum height for the zoning district in which they are located, subject to limits specified herein: 
The following structures may exceed the height limit of any zone by not more than ten (10) feet: 
1.  Parapet walls, chimneys, vents, and mechanical or safety features such as fire towers, stairway or elevator penthouses, and heating and cooling equipment; 
2.  Ornamental or architectural features, such as towers, cupolas, domes and spires, when not designed for occupancy. 
(Ord. 313, § 3(part), 1998; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.600 - Yard and building/structure setback regulations. 
A.  Purpose. Minimum yard and building setback requirements are established to ensure safety, light, air, privacy, building separation, and open areas appropriate to each land use and zoning district, and to minimize impacts of land uses and structures upon adjacent sites. 
B.  Measurement. Minimum required yards and building setbacks shall be measured pursuant to applicable regulations. The setback area measured from private road easements or rights-of-way that are twenty (20) feet or less in width shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet measured from the centerline within the easement or right-of-way. 
C.  For a building site exceeding twenty-five (25) percent average slope the front yard setback from a town-maintained street shall be the right-of-way line, plus two (2) feet, unless the town engineer requires a greater setback distance. 
D.  Interpretation. When unusual geometric shape, dimensions, and topography make the literal interpretation of yard, minimum lot width, and setback provisions impractical, the planning director shall determine the application of such provisions in a manner which is consistent with the purpose of this title. 
E.  Use of Required Yards. Required yards shall be open and unobstructed above grade, except for structures and projections specifically allowed in this chapter. The following structures or features may be located in or projected into a required yard: 
1.  Window sills, belt courses, cornices, flues and chimneys, eaves, air conditioning units and similar architectural projections may extend not more than two (2) feet into a required yard. 
2.  Uncovered porches, steps, landings, and similar features located not more than two (2) feet above grade may extend not more than three (3) feet into a required yard. 
3.  Required yards may be occupied by landscaping, ground level recreational facilities, sidewalks or pathways, driveways, and similar outdoor activities and features appurtenant to the use of the site. 
4.  A non-open or solid fence up to six (6) feet in height above grade may be installed along property lines which do not abut a road or street, or beyond setback lines as required by the zone when the property line abuts a road or street. A non-open or solid fence not exceeding four (4) feet in height above grade may extend into the front yard setback area; and wrought iron and/or chain link fences up to six (6) feet in height above grade may extend into the front yard setback area. No fence shall be installed within public rights-of-way. Exclusive of the front yard setback area, fences to a maximum height of eight (8) feet above grade subject to procurement of town building permit issuance may be installed around recycling processing facilities, a wastewater treatment/disposal utility facility, and/or legally established facilities that provide either scrap and salvage services or general vehicle/equipment storage or vehicle impoundment service. 
5.  Except for the provisions of item No. 4 of this Subsection "E," a variance shall be required as set forth in Section 17.45.300 for fences exceeding six (6) feet in height above grade or for the installation of fences exceeding four (4) feet in height above grade in any front yard or general setback zone. 
6.  No fence shall be installed within a private roadway easement unless all persons who have a legal right to use such private roadway easement have, in writing, consented to its installation. 
F.  Front Yard and General Setback Zone. Except any land use permitted by the provisions of Title 5, Chapter 10.06, or Title 17 of this code, it is unlawful to display or place large merchandise and specifically motor vehicles, recreation vehicles, or appliances within a front yard or general setback zone. 
(Ord. No. 543, §§ 2, 3, 7-8-2014; Ord. 375, § 1, 2002; Ord. 367, § 1, 2001; Ord. 313, § 3(part), 1998; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992; Ord. No. 444, § 2, 1-24-2006) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 543, §§ 2 and 3, adopted July 8, 2014, amended § 17.06.600 by amending subsection E.4 and adding subsection E.6, but at the time of supplementation was not yet effective. Said ordinance shall take effect Aug. 7, 2014.  
17.06.700 - Site coverage. 
A.  Purpose. Site coverage regulations are intended to ensure that building coverage and impervious surface coverage of each site is compatible with the nature of uses allowable in each zone, and with environmental objectives of the general plan, and to avoid overcrowding of sites with buildings and impermeable surface materials. 
B.  Building Coverage. Building coverage of a site shall be deemed the total area of all buildings and roofed or covered space on the site, expressed as a percent of total site area. Eaves and roof overhangs of a building shall be counted as building coverage. 
C.  Impervious Coverage. Impervious coverage shall include all areas defined as building coverage, plus all paved surfaces and other site improvements contributing to surface runoff greater than would occur on the site in its natural state. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.800 - Slope limitations. 
A.  Purpose. Site development regulations modifying the basic provisions applicable to a steeply sloping site are intended to alleviate or mitigate potentially harmful effects of soil erosion, increased stormwater runoff, and excessive grading, and to ensure development that is consistent with acceptable environmental standards. 
B.  See each zone for application of slope limitations. 
(Ord. 264, § 2 (part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.810 - Lighting fixtures. 
In all residential, commercial and/or community facilities/services zones, lighting fixtures shall be designed, established and maintained to reflect away from any adjoining or nearby residences within two hundred (200) feet; and to minimize glare and illumination onto adjoining or nearby properties. 
(Ord. No. 414, § 1, 3-9-2004; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995)  
17.06.820 - Scenic highway corridors. 
A.  The establishment of those types of land uses and building/structure improvements listed within subsection B of this section upon real properties located in the 1994 Paradise general plan designated "scenic highway corridors" shall be prohibited. 
B.  The establishment of new billboards; automotive sales and service (or repair); construction sales and service; cargo containers; convenience (mini-storage) facilities; outdoor vehicle and recreation equipment storage; utility service (major) facilities; outdoor storage of mobilehome(s) not legally permitted for human occupancy; and outdoor special sales including, but not limited to: art and craft shows/fairs, automobile/recreation vehicle sales, farmers market, flea markets, swap meets; and any other land uses deemed similar to the foregoing as determined by the planning director shall be prohibited in scenic highway corridors. 
(Ord. No. 444, § 3, 1-24-2006; Ord. No. 395, § 2, 2003; Ord. 362, § 2, 2001; Ord. 347, § 1, 2000)  
17.06.830 - Recyclable materials collection/loading facility. 
When a building permit for a new building or other permits required for modular buildings or mobilehomes are required for commercial, industrial or institutional uses, or multiple living (or dwelling) unit uses having four (4) or more such units per parcel (or lot), in addition to all other requirements set forth in the California Building Code as amended and adopted by reference in this code, the following shall be required: 
A.  The establishment of a constructed area providing an enclosure for containers used to hold solid waste and/or recyclable materials for collection and loading. 
(Ord. No. 442, § 1, 1-10-2006)  
17.06.900 - Street setback and cul-de-sac regulations. 
A.  Streets or roads temporarily dead ended but potentially planned for future extension shall be provided a turnaround facility in accordance with the design requirements set forth by a resolution adopted by the town council. Front yard setbacks as required via the provisions of this title shall be measured from either the centerline of the roadway or the centerpoint of the turnaround facility. 
B.  Except as permitted by provisions within Title 16 (Subdivision Regulations) of the Paradise Municipal Code, the town of Paradise shall not process nor approve any "discretionary permit or project" advocating an increase of existing residential land use density upon any real property that is served access by either an existing or resultant cul-de-sac exceeding a maximum length of one thousand eight hundred (1,800) lineal feet. 
(Ord. 326, § 2, 1999; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.910 - Cargo containers. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this section is to establish regulations for the long-term use of cargo containers on adequate sites to ensure that such land use is compatible with surrounding development. 
B.  Applicability. The establishment or expanded long-term use of cargo containers as an accessory storage land use may be authorized in any zone except the multiple family residential (MF) and central business (CB) zoning districts, subject to the specific land use regulations within each zone, all other town-adopted development standards applicable to buildings, and all applicable land use standards set forth in subsection C. of this section. 
C.  Land use standards. The following standards shall apply to all new or expanded long term (ex. year-round, multiple years, etc.) use of cargo containers for accessory storage purposes: 
1.  Cargo containers placed outside the industrial service (IS) zone shall be positioned no closer to the front yard building setback line than the rearmost wall of the building occupancy to which the cargo container serves as an accessory use. 
2.  Cargo containers placed outside the industrial service (IS) zone shall not display company logos, names, graffiti or other alpha or numeric markings upon exterior surfaces and shall be painted the same color as the primary or largest building structure on the site. 
3.  No more than one (1) cargo container per acre up to a maximum total of three (3) containers shall be placed upon a single property of record located within a "town residential" or "rural residential" zoning district; and not more than two (2) cargo containers per acre up to a maximum total of six (6) containers shall be placed upon a single property within other permissible zoning districts. 
4.  Cargo containers shall be visually screened such that they are substantially obscured from view from abutting or nearby public and private property in a manner deemed satisfactory to the town planning director. 
5.  Long term use and placement of cargo containers upon properties within the Paradise Redevelopment project area (RDA) shall be subject to discretionary review and approval, conditional approval, or denial of the town planning director. 
6.  Cargo containers may be authorized as a temporary land use in any zone, subject to the regulations contained within Chapter 17.32 of this Title. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 1, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 420, § 2, 6-8-2004)  
17.06.920 - Convenience storage (mini-storage) facilities. 
A.  Intent. The intent of the regulations of this section is to establish convenience storage (mini-storage) facilities on adequate sites subject to development standards to ensure that such land use is compatible with surrounding development. 
B.  Applicability. The establishment or expansion of convenience storage (mini-storage) facilities upon properties within the C-C and I-S zoning districts is potentially permitted subject to the specific land use regulations within each zone; and subject to all applicable development standards set forth in subsection C of this section. 
C.  Development standards. The following standards shall apply to all new or expanded convenience storage (mini-storage) facilities: 
1.  Except upon properties in the 1-S zone and located south of the northernmost intersection of "Old Clark Road" and State Highway 191, convenience storage (mini-storage) facilities shall not be established within any of the following locations: 
A.  Within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the centerline of any Paradise General Plan classified "arterial" or "collector" road [ex. the Skyway, Bille, Clark, Pearson Roads, etc.], unless the development project meets all of the following criteria: 1) The development project includes a legally permitted "town revenue producing" commercial/retail component; and 2) The commercial/retail component is to be constructed and available for occupancy prior to or concurrent with the construction of the mini-storage facility. 
B.  Within one hundred (100) linear feet of the "Paradise Memorial Trailway" land corridor. 
C.  Within the boundaries of the town adopted "downtown revitalization master plan area." 
D.  Within six hundred (600) linear feet of the boundaries of the "downtown revitalization master plan area" unless the development project meets all of the following criteria: 1) It is designed in accordance with the town's adopted "downtown design guidelines;" 2) The development project secures design approval from the town's "design review committee;" 3) The development project includes a legally permitted "town revenue producing" commercial/retail component; 4) The commercial/retail component is to be constructed and available for occupancy prior to or concurrent with the construction of the mini-storage facility; and 5) The commercial/retail component must be located upon the portion of the affected project site that is within two hundred (200) feet of the centerline of any Paradise General Plan classified "arterial" or "collector" road. 
2.  Outdoor storage of boats, vehicles, or other materials shall not be permitted at convenience storage (mini-storage) facilities that are adjacent to properties that are zoned for or developed with residential uses. Where outdoor storage is permitted, it shall be completely screened from view from adjoining streets or adjacent properties. 
3.  The maximum building height shall be two (2) stories or twenty-five (25) feet, except that any building or portion of a building within twenty (20) feet of the side yard setback line shall have a maximum height of one story or fifteen (15) feet. 
4.  Outdoor sales, washing, maintenance and repair of boats, vehicles, or other materials shall not be permitted. 
5.  The required access aisles shall not be used for storage purposes. 
6.  On and off-site improvements, including curb, gutter, sidewalk, pavement, streetlights, and street trees, shall be installed by the developer and said improvements shall meet town specifications. 
7.  Building setbacks and landscaping greater than that required by other provisions of this code may be required if deemed necessary by either the planning commission or the planning director in order to make the convenience storage (mini-storage) facilities compatible with existing or prospective developments in the area. 
8.  Except upon property in the I-S zone all convenience storage (mini-storage) facilities shall not be established with metal exterior sided buildings visible to a public roadway or abutting property adjacent to the facility and shall be constructed primarily of masonry, concrete, wood with stucco siding, or building material(s) deemed to be similar and acceptable by the planning director. 
(Ord. 375, §§ 2, 3, 2002; Ord. 362, § 3, 2001)  
17.06.930 - New or expanded commercial land use with metallic building(s). 
A.  Intent: The intent of the provisions of this section is to establish new or expanded commercial land uses utilizing metallic building(s) upon sites subject to development standards to ensure that such buildings are aesthetically compatible with surrounding development. 
B.  Applicability: The establishment of potentially permitted new or expanded commercial land uses with metallic building(s) upon properties within the CB, CC, NC, CF, and CS zoning districts shall be subject to all applicable development standards set forth in subsection C of this section. 
C.  Development standards: The following standards shall apply to all new or expanded commercial land use(s) with metallic building(s): 
1.  The building design includes an exterior facade of quality brick, stone, wood, or building material(s) deemed similar and acceptable by the planning director that affects, at minimum, one-fourth (¼) of all surfaces, excluding glass, visible from a right-of-way and/or street or road access. 
2.  The design incorporates architectural and aesthetic features that are determined to be compatible with the town's adopted "downtown design guidelines" by either the planning director or the Paradise Design Review Board. 
3.  Building setbacks and landscaping greater than that required by other provisions of this code may be required if deemed necessary by either the Planning Commission or the planning director in order to make the design of metallic building facilities compatible with the design of existing or prospective building or use(s) in the area. 
(Ord. No. 387, § 1, 2002)  
17.06.940 - Exterior displays of merchandise in commercial zones. 
A.  Purpose. Regulations affecting the outdoor display of merchandise are established so that outdoor merchandise displays have an appearance designed to attract and promote business and to avoid random placement of merchandise that lacks thematic continuity. 
B.  Except as provided in this Section 17.06.940, it shall be unlawful to sell or display merchandise in the exterior area of a building in a commercial zone. Merchandise may be displayed in the exterior area of a building in a commercial zone only in conjunction with the following businesses, areas or activities: 
1.  Automobile, boat, trailer, camper, motorcycle and construction equipment sales, rentals and outdoor furniture; 
2.  Retail lumber yards, building materials and prefabricated storage sheds and carports; 
3.  Fruit and vegetable stands possessing a valid town permit; 
4.  Landscaping, statuary and horticultural plants, materials and supplies; 
5.  Vending and ice machines when located as an accessory to a permitted use; 
6.  Gasoline pumps and accessory items when located on pump islands; 
7.  Christmas tree sales; 
8.  Special events permitted by town; 
9.  Sale of newspapers and other printed material; 
10.  Vendors permitted under Chapter 5.11 of this code; 
11.  Propane tanks; 
12.  Firewood sales; 
13.  Areas not visible from a public street; 
14.  Outdoor special sales pursuant to Section 17.32.100.G; 
15.  In the central business (CB) zone and community commercial (CC) zoned properties along Skyway between Pearson Road and the town limit and along State Route 191 (Clark Road) within the town, merchandise may be displayed only within five (5) feet of a single exterior building wall along no more than fifty (50) percent of the length of the wall. 
16.  Businesses not displaying merchandise along building walls facing streets may display merchandise in enclosed exterior spaces located beyond building setbacks. 
17.  Merchandise may otherwise be displayed upon other commercial properties only within ten (10) feet of a single building wall. 
C.  In no event shall merchandise be displayed within public rights-of-way, vehicle access ways, doorways for required pedestrian access or parking areas, unless expressly authorized pursuant to Chapter 17.32 of this title. 
(Ord. No. 550, § 1, 12-9-2014; Ord. No. 546, § 1, 8-12-2014)  
17.06.950 - Timber removal activities. 
In all zones, tree or timber removal activities that are not specifically enumerated and defined as "commercial timber harvesting" may be permitted as a land use activity subject to the provisions of Chapter 8.12 of the Code. 
(Ord. 302, § 3, 1998)  
17.06.1000 - Junk. 
More than one hundred (100) square feet of junk may not be stored in any zoning district if the planning director or the planning commission determines that such junk is a nuisance or provides a health or safety hazard to persons or property. The storage of junk within a front yard or general setback zone shall be prohibited, except as permitted by this title. 
(Ord. 313, § 3(part), 1998; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.06.1100 - Uses prohibited. 
All land uses not specifically enumerated within adopted zoning district regulations assigned to a lot, parcel, or site (or portion thereof) shall be prohibited, except those which were lawfully created or established prior to the effective date of this title. 
(Ord. 313, § 3(part), 1998; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.07 - ZONES 
 
17.07.100 - Zones. 
The zones set out in Chapters 17.08 through 17.31 of this title are established. The regulations set forth therein shall govern the land uses permitted and conditionally permitted within the districts so zoned. All uses of land within a district not specifically authorized or permitted by its zone and/or other provisions of this title are prohibited. 
(Ord. 389, § 1, 2003; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.08 - RESOURCE CONSERVATION (R-C) ZONE 
 
17.08.100 - Purpose. 
The resource conservation (R-C) zone is intended for areas planned and deemed suitable to remain in their natural, primarily undeveloped state or to be used for open space and agricultural purposes. This zone classification can also be assigned to land areas that are planned and devoted to recreation use. The resource-conservation zone is consistent with the open-space/agricultural or the recreational land use designations of the Paradise general plan. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.08.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
In the R-C zone the following land uses are permitted uses where indicated by the letter "P" and are uses permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Uses where indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review permit; and by the letter "A" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
P/C/S 	Uses 
A 	Agricultural building 
P 	Animal production/livestock 
C 	Campground 
S 	Commercial composting 
C 	Commercial recreation (outdoor) 
P 	Commercial timber harvesting 
P 	Crop production 
P 	Dwelling, accessory 
S 	Electric generation (limited) 
P 	Horticulture 
P 	Open space 
S 	Park and recreation 
S 	Stable (commercial) 
P 	Stable (private) 
P 	Utility service (minor) 
 
(Ord. 436, §§ 1, 2, 6-14-2005; Ord. 344, § 2, 2000; Ord. 302, § 4, 1998; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.08.300 - Site development regulations. 
The following site development regulations apply within the resource conservation zone: 
Regulation 	Requirement 
Minimum lot area (gross) 	5 acres 
Minimum lot width 	150 feet 
Minimum street/road frontage width 	40 feet 
Minimum front yard setback 	
 Public street 	50 feet from centerline 
 Private street 	30 feet from centerline 
Minimum side and rear yard setback 	10 feet from property line 
Maximum height above grade 	35 feet 
 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.10 - AGRICULTURAL-10 (AG-10) AND AGRICULTURAL-20 (AG-20) ZONES 
 
17.10.100 - Purposes. 
The agricultural-10/20 (AG-10, AG-20) zones are intended for land areas planned and deemed suitable to remain in their natural, primarily undeveloped state or to be used for open space and agricultural purposes. Such land areas can also be deemed inappropriate for urban development due to steep slopes, a significant lack of public services, and a substantial desire to retain existing agricultural or open space characteristics. The agricultural-10 and agricultural-20 zones are consistent with the open-space/agricultural land use designation of the Paradise General Plan. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.10.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
In the agricultural-10/20 zones, the following land uses are permitted where indicated by the letter "P"; and are uses permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Uses where indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review. Uses identified with the letter "A" are permitted land uses upon town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
P/C/S 
AG-10 	AG-20 	Uses 
P 	P 	Agricultural building 
P 	P 	Agricultural employee housing, limited residential 
A 	P 	Agricultural processing 
P 	P 	Agricultural service 
P 	P 	Animal production/livestock 
C 	C 	Aviation facilities 
S 	S 	Campground 
C 	S 	Cemetery 
P 	P 	Commercial composting 
C 	C 	Commercial recreation (outdoor) 
P 	P 	Commercial timber harvesting 
P 	P 	Community care facility (limited residential) 
P 	P 	Crop production 
P 	P 	Day care home (small family) 
P 	P 	Dwelling, accessory 
P 	P 	Dwelling, secondary 
C 	C 	Educational facility 
A 	A 	Electric generation (limited) 
P 	P 	Guidance services (limited) 
C 	C 	Hazardous waste facility 
P 	P 	Horticulture 
P 	P 	Kennel (indoor) 
C 	S 	Kennel (outdoor) 
P 	P 	Open space 
S 	S 	Park and recreation 
	C 	Shooting range 
P 	P 	Single-family residence 
C 	C 	Solid waste facility 
C 	S 	Solid waste transfer facility 
A 	P 	Stable (commercial) 
P 	P 	Stable (private) 
C 	S 	Utility service (major) 
P 	P 	Utility service (minor) 
 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 444, § 4, 1-24-2006; Ord. No. 426, § 1, 8-10-2004; Ord. No. 392, § 1, 2003; Ord. 349, §§ 1—3, 2000; Ord. 332, § 2, 1999; Ord. 302, § 5, 1998; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.10.300 - Accessory uses. 
Agricultural uses include the following accessory uses, structures and activities, which are to be constructed after, or in conjunction with the principal permitted uses of the property. (Example: a residential garage can be constructed on a lot only if a dwelling is also on the lot, or a building permit for the dwelling is issued on or before the day a building permit for the garage is issued): 
A.  Private garage and carport; 
B.  Recreational activities and facilities for use by the residents on the site; 
C.  Cabanas, gazebos, porches, patios and incidental household storage buildings; 
D.  Radio and television antennas, and solar collectors; 
E.  Home occupations complying with Chapter 17.33; 
F.  Keeping of dogs, cats, potbelly pigs, or similar small domestic animals as household pets. (Refer to Chapter 6.28 of this code); 
G.  Guest house; 
H.  Composting. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.10.400 - Site development regulations. 
The following site development regulations apply within the agricultural-10 and agricultural-20 zones: 
Regulation 	Requirement 
	AG-10 	AG-20 
Minimum lot area (gross) 	10 acres 	20 acres 
Minimum site area per dwelling 	None 	None 
Minimum lot width 	150 feet 	200 feet 
Minimum street/road frontage width 	80 feet 	80 feet 
Minimum front yard setback 		
 Public street 	50 feet 	50 feet from centerline 
 Private street 	30 feet 	30 feet from centerline 
Minimum side and rear yard setback 	10 feet 	10 feet from property line 
Maximum height above grade 	35 feet 	35 feet 
 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.10.500 - Other provisions. 
A.  Home Occupations. Refer to Chapter 17.33. 
B.  Sign Regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.37. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.11 - AGRICULTURAL RESIDENTIAL (AR) ZONES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 214, 250, 302 and 308. 
 
17.11.100 - Purposes. 
The agricultural residential (AR) zones are intended for land areas that are planned or are existing residential areas characterized by larger parcels and accessory agricultural land uses, including raising of livestock and other forms of agricultural production. The agricultural residential-1, agricultural residential-3, and the agricultural residential-5 zones are consistent with the agricultural-residential (A-R) land use designation of the Paradise general plan. The agricultural residential-3 and agricultural residential-5 zones are also consistent with the open-space/agricultural land use designation of the Paradise general plan. 
(Ord. 348 § 2(part), 2000)  
17.11.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
In the agricultural residential zones, the following land uses are permitted where indicated by the letter "P," and are uses permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Uses indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review. Uses identified with the letter "A" are permitted land uses upon town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
AR-1 	AR-3 	AR-5 	Uses 
P 	P 	P 	Agricultural employee housing, limited residential 
— 	C 	C 	Agricultural processing 
S 	S 	S 	Agricultural services 
A 	P 	P 	Animal production/livestock 
C 	C 	C 	Bed and breakfast 
— 	C 	C 	Campground 
— 	C 	C 	Cemetery 
— 	C 	S 	Commercial composting 
C 	C 	C 	Community care facility 
P 	P 	P 	Community care facility (limited residential) 
P 	P 	P 	Crop production 
P 	P 	P 	Day care home (small family) 
S 	S 	P 	Dwelling, accessory 
A 	A 	A 	Dwelling, secondary 
C 	C 	C 	Educational facility 
C 	S 	S 	Electric generation (limited) 
P 	P 	P 	Guidance services (limited) 
C 	C 	C 	Guidance services (general) 
P 	P 	P 	Horticulture 
C 	S 	P 	Kennel (indoor) 
— 	C 	C 	Kennel (outdoor) 
P 	P 	P 	Open space 
C 	C 	C 	Park and recreation 
C 	C 	C 	Religious assembly 
C 	C 	C 	Safety service 
P 	P 	P 	Single-family residence 
— 	C 	S 	Stable (commercial) 
A 	P 	P 	Stable (private) 
C 	C 	C 	Two-family residence* 
C 	C 	C 	Utility service (major) 
P 	P 	P 	Utility service (minor) 
 
* Density not applied if lot larger than three (3) acres. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 496, § 1, 3-9-2010; Ord. No. 467, § 1, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 460, § 2, 4-10-2007; Ord. 436, § 3, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 392, § 2, 2003; Ord. 375 §§ 4, 5, 2002; Ord. 370 § 1, 2001; Ord. 349 §§ 4, 5, 2000; Ord. 348 § 2(part), 2000)  
17.11.300 - Accessory uses. 
Agricultural residential uses include the following accessory uses, activities and structures, which are to be constructed after, or in conjunction with the principal permitted uses of the property (example: a residential garage can be constructed on a lot only if a dwelling is also on the lot, or a building permit for the dwelling is issued on or before the day a building permit for the garage is issued): 
A.  Private garage and carport; 
B.  Recreational activities and facilities for use by the residents on the site; 
C.  Cabanas, gazebos, porches, patios and incidental household storage buildings; 
D.  Radio and television antennas, and solar collectors; 
E.  Home occupations complying with Chapter 17.33; 
F.  Keeping of dogs, cats, potbelly pigs or similar small domestic animals as household pets. (Refer to Chapter 6.28 of this code); 
G.  Guest house; 
H.  Composting. 
(Ord. 348 § 2(part), 2000)  
17.11.400 - Site development regulations. 
The following site development regulations apply within the agricultural residential zones: 
Regulation 	Requirement      
	AR-1 	AR-3 	AR-5 
Minimum lot area (gross) 	1 acre 	3 acre 	5 acre 
Minimum site area per dwelling 	None 	None 	None 
Minimum lot width 	130 feet 	150 feet 	150 feet 
Minimum street frontage width 	30 feet 	40 feet 	60 feet 
Front yard setback 			
 Public street (from centerline) 	50 feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 Private road (from centerline) 	30 feet 	30 feet 	30 feet 
Side and rear yard setback 	10 feet 	10 feet 	10 feet 
Maximum height above grade 	35 feet 	35 feet 	35 feet 
 
(Ord. 348 § 2(part), 2000)  
17.11.500 - Other provisions. 
A.  Animals. On any site of less than five (5) acres in gross area, the keeping of livestock animals other than domestic household pets is subject to Chapter 17.35. 
B.  Home occupations. Refer to Chapter 17.33. 
C.  Mobile home provisions. Refer to Chapter 17.36. 
D.  Sign regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.37. 
E.  Large family day care home. Refer to Chapter 17.43 for applicable land use regulations. 
(Ord. 370 § 2, 2001; Ord. 362, § 4, 2001)  
Chapter 17.12 - RURAL RESIDENTIAL (RR) ZONES 
 
17.12.100 - Purposes. 
The rural residential (RR) zones are intended for land areas that are planned or are existing single-family rural residential areas characterized by moderately large parcels and with residential densities that range from one to two (2) dwelling units per acre. The rural residential-1, rural residential-2/3, and rural residential-1/2 zones are consistent with the rural/residential (R-R) land use designation of the Paradise general plan. 
(Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995)  
17.12.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
In the rural residential zones, the following land uses are permitted where indicated by the letter "P," and are permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Land uses indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review. Uses identified with the letter "A" are permitted land uses upon town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
RR-1 	RR-2/3 	RR-1/2 	Uses 
P 	P 	P 	Agricultural employee housing, limited residential 
A 	A 	A* 	Animal production/livestock 
C 	C 	C 	Bed and breakfast 
C 	C 		Community care facility 
P 	P 	P 	Community care facility (limited residential) 
P 	P 	P 	Crop production 
P 	P 	P 	Day care home (small family) 
A 	A 	A 	Dwelling, secondary 
C 	C 	C 	Educational facility 
P 	P 	P 	Guidance services (limited) 
C 	C 	- 	Guidance services (general) 
P 	P 	P 	Horticulture 
C 	C 	— 	Kennel (indoor) 
C 	C 	C 	Mobile home park 
P 	P 	P 	Open space 
C 	C 	C 	Park and recreation 
C 	C 	C 	Religious assembly 
C 	C 	C 	Residential, group 
C 	C 	C 	Safety service 
P 	P 	P 	Single-family residence 
A 	A* 	A* 	Stable (private) 
S 	S 	S 	Two-family residence (density applied) 
A 	A 	A 	Utility service (minor) 
C 	C 	C 	Utility service (major) 
 
*Note: The affected property site must be at minimum one acre or greater in net area size. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 467, § 2, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 460, § 3, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 426 § 2, 9-28-2004; Ord. 389, § 2, 2003; Ord. 370, § 3, 2001; Ord. 349, § 6, 2000; Ord. 332, § 4, 1999; Ord. 310, § 1, 1998; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995)  
17.12.300 - Accessory uses. 
Rural residential uses include the following accessory uses, activities and structures, which are to be constructed after, or in conjunction with the principal permitted uses of the property (example: a residential garage can be constructed on a lot only if a dwelling is also on the lot, or a building permit for the dwelling is issued on or before the day a building permit for the garage is issued): 
A.  Private garage and carport; 
B.  Recreational activities and facilities for use by the residents on the site; 
C.  Cabanas, gazebos, porches, patios and incidental household storage buildings; 
D.  Radio and television antennas, and solar collectors; 
E.  Home occupations complying with Chapter 17.33; 
F.  Keeping of dogs, cats, potbelly pigs, or similar small domestic animals as household pets. (Refer to Chapter 6.28 of this code); 
G.  Guest house; 
H.  Composting. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995)  
17.12.400 - Site development regulations. 
The following site development regulations apply within the rural residential zones: 
Regulation 	Requirement      
	RR-1 	RR-2/3 	RR-1/2 
Minimum lot area (gross) 	1 acre 	2/3 acre 	1/2 acre 
Minimum site area per dwelling 	1 acre 	2/3 acre 	1/2 acre 
Minimum lot width 	130 feet 	95 feet 	65 feet 
Minimum street frontage width 	40 feet 	30 feet 	30 feet 
Front yard setback 			
 Public street (from centerline) 	50 feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 Private road (from centerline) 	30 feet 	30 feet 	30 feet 
Side and rear yard setback 	10 feet 	5 feet 	5 feet 
Maximum height above grade 	35 feet 	35 feet 	35 feet 
Maximum coverage 			
 Building 	20 percent 	20 percent 	25 percent 
 Impervious 	30 percent 	30 percent 	40 percent 
 
(Ord. No. 392, § 3, 2003; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995)  
17.12.500 - Other provisions. 
A.  Animals. For property within a zoning district of rural residential-1, rural residential-2/3, or rural residential-1/2 and having one acre or greater in net area size the keeping of livestock animals other than domestic household pets is subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.35. 
B.  Home Occupations. Refer to Chapter 17.33. 
C.  Mobile Home Park Standards. Refer to Chapter 17.34. 
D.  Mobile Home Provisions. Refer to Chapter 17.36. 
E.  Sign Regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.37. 
F.  Parking Requirements. Refer to Chapter 17.38. 
G.  Large Family Day Care Home. Refer to Chapter 17.43 for applicable land use regulations. 
(Ord. 332, § 5, 1999; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995)  
Chapter 17.14 - TOWN RESIDENTIAL (TR) ZONES 
 
17.14.100 - Purposes. 
The town residential (TR) zones are intended for land areas that are planned or are existing single-family residential areas characterized by small sized (one-half (½) gross acre or less) parcels and the absence of accessory rural land uses, particularly the keeping of livestock. The town residential-1, town residential-1/2 and town residential-1/3 zones are consistent with the town residential (T-R) land use designation of the Paradise general plan. 
(Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.14.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
In the town residential zones, the following land uses are permitted uses where indicated by the letter "P" and are uses permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Uses indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review. Uses identified with the letter "A" are permitted land uses upon town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
TR-1 	TR-1/2 	TR-1/3 	Uses 
P 	P 	P 	Agricultural employee housing, limited residential 
A 	A* 	A* 	Animal production/livestock 
C 	C 	C 	Bed and breakfast 
P 	P 	P 	Community care facility (limited residential) 
P 	P 	P 	Crop production 
P 	P 	P 	Day care home (small family) 
A 	A 	A 	Dwelling, secondary 
C 	C 	C 	Educational facility 
P 	P 	P 	Guidance services (limited) 
P 	P 	P 	Horticulture 
C 	— 	— 	Kennel (indoor) 
C 	C 	C 	Mobile home park 
P 	P 	P 	Open space 
C 	C 	C 	Park and recreation 
C 	C 	C 	Religious assembly 
C 	C 	C 	Residential, group 
C 	C 	C 	Safety service 
P 	P 	P 	Single-family residence 
A 	A* 	A* 	Stable (private) 
C 	P 	P 	Two-family residence (density applied) 
A 	A 	A 	Utility service (minor) 
C 	C 	C 	Utility service (major) 
 
* Note: The affected property site must be at minimum, one acre or greater in net area size. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. 389, § 3, 2003; Ord. 349, § 7, 2000; Ord. 332, § 6, 1999; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.14.300 - Accessory uses. 
Town residential uses include the following accessory uses, activities and structures, which are to be constructed after, or in conjunction with the principal permitted uses of the property (example: a residential garage can be constructed on a lot only if a dwelling is also on the lot, or a building permit for the dwelling is issued on or before the day a building permit for the garage is issued): 
A.  Private garage and carport; 
B.  Recreational activities and facilities for use by the residents on the site; 
C.  Cabanas, gazebos, porches, patios and incidental household storage buildings; 
D.  Radio and television antennas, and solar collectors; 
E.  Home occupations complying with Chapter 17.33; 
F.  Keeping of dogs, cats, potbelly pigs, or similar small domestic animals as household pets. (Refer to Chapter 6.28 of this code); 
G.  Guest house; 
H.  Composting. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.14.400 - Site development regulations. 
The following site development regulations apply within the town residential zones. 
Regulation 	Requirement      
	TR-1 	TR-1/2 	TR-1/3 
Minimum lot area (gross) 	1 acre 	1/2 acre 	1/3 acre 
Minimum site area per dwelling 	1 acre 	1/2 acre 	1/3 acre 
Minimum lot width 	65 feet 	65 feet 	65 feet 
Minimum street frontage width 	40 feet 	30 feet 	25 feet 
Front yard setback 			
 Public street (from centerline) 	50 feet 	50 feet 	50 feet 
 Private road (from centerline) 	30 feet 	30 feet 	30 feet 
Side and rear yard setback 	 5 feet 	 5 feet 	 5 feet 
Maximum height above grade 	35 feet 	35 feet 	35 feet 
Maximum coverage 			
Building 	25 percent 	25 percent 	30 percent 
Impervious 	40 percent 	40 percent 	40 percent 
 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.14.500 - Other provisions. 
A.  Animals. For property within a zoning district of town residential-1, town residential-1/2, or town residential-1/3 and having one acre or greater in net area size the keeping of livestock animals other than domestic household pets is subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.35. 
B.  Home Occupations. Refer to Chapter 17.33. 
C.  Mobile Home Park Standards. Refer to Chapter 17.34. 
D.  Mobile Home Provisions. Refer to Chapter 17.36. 
E.  Sign Regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.37. 
F.  Parking Requirements. Refer to Chapter 17.38. 
G.  Large Family Day Care Home. Refer to Chapter 17.43 for applicable land use regulations. 
(Ord. 332, § 7, 1999; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.17 - MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL (M-F) ZONE 
 
17.17.100 - Purpose. 
The multiple-family residential (M-F) zone is intended for land areas that are planned or are existing multiple-family residential areas. Dependent upon the presence and application of constraints, maximum potential residential densities shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre and seven (7) dwelling units per acre within mobile home parks. The multiple-family residential zone is consistent with the multi-family residential (M-R) land use designation of the Paradise general plan. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.17.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
In the multiple-family residential zone the following land uses are permitted where indicated by the letter "P," and are uses permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Uses indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review. Uses identified with the letter "A" are permitted land uses upon town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
P/C/S 
M-F 	Uses 
C 	Administrative service 
P 	Agricultural employee housing, limited residential 
A 	Bed and breakfast 
P 	Community care facility (limited residential) 
C 	Community care facility 
C 	Club or lodge 
S 	Day care facility 
A 	Day care home (large family) 
P 	Day care home (small family) 
C 	Educational facility 
P 	Guidance service (limited) 
C 	Guidance service (general) 
C 	Mobile home park 
A 	Multiple-family residence 
P 	Open space 
C 	Park and recreation 
C 	Religious assembly 
S 	Residential, group 
C 	Safety service 
P 	Secondary dwelling (density not applied) 
P 	Single-family residence 
P 	Two-family residence (density applied) 
C 	Utility service (major) 
A 	Utility service (minor) 
A 	Wastewater treatment/disposal utility 
 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 483, § 1, 6-10-2008; Ord. No. 467, § 3, 8-14-2007; Ord. 436, § 4, 6-14-2005; Ord. 389, § 4, 2003; Ord. 354, § 2, 2000; Ord. 310, § 2, 1998; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.17.300 - Accessory uses. 
Multiple-family residential uses include the following accessory uses, activities and structures, which are to be constructed after, or in conjunction with the principal permitted land uses of the property: 
A.  Private garage and carport; 
B.  Recreational activities and facilities for use by the residents on the site; 
C.  Cabanas, gazebos, porches, patios, and incidental household storage buildings; 
D.  Radio and television antennas, and solar collectors; 
E.  Home occupations complying with Chapter 17.33; 
F.  Keeping of dogs, cats, potbelly pigs or similar small domestic animals as household pets. (Refer to Chapter 6.28 of this code); 
G.  Parking facilities, including carport; 
H.  Group laundry facilities for a unified development; 
I.  Guest house; 
J.  Large family day care homes complying with the land use regulations of Chapter 17.43. 
(Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.17.400 - Site development regulations. 
The following regulations apply within the M-F zone: 
Regulation 	Requirement 
Minimum net lot area (square feet) 	10,890 
Minimum site area (square feet) per dwelling unit size 	
 Unit greater than 1,200 square feet 	4,356 
 Unit 700 to 1,200 square feet 	3,600 
 Unit less than 700 square feet 	3,000 
Minimum lot width 	65 feet 
Minimum street/road frontage width 	40 feet 
Minimum front yard setback 	
 Public street (from centerline) 	50 feet 
 Private road (from centerline) 	30 feet 
Minimum side and rear yard setback 	5 feet 
Maximum height 	35 feet 
Maximum coverage 	
 Building coverage 	35 percent 
 Impervious coverage 	60 percent 
Maximum floor area ratio 	.5 to 1 
Residential Density [Maximum] 	15 dwellings/gross acre* 
 
*Note: Density potentially permitted only if served by an approved clustered wastewater treatment and disposal system. 
(Ord. No. 467, § 4, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 392, § 4, 2003; Ord. 389, § 4, 2003; Ord. 362, § 5, 2001; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.17.500 - Other provisions. 
A.  Site Coverage Modification. On any site having an average slope greater than ten (10) percent, the maximum allowable impervious coverage shall be reduced by the following schedule. 
Average Slope 
Greater Than 	Maximum Impervious Coverage 
to be Reduced By 
10 percent 	 5 percent of lot area 
15 percent 	10 percent of lot area 
20 percent 	15 percent of lot area 
25 percent 	20 percent of lot area 
 
B.  Animals. The keeping of livestock animals other than domestic household pets is prohibited within an "M-F" zoning district. 
C.  Home Occupations. Refer to Chapter 17.33. 
D.  Mobile Home Park Standards. Refer to Chapter 17.34. 
E.  Mobile Home Provisions. Refer to Chapter 17.36. 
F.  Sign Regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.37. 
G.  Parking Regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.38. 
(Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.20 - NEIGHBORHOOD-COMMERCIAL (N-C), CENTRAL-BUSINESS (C-B) AND COMMUNITY-COMMERCIAL (C-C) ZONES 
 
17.20.100 - Specific purposes. 
The following purposes apply to the specific commercial zones. 
A.  The neighborhood-commercial zone is intended for land areas that are characterized by existing and planned neighborhood and locally oriented commercial retail and service uses. This zone is primarily applied to small sites adjacent to residential neighborhoods and along designated arterial or collector streets. The neighborhood-commercial zone is consistent with both the neighborhood-commercial (N-C) and the town-commercial (T-C) land use designations of the Paradise general plan. 
B.  The central-business zone is intended for land areas located within the central commercial (downtown or core) area of Paradise and that provide for commercial retail and service uses, public uses, professional and administrative office uses, and multiple-family residential uses. The central-business zone is consistent with the central-commercial (C-C) land use designation of the Paradise general plan and it is potentially consistent with the town-commercial (T-C) Paradise general plan land use designation. 
C.  The community-commercial zone is intended for land areas that are planned or are providing a full range of locally and regionally oriented commercial land uses, including retail, retail centers, wholesale, storage, hotels and motels, restaurants, service stations, automobile sales and service, professional and administrative offices, etc. Dependent upon the presence and application of constraints, maximum potential residential densities shall not exceed ten (10) dwelling units per acre. The community-commercial zone is consistent with the town-commercial (T-C) land use designation of the Paradise general plan and it is potentially consistent with the community-service (C-S) Paradise general plan land use designation. 
(Ord. No. 495, § 2, 8-25-2009; Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.20.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
In the neighborhood-commercial, central-business and community commercial zones the following land uses are permitted where indicated by the letter "P," and are uses permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Uses indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review. Uses identified with the letter "A" are permitted land uses upon town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
P/C/S 	Uses 
N-C 	C-B 	C-C 	
- 	P 	A 	Administrative service 
S 	A 	- 	Agricultural employee housing, limited residential 
C 	- 	C 	Auto body repair 
C 	S 	A 	Auto repair 
- 	S 	A 	Auto sales (indoor) 
- 	- 	S 	Auto sales (outdoor) 
S 	A 	P 	Bed and breakfast 
- 	- 	C 	Body piercing/tattoo shop 
P 	P 	P 	Business office 
- 	A 	P 	Business services 
- 	S 	S 	Business/trade school 
- 	- 	C 	Campground 
- 	- 	S 	Car washing 
- 	S 	S 	Club or lodge 
	C 	S 	Cocktail lounge 
C 	C 	S 	Commercial recreation (indoor) 
- 	- 	C 	Commercial recreation (outdoor) 
C 	- 	C 	Community care facility 
- 	- 	S 	Convalescent service 
C 	- 	C 	Construction sales and service 
A 	P 	P 	Consumer repair 
- 	A 	A 	Cultural service 
C 	C 	S 	Day care facility 
C 	C 	A 	Day care home (large family) 
P 	P 	P 	Dwelling, accessory (with permitted primary use) 
- 	C 	C 	Educational facility 
		C 	Emergency shelters 
- 	- 	S 	Equipment repair 
- 	A 	P 	Financial services 
S 	A 	P 	Food sales 
		C 	Fuelwood sales 
	C 	S 	Funeral home 
P 	P 	P 	Guidance service (limited) 
- 	- 	C 	Kennel (indoor) 
- 	- 	S 	*Large collection recycling facility 
		C 	Large retail project 
- 	C 	S 	Laundry services 
- 	- 	C 	*Light processing recycling facility 
C 	C 	P 	Liquor sales 
S 	S 	P 	Manufacturing (custom) 
- 	- 	C 	Manufacturing (light) 
S 	A 	P 	Medical offices 
- 	- 	C 	Mobile home park 
- 	- 	S 	Mobile home sales 
- 	S 	S 	Motel or lodging 
- 	S 	S 	Multiple-family residence 
P 	P 	P 	Open space 
- 	S 	C 	Park and recreation 
- 	A 	A 	Parking facility (public) 
- 	S 	S 	Parking facility (private-commercial) 
S 	A 	P 	Personal improvement 
S 	P 	P 	Personal services 
S 	A 	P 	Pet services 
- 	P 	P 	Pet shop 
S 	S 	S 	Postal facility 
P 	P 	P 	Professional office 
- 	C 	C 	Public assembly 
- 	C 	C 	Religious assembly 
- 	C 	S 	Research services 
- 	- 	S 	Residential, group 
C 	A 	P 	Restaurant 
S 	P 	P 	Retail services 
A 	A 	A 	*Reverse vending machine 
S 	A 	S 	Safety service 
- 	- 	S 	Service station 
S 	A 	- 	Single-family residence 
A 	A 	A 	*Small collection recycling facility 
- 	- 	C 	Towing service/vehicle impound 
- 	A 	S 	Transportation service 
- 	C 	C 	Transportation terminal 
- 	S 	S 	Two-family residence (density applied) 
P 	P 	P 	Utility service (minor) 
C 	C 	C 	Utility service (major) 
- 	C 	S 	Veterinary service 
- 	- 	C 	Warehouse (general) 
- 	- 	P 	Warehouse (limited) 
- 	A 	A 	Wastewater treatment/disposal utility 
 
* Refer to Chapter 17.40. 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 503, §§ 2—4, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. 460, §§ 4, 5, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 426 § 3, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 411, § 3, 2-10-2004; Ord. No. 405, §§ 4—9, 11-12-2003; Ord. 384, § 1, 2002; Ord. 362, § 6, 2001; Ord. 354, §§ 3, 4, 2000; Ord. 351, § 3, 2000; Ord. 349, §§ 8—10, 2000; Ord. 332, § 8, 1999; Ord. 310, § 3, 1998; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 503, adopted Aug. 10, 2010, shall take effect 30 days after the date of its passage.  
17.20.300 - Accessory uses—Commercial. 
Commercial uses include the following accessory uses, activities and structures: 
A.  Any commercial use that is not listed as a permitted use in the same zone, and complies with the following criteria: 
1.  Is operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients or customers of the principal use; 
2.  Occupies less than thirty-five (35) percent of the total developed area of the principal use; 
3.  Is located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and does not comprise a separate business use or activity; 
B.  Any industrial use that is not listed as a permitted use in the same zone, and which complies with the criteria listed in subsection A of this section, and is not located in any "N-C" or "C-B" zoning district; 
C.  Keeping of dogs, cats, potbelly pigs or similar small domestic animals as household pets (see Chapter 6.28 of this code). 
(Ord. No. 426 § 4, 9-28-2004; Ord. 351, § 4, 2000; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 227, § 4, 1993; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.20.400 - Site development regulations. 
The following site development regulations apply within the commercial zones: 
Regulation 	Requirement      
	N-C 	C-B 	C-C 
Minimum gross lot area (square feet) 	10,890 	10,890 	10,890 
Minimum site area (square feet) per dwelling unit size 			
 Unit greater than 1,200 square feet 	5,445 	4,356 	5,445 
 Unit 700 to 1,200 square feet 	4,840 	3,600 	4,840 
 Unit less than 700 square feet 	4,355 	2,900* 	4,355 
Minimum lot width 	65 feet 	55 feet 	65 feet 
Minimum street frontage width 	30 feet 	30 feet 	40 feet 
Minimum front yard setback 			
 Public street (from centerline) 	50 feet 	40 feet 	50 feet 
 Private road (from centerline) 	30 feet 	25 feet 	30 feet 
Minimum side and rear yard setback 	5 feet 	0 feet 	0 feet 
Maximum height 	35 feet 	35 feet 	35 feet 
Maximum coverage 			
 Building 	50 percent 	60 percent 	50 percent 
 Impervious 	60 percent 	90 percent 	80 percent 
Maximum floor area ratio 	.5 to 1 	.75 to 1 	.5 to 1 
 
*Note: Density potentially permitted only if served by an approved clustered wastewater treatment and disposal system. 
(Ord. No. 495, § 3, 8-25-2009; Ord. No. 467, § 5, 8-14-2007; Ord. 382, § 4, 2002; Ord. 362, § 1, 2001; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.20.500 - Drive-in services. 
A.  Any land use having a drive-in service shall be subject to site plan review pursuant to the regulations of Section 17.45.400. The town may require adequate traffic circulation, vehicle queue lanes, and conditions to minimize impacts of the drive-up feature on abutting land uses. 
B.  This section shall apply to drive-through food and beverage service windows, drive-up banking windows, drive-through car-washing facilities, and similar uses, but shall not apply to automobile service stations. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.20.600 - Other provisions. 
A.  Mobile Home Provisions. Refer to Chapter 17.36. 
B.  Sign Regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.37. 
C.  Parking Requirements. The off-street parking and loading regulations of Chapter 17.38 shall be applicable to any new land use, expanded land use, new building or building addition established upon real properties located within the N-C or C-C zoning districts. Except for the parking facility design requirements and standard regulations of Sections 17.38.900, 17.38.1100 and 17.38.1150, the regulations of Chapter 17.38 shall not be applicable to land usage or development of real properties located within the C-B (central-business) zoning district. 
(Ord. 319, § 1, 1999; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.23 - INDUSTRIAL-SERVICE (I-S) ZONE 
 
17.23.100 - General purposes. 
The industrial-service zone is intended for land areas that will provide for light industrial and manufacturing uses, warehouses, intensive nonretail commercial uses, public uses, etc. Development standards reflect the service and industrial characteristics of the zoning district. The industrial-service zone is consistent with the light-industrial (L-I) land use designation of the Paradise General Plan. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2, 1992)  
17.23.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
In the industrial service zone, the following land uses are permitted where indicated by the letter "P," and are uses permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Uses indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review. Uses identified with the letter "A" are permitted land uses upon town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
P/C/S 	Uses 
C 	Adult business 
S 	Agricultural processing 
P 	Agricultural service 
S 	Automotive dismantling 
A 	Auto body repair 
P 	Auto repair 
S 	Basic industry 
P 	Business office 
P 	Business service 
S 	Business/trade school 
P 	Commercial composting 
S 	Commercial recreation (indoor) 
C 	Commercial recreation (outdoor) 
C 	Community care facility 
P 	Construction sales and service 
P 	Convenience storage 
C 	Day care facility 
P 	Dwelling, accessory 
P 	Equipment repair 
S 	Fuelwood sales 
A 	General vehicle/equipment storage 
C 	Hazardous waste facility 
C 	*Heavy processing recycling facility 
S 	Kennel (indoor) 
C 	Kennel (outdoor) 
S 	*Large collection recycling facility 
S 	*Light processing recycling facility 
P 	Manufacturing, custom 
P 	Manufacturing, light 
P 	Open space 
C 	Park and recreation 
P 	Parking facility 
S 	Postal facility 
P 	Professional office 
C 	Public assembly 
A 	Research service 
C 	Resource extraction 
A 	*Reverse vending machine 
S 	Safety service 
A 	Scrap and salvage 
S 	Service station 
A 	*Small collection recycling facility 
C 	Solid waste facility 
S 	Solid waste transfer facility 
S 	Towing service/vehicle impound 
A 	Transportation service 
S 	Transportation terminal 
C 	Utility service (major) 
P 	Utility service (minor) 
S 	Veterinary service 
P 	Warehouse (general) 
P 	Warehouse (limited) 
 
* Refer to Chapter 17.40. 
(Ord. No. 503, §§ 5, 6, 8-10-2010; Ord. No. 426 §§ 5, 6, 9-28-2004; Ord. 370 § 4, 2001; Ord. 362 § 8, 2001; Ord. 354 § 5, 2000; Ord. 351 § 5, 2000; Ord. 349 §§ 11, 12, 2000; Ord. 344 § 3, 2000; Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2, 1992) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 503, adopted Aug. 10, 2010, shall take effect 30 days after the date of its passage.  
17.23.300 - Accessory uses—Industrial. 
Industrial uses include the following accessory uses, activities and structures: 
A.  Any commercial or industrial use that is not a permitted use in the same district, and complies with the following criteria: 
1.  Is operated primarily for the convenience of employees, clients or customers of the principal use, 
2.  Occupies less than thirty-five (35) percent of the developed area of the principal use, 
3.  Is located and operated as an integral part of the principal use and does not comprise a separate business use or activity. 
B.  Keeping of dogs, cats, potbelly pigs or similar small domestic animals as household pets (see Chapter 6.28 of this code). 
(Ord. No. 426 § 7, 9-28-2004; Ord. 351 § 6, 2000; Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2, 1992)  
17.23.400 - Site development regulations. 
The following site development regulations apply within the industrial-service zone: 
Regulation 	Requirement 
	I-S 
Minimum lot area 	½ acre 
Minimum lot width 	65 feet 
Minimum street frontage width 	50 feet 
Minimum front yard setback 	
 Public street (from centerline) 	50 feet 
 Private road (from centerline) 	30 feet 
Minimum side and rear yard setback 	10 feet 
Maximum height 	50 feet 
Maximum coverage 	
 Building coverage 	60 percent 
 Impervious coverage 	90 percent 
Maximum floor area ratio 	.5 to 1 
 
(Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2, 1992)  
17.23.500 - Drive-in services. 
A.  Any use allowed or conditionally allowed by this zone having a drive-in service, shall be subject to site plan review pursuant to the regulations of Section 17.45.400. The town may establish conditions to assure adequate traffic circulation and vehicle queue lanes, and may so condition the use to minimize impacts of the drive-up feature on abutting land uses. 
B.  This provision shall apply to drive-through food and beverage service windows, drive-up banking windows, drive-through car washing facilities, and similar uses, but shall not apply to automobile service stations. 
(Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2, 1992)  
17.23.600 - Other provisions. 
A.  Sign Regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.37. 
B.  Parking Requirements. Refer to Chapter 17.38. 
(Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2, 1992)  
Chapter 17.26 - COMMUNITY-FACILITIES (C-F) COMMUNITY-SERVICES (C-S) ZONES 
 
17.26.100 - Purposes. 
The community-facilities (C-F) and community-services (C-S) zones are intended for land areas that are planned to or already provide for public and public institutional land uses or private land uses which serve a community purpose or benefit the community. The community-facilities zone is consistent with the public-institutional (P-I), community-service (C-S), and recreational (R) land use designations of the Paradise general plan. The community-services zone is consistent with the community-service (C-S) and recreational (R) land use designations of the Paradise general plan. In addition, the community-services zone is potentially consistent with the multi-family residential (M-R) land use designation of the Paradise general plan. 
(Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.26.200 - Permitted and conditional uses. 
The following land uses are permitted where indicated by the letter "P," and are uses permitted subject to town issuance of a conditional use permit where indicated by the letter "C." Uses indicated by the letter "S" are permitted uses with town approval and issuance of a site plan review. Uses identified with the letter "A" are permitted land uses upon town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
C-F 	C-S 	Uses 
P 	A 	Administrative service 
P 	P 	Agricultural employee housing, limited residential 
C 	C 	Aviation facilities 
A 	A 	Business service 
C 	C 	Campground 
A 	C 	Cemetery 
S 	S 	Club or lodge 
S 	S 	Commercial recreation (indoor) 
	C 	Commercial recreation (outdoor) 
C 	S 	Community care facility 
P 	P 	Community care facility (limited residential) 
S 	S 	Convalescent service 
A 	A 	Cultural service 
S 	S 	Day care home facility 
A 	A 	Day care home (large family) 
— 	P 	Day care home (small family) 
P 	P 	Dwelling, accessory 
P 	S 	Educational facility 
A 	P 	Emergency shelters 
P 	A 	Guidance services (general) 
P 	P 	Guidance services (limited) 
C 	S 	Hospital service 
P 	P 	Medical office 
— 	C 	Motel or lodging 
— 	S 	Multiple-family residence 
S 	S 	Park and recreation 
S 	C 	Postal facilities 
P 	P 	Professional office 
S 	S 	Public assembly 
S 	S 	Religious assembly 
— 	S 	Residential group 
A 	A 	*Reverse vending machine 
A 	S 	Safety service 
P 	P 	Secondary dwelling 
P 	P 	Single-family residence 
A 	A 	*Small collection recycling facility 
S 	S 	Transportation service 
S 	C 	Transportation terminal 
— 	A 	Two-family residence (density applies) 
S 	C 	Utility service (major) 
P 	P 	Utility service (minor) 
— 	S 	Veterinary services 
A 	A 	Wastewater treatment/disposal utility 
 
* Refer to Chapter 17.40 
(Ord. No. 564, § 2, 11-7-2016; Ord. No. 495, § 4, 8-25-2009; Ord. No. 460, § 6, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 426 § 8, 9-28-2004; Ord. No. 411, § 4, 2-10-2004; Ord. 370 § 5, 2001; Ord. 362 § 9, 2001; Ord. 354 § 6, 2000; Ord. 349 §§ 13, 14, 2000; Ord. 332 § 9, 1999; Ord. 310 § 4, 1998; Ord. 250 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 227 § 5, 1993: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.26.300 - Accessory uses. 
Community uses include accessory uses and activities that are necessarily and customarily associated with the purpose and function of the community use, including but not limited to the following: 
A.  Refreshment, food and beverage sales of a convenience nature, operated in association with uses involving public assembly; 
B.  Cafeterias, dining halls, and similar uses operated incidental to principal uses primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, students, clients, patients or visitors; 
C.  Gift shops, newsstands and similar commercial activities operated incidental to principal uses primarily for the convenience of employees, residents, clients, patients or visitors. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.26.400 - Site development regulations. 
The following site development regulations shall apply within the community-facilities and the community-services zones: 
Regulation 	Requirement 
Minimum net lot area 	One-half acre 
Minimum lot width 	65 feet 
Minimum front yard setback 	
 Public street 	50 feet* from centerline 
 Private street 	30 feet from centerline 
Minimum side or rear yard setback 	10 feet from property line 
Maximum height 	Within 100 feet of any residential district, the maximum height of the residential district shall apply. A maximum height of 50 feet shall apply in any portion of a C-F or C-S zoning district situated more than 100 feet from a residential district. 
Maximum building coverage 	50 percent 
Maximum impervious coverage 	80 percent 
Residential density (C-S zone only) 	15** dwellings/acre (maximum) 
 
*Note: The requirement is forty (40) feet (from centerline) for properties in the "CF" and "CS" zoning districts located within the town adopted "Downtown Revitalization Master Plan Area". 
**Second Note: Density potentially permitted only if served by an approved clustered wastewater treatment and disposal system. 
(Ord. No. 495, § 5, 8-25-2009; Ord. No. 467, § 6, 8-14-2007; Ord. No. 392, § 5, 2003; Ord. 382, § 5, 2002; Ord. 362, § 10, 2001; Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.26.500 - Other provisions. 
A.  Sign Regulations. Refer to Chapter 17.37. 
B.  Parking Requirements. Refer to Chapter 17.38. 
(Ord. 250, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.29 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT COMBINING (P-D) ZONE 
 
17.29.100 - Purposes. 
The purpose of the planned development combining zone is to allow the establishment of planned developments with flexibility in the design of development projects; and to promote economical and efficient use of the land, an increased level of urban amenities, and preservation of the natural environment; and to provide for phased completion of planned-development projects. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.200 - Application of combining zone. 
The planned development combining zone may be combined only with R-C; AR-1; AR-3; AR-5; RR-1; RR-2/3; RR-1/2; TR-1; TR-1/2; TR-1/3; M-F; N-C; C-B; C-C; C-F; C-S; and the I-S zones. 
(Ord. No. 483, § 2, 6-10-2008; Ord. 351, § 7, 2000; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.300 - Preapplication review. 
Prior to application, the prospective applicant should consult with the planning director to obtain information and guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of plans, surveys and other data. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.400 - Minimum area/standard(s). 
A planned development combining zone shall include a minimum of two (2) acres, under single ownership or otherwise subject to unified planning, construction and management. Except affected properties within any town established M-F, C-C, or C-S zoning district, any land division "concept plan" that is submitted as the basis and in conjunction with application for a planned development combining zone shall comply with the following design standard: 
A.  The design of the proposed planned development land division "concept plan" shall not create resultant lots with a net lot size that is less than fifty (50) percent of the minimum lot size requirement of the base zoning district(s) to which the planned development zone is to be combined. 
(Ord. No. 414, § 2, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 405, § 10, 11-12-2003; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.500 - Application for rezoning. 
A.  Application for a planned development combining zone shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 17.45 of this title. The applicant shall include on the application or the plot plan as applicable and appropriate the following information: 
1.  Existing topography and the approximate location of significant buildings, improvements, and natural or environmental features on the property and adjacent land within one hundred (100) feet; 
2.  The current general plan land use designation, the current zoning, and the current land use in the proposed P-D combining zone and adjacent land within one hundred (100) feet; 
3.  A general land use plan showing proposed uses to be developed on the site, supported by projected acreage, population, housing units, building floor area, employment, or related planning and development data; 
4.  A general facility plan showing the approximate location of existing and proposed streets, pedestrian ways, and circulation features; proposed public utility services and facilities; and proposed public or community facilities and uses. 
B.  The applicant shall submit a concept plan which shall contain a descriptive written statement indicating the following: 
1.  The manner in which the proposed development will be in accord with the general plan; 
2.  Architectural and environmental design qualities to be attained; 
3.  A general description of proposed land use regulations, site development regulations and performance standards sufficient to govern subsequent development, including but not limited to the following: 
a.  Allowable land uses, 
b.  Maximum and/or minimum regulations governing residential density, building floor area, height, coverage, lot size and dimensions, setbacks and open spaces, landscaping, signs, architectural design, and other features of the development, 
c.  Conditions, covenants and restrictions, and proposed means of management and continued maintenance and operation of common facilities; 
4.  A general phasing plan and schedule, indicating the anticipated time for beginning of construction and completion of each phase of development; 
5.  Evidence that the applicant has sufficient control over the land to effectuate the proposed plan. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.600 - Action by the planning commission. 
A.  The planning commission shall review and act on the application in accordance with applicable regulations set forth in the town Code. 
B.  The planning commission may request additional information from the applicant when, in its opinion, there are substantial issues or significant public concerns requiring such information in order to act on the application. In such cases, the planning commission shall continue the public hearing for such time as is reasonable for preparation of the requested information. Such additional information may include but is not limited to the following: 
1.  A housing market analysis demonstrating the demand and marketability of proposed residential uses; 
2.  A commercial market analysis for any proposed shopping center or major commercial use, showing the need for such uses and the inadequacy of existing sites to meet this need; 
3.  A traffic analysis demonstrating that existing and proposed facilities will adequately serve the transportation need generated by the development. 
C.  The planning commission may recommend changes in the draft concept plan, and forward such recommended changes to the town council with its recommendation regarding establishment of the "P-D" combining zone. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.700 - Action by the town council. 
A.  The town council shall consider the application and draft concept plan, together with the recommendation of the planning commission, as provided by the provisions of Chapter 17.45 of this title. 
B.  The town council may approve a planned development combining zone if it finds that: 
1.  The proposed zoning district and the concept plan, as recommended by the planning commission, or as modified by the town council, is consistent with the general plan and with the purposes of this title. Any substantial modification to the concept plan by the town council which has not been reviewed by the planning commission shall be returned to the planning commission for its review; 
2.  The proposed zoning district and all uses therein shall be compatible and complementary to existing and potential development in the general vicinity. 
C.  An ordinance establishing a planned development combining zone, if enacted by the town council, shall incorporate the concept plan for the district as approved by the town council. 
D.  Each planned development combining zone shall be shown on the zoning map by the letters "P-D," and identified sequentially by order of enactment and reference to the enacting ordinance. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.800 - Expiration of P-D combining zone/district. 
Any P-D combining zone/district created after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall expire after three (3) years from its approval date by the town council if the proposed uses thereon are not established. If any P-D combining district expires, the zoning (or its current equivalent) which existed prior to the adoption of the P-D district shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.900 - Approval date. 
The approval date for a P-D combining zoning district approved after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, shall be the date of the final action of the town council approving the rezone. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.29.1000 - Changes to zones. 
A.  A concept plan or a development plan may be amended under the same procedures applicable to initial approval and as specifically provided by the rezoning procedures of Chapter 17.45 of this title. An amendment may be initiated by the planning commission or the town council, or by the original applicant or a successor thereto having a continuing controlling interest in development or management of uses within the planned development combining zone/district. 
B.  Minor revisions or modifications not increasing the density or intensity of the project and which would not adversely affect off-site property, may be approved by the planning director if it is determined that the circumstances or conditions applicable at the time of original approval remain valid and that changes would not affect any required findings. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.31 - CULTIVATION OF MARIJUANA[2] 
Section : 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 566, adopted June 13, 2017, did not expressly amend the title of Ch. 17.31, but inasmuch as said ordinance revised Ch. 17.31 to regulate medical and nonmedical cultivation and delivery and prohibit marijuana collectives and cooperatives, said title has been changed, at the editor's discretion, from "Cultivation of Medical Marijuana" to read as herein set out.  Ord. No. 523, §§ 1, 2, adopted Oct. 4, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 17.31, §§ 17.31.100—17.31.300, and enacted a new Ch. 17.31 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.31 pertained to mobile home combining (M-H) zone and derived from Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992; Ord. 227, § 7, 1993; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995. 
 
17.31.100 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The town council finds that the Town of Paradise is not preempted from exercising its traditional police powers in enacting land use and zoning regulations, as well as legislation for preservation of public health, safety and welfare, such as this zoning ordinance prohibiting the establishment and operation of marijuana cooperatives and collectives within the town. 
B.  The town council finds that the public health, safety and general welfare of the town and its residents necessitates and requires the adoption of this zoning ordinance, prohibiting the establishment and operation of marijuana cooperatives and collectives. 
C.  This chapter is consistent with the Paradise general plan in that the general plan, its objectives, policies and goals do not permit or contemplate the establishment or operation of marijuana cooperatives, collectives or similar facilities that engage in dispensing of marijuana for medicinal or recreational purposes. 
D.  The purpose of this chapter is to expressly regulate the cultivation and delivery of medical marijuana and to prohibit marijuana collectives/cooperatives and dispensaries in all Town of Paradise zoning districts. Such regulation shall apply to all medical and nonmedical marijuana collectives/cooperatives and dispensaries, the delivery of medical or nonmedical marijuana and the cultivation of marijuana except as permitted herein. 
(Ord. No. 566, § 1, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 523, § 2, 10-4-2011)  
17.31.200 - Applicability. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to burden any defense to criminal prosecution under the Compassionate Use Act. 
B.  Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to make legal any cultivation, sale, or other use of medical or nonmedical marijuana that is otherwise prohibited under California law. 
C.  Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting medical or nonmedical marijuana cultivation by tenants. 
D.  Nothing in this chapter is intended, nor shall it be construed, to exempt any activity related to the cultivation of medical or nonmedical marijuana from any applicable electrical, plumbing, land use, or other building or land use standards or permitting requirements. 
E.  All cultivation of medical or nonmedical marijuana within the town shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 566, § 2, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 523, § 2, 10-4-2011)  
17.31.300 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
A.  "Authorized grower" means a person twenty-one (21) years and older who is authorized by, and in compliance with state law to cultivate marijuana indoors for personal or medical use. 
B.  "Cultivation" means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, or otherwise processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof. 
C.  "Director" means the Town of Paradise planning director or his or her designee. 
D.  "Fully enclosed and secure structure" means a fully-enclosed space within a building that complies with the California Building Standards Code ("CBSC"), as adopted in the Town of Paradise, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBSC, that has a complete roof, a foundation, slab or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, is accessible only through one or more lockable doors, has an air filtration system approved by the town building official, and is not visible from a public right-of-way. Walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through such as two (2) inch by four (4) inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths (?) inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of gauge, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement. If indoor grow lights or air filtration systems are used, they must comply with the California building, electrical, and fire codes as adopted in the Town of Paradise. Electricity shall not be provided by an outdoor generator. 
E.  "Immature marijuana plant" means a marijuana plant, whether male or female, that has not yet flowered and which does not yet have buds that are readily observed by unaided visual examination. 
F.  "Indoors" means within a fully enclosed and secure structure as that structure is defined above in subsection D. 
G.  Marijuana" means marijuana as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11018. 
H.  "Marijuana collective or cooperative" means a collective, cooperative, dispensary, operator, establishment, provider, association, or similar entity that cultivates, distributes, delivers, tests, or processes marijuana for medical purposes relating to a qualified patient or primary caregiver, pursuant to the Compassionate Use Act, the Medical Marijuana Program Act or for recreational purposes under the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act (AUMA). 
I.  "Mature marijuana plant" means a marijuana plant, whether male or female, that has flowered and which has buds that are readily observed by unaided visual examination. 
J.  "Medical marijuana" means marijuana used for medical purposes in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5. 
K.  "Outdoor" means any location within the Town of Paradise that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure as defined above in subsection D. 
L.  "Parcel" means property assigned a separate parcel number by the Butte County assessor. 
M.  "Primary caregiver" means a primary caregiver as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. 
N.  "Private residence" means a house, apartment unit, mobile home, or other similar dwelling unit. 
O.  "Qualified patient" means a qualified patient as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7. 
P.  "School" means an educational facility as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.768(h). 
(Ord. No. 566, § 3, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 523, § 2, 10-4-2011)  
17.31.400 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 558, § 1, adopted Jan. 25, 2016, repealed § 17.31.400, which pertained to cultivation in residential zoning districts for personal use and derived from Ord. No. 523, § 2, adopted Oct. 4, 2011.  
17.31.500 - Prohibition. 
A.  Marijuana collectives and cooperatives as defined in Sections 17.31.300H shall be prohibited in all zoning districts within the town. This prohibition shall include the cultivation of marijuana by all marijuana collectives and cooperatives. 
B.  Except for delivery by a primary caregiver for a qualified patient, the delivery of marijuana shall be prohibited within the town. No person shall conduct any mobile marijuana delivery service within the town through any means whatsoever. The term "delivery" shall also include the same meaning as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 19300.5 (m) or as amended. 
C.  This section shall prohibit all medical or nonmedical marijuana activities for which a state of California license is required. The town shall not issue any permit, license or other entitlement for any activity for which a state of California license is required under the Medical Marijuana Regulation and Safety Act or the AUMA. 
D.  Outdoor cultivation of marijuana for non-commercial medical or commercial purposes, including cultivation by a qualified patient or a primary caregiver or any person, shall be prohibited in all zoning districts within the town. No person, including a qualified patient or primary caregiver, shall cultivate outdoor any amount of marijuana in the town. 
E.  When authorized by state law, an authorized grower shall be allowed to cultivate marijuana only in a private residence in a residential zone, only indoors, and only for personal use, in compliance with the following regulations: 
1.  If the authorized grower is a tenant, the property owner of the residence shall have given written consent to the cultivation of marijuana on the premises. 
2.  The marijuana cultivation area shall be located indoors within a fully enclosed and secure structure and shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet and not exceed ten (10) feet in height, nor shall it come within twelve (12) inches of the ceiling or any cultivation lighting. Cultivation in a structure on the property of the residence but not physically part of the home shall be permitted, only if it is fully enclosed, secure, not visible from a public right-of-way. 
3.  Marijuana cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) watts in total for the total cultivation area within the residence. 
4.  The use of gas products such as, but not limited to, CO2, butane, methane, or any other flammable or non-flammable gas for marijuana cultivation or processing shall be prohibited. 
5.  There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of marijuana cultivation outside the private residence from the public right-of-way, including, but not limited to, any marijuana plants, equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation, and any light emanating from cultivation lighting. 
6.  The authorized grower shall reside full-time in the residence where the marijuana cultivation occurs. 
7.  The authorized grower shall not participate in marijuana cultivation in any other location within the town. 
8.  The residence shall include fully functional and usable kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the resident authorized grower, and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for marijuana cultivation. 
9.  The marijuana cultivation area shall be in compliance with the current adopted edition of the California Building Standards Code Section 1203.5 Natural Ventilation or Section 402.3 Mechanical Ventilation (or equivalent), as amended from time to time. 
10.  The building official may require additional specific standards to meet the California Building Standards Code and Fire Code, including, but not limited to, installation of fire suppression sprinklers. 
11.  The marijuana cultivation area shall not result in a nuisance or adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the resident or nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odors, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products or wastes. 
12.  No more than six (6) marijuana plants, mature or immature, shall be permitted only for personal use under this chapter. 
13.  Marijuana in excess of 28.5 grams produced by plants kept for indoor personal cultivation under this chapter must be kept in a locked space on the grounds of the private residence not visible from the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 566, § 4, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 558, § 2, 1-25-2016; Ord. No. 523, § 2, 10-4-2011)  
17.31.600 - Nuisance and civil penalties. 
A.  Any cultivation, processing or distribution of medical [or nonmedical] marijuana which takes place in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be unlawful, and is hereby declared a public nuisance and may be abated by the town as such in accordance with the procedure set forth in Chapter 8.04 of this code. 
B.  In addition, violation of this chapter shall be prosecuted under civil administrative citation procedure set forth in Chapter 1.09 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 566, 6-13-2017; Ord. No. 523, § 2, 10-4-2011)  
Chapter 17.32 - TEMPORARY USE REGULATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 214 and 264. 
 
17.32.100 - Temporary use regulations. 
The following temporary land uses shall be allowed subject to the regulations set forth within this chapter. Note: All temporary land uses that include food sales require a permit from the Butte County department of public health. 
A.  Model homes or apartments and related real estate sales activities, located within a subdivision or residential development: temporary use permit required; 
B.  Contractor's office, storage yard, and equipment parking and servicing on the site of an active construction project: temporary use permit required; 
C.  Religious, patriotic or historic assemblies, displays or exhibits: permitted; 
D.  Circus, carnival, rodeo, fair or similar transient amusement or recreational activities: temporary use permit required; 
E.  Christmas tree sales lots not directly associated with an established and permitted retail services land use: temporary use permit required; and subject to the business license regulations of Chapter 5.11 of the Paradise Municipal Code. 
F.  Residential occupancy of a mobile home or travel trailer by supervisory or security personnel on the site of an active construction project: temporary use permit required; 
G.  Outdoor special sales, outdoor art and craft shows or exhibits, swap meets, farmers markets, flea markets, parking lot sales, or similar sales activities, limited to sites in C-C, C-F and C-S zoning districts and to operation for not more than three (3) consecutive days or more than a total of twenty-one (21) days in the same year: permitted and subject to the business licenses regulations of Chapter 5.11 of this code. 
H.  The temporary use of a mobile home or similar portable structure for residential use when located in a residential zoning district, while a permanent dwelling (including mobile homes) is under construction: temporary use permit required. 
1.  A temporary use permit authorizing a temporary residence may be granted or denied only after a sewage disposal permit has been issued and a building permit has been issued for the permanent structure. 
2.  The temporary dwelling must be removed from the site after one year from the date of the approval of the temporary dwelling, if the building permit for construction of the permanent dwelling is not renewed. In addition, the temporary use permit shall be effective for the same length of time as the building permit for the permanent dwelling; 
I.  Seasonal retail sale of agricultural or horticultural products raised off the premises and limited to sites in C-C, C-F or C-S zoning districts: permitted and subject to the business licenses regulations of Chapter 5.11 of this code. 
J.  Temporary signs relating to a temporary and legally permitted land use or a legally permitted and active construction project: permitted. [Note: Signage related to a construction project shall be removed within ten (10) days of town approval of final building inspection]; 
K.  Temporary structures, travel trailers, recreational vehicles or mobile homes may be used for the provision of emergency services for the duration of the emergency; 
L.  Garage and yard sales in residential zones. Three (3) garage or yard sales conducted in any twelve (12) month period, not exceeding three (3) consecutive days each, shall be deemed a permitted and incidental use to the residential use of a property located in a residential zone. Garage or yard sales in excess of this limit shall be prohibited in all residential zones; 
M.  Any other temporary land use determined by the planning director to be similar to the foregoing. 
N.  The temporary use of a cargo container for storage on the site of an active construction project in conjunction with the issuance and term of a valid construction permit issued by the Town of Paradise: permitted. 
(Ord. No. 546, § 2, 8-12-2014; Ord. 436, § 5, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 420, §§ 3, 4, 6-8-2004; Ord. 313 § 4(part), 1998)  
17.32.200 - Application for temporary use. 
A.  Application to conduct a temporary land use shall be made to the planning director. It shall include a site plan and description of the proposed use and such additional information as the planning director may require to evaluate the use and to make the determinations required by these special provisions. 
B.  Application shall be made at least nine (9) business days prior to the requested commencement date of the temporary use, and the planning director shall make a determination whether to approve, conditionally approve, or to deny the proposed temporary use within five (5) business days after the date the application is determined complete for processing. 
(Ord. 313 § 4(part), 1998)  
17.32.300 - General conditions. 
The following general conditions are applicable to temporary land uses that are permitted by the provisions of this chapter or are permitted subject to town approval and issuance of a temporary use permit: 
A.  Each site occupied by a temporary land use shall be left free of debris, litter, or other evidence of temporary use upon completion or removal of the use. 
B.  A temporary land use conducted in a parking facility shall not occupy or remove from availability more than fifty (50) percent of the parking spaces required by the permanent land use on the site. 
(Ord. 313 § 4(part), 1998)  
17.32.400 - Determinations. 
A.  The planning director or his/her designee may authorize a temporary use only when in their judgment, the following determinations can be made: 
1.  The temporary use will not adversely impact the public health, safety, or convenience or create undue traffic hazards or congestion. 
2.  The temporary use will not adversely interfere with the normal conduct of other land uses and activities on the site or in the general vicinity. 
3.  The temporary use will be conducted in a manner compatible with the land uses in the general vicinity. 
B.  The planning director may establish such additional conditions as necessary to ensure land use compatibility and to minimize potential impacts, including but not limited to time and frequency of operation, temporary arrangements for parking and circulation, requirements for screening or enclosure, and guarantees for site restoration and cleanup following the temporary use. 
(Ord. 313 §4(part), 1998)  
17.32.500 - Fees. 
The planning director or his/her designee is authorized to administer and collect a fee necessary to process the temporary use permit application. The fee shall be identified on the applicable master fee schedule adopted and periodically amended by the town council. 
(Ord. 313 §4(part), 1998)  
17.32.600 - Revocation of temporary use permit. 
After providing the permittee with written notification and a public meeting, the planning director is vested with the administrative authority to officially revoke a temporary use permit whenever evidence exists and a determination is rendered verifying that the affected temporary land use activity is not being conducted in a manner that complies with the provisions of this chapter or its town-adopted and assigned conditions of approval. 
(Ord. 344 § 4, 2000; Ord. 313 § 4(part), 1998)  
Chapter 17.33 - HOME OCCUPATION REGULATIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Prior ordinance history: 214 and 264. 
 
17.33.100 - Purpose. 
Home occupation regulations are intended to allow limited business activities in residential zoned districts when conducted by the occupants of a dwelling in a manner wholly accessory to and compatible with the residential characteristics of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 313 § 5(part), 1998)  
17.33.200 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows: 
" Cottage food operation " when used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 113758, as may be amended. Food preparation relating to a fundraising activity by a tax-exempt charitable organization shall not be considered a cottage food operation. 
" Home occupation " means an accessory commercial activity or business service, conducted on the site of a dwelling unit by the inhabitants thereof, in a manner clearly incidental to the residential character of the site, and in accord with the provisions of this chapter, including cottage food operations. It shall not include activities that are limited solely to the use of a desk, telephone and personal computer. 
" Home occupation permit " means a nondiscretionary permit issued by the planning director, based upon the specific standards and criteria contained in this chapter, and authorizing the establishment of a home occupation, including a cottage food operation. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 1, 6-25-2013; Ord. 313 § 5(part), 1998)  
17.33.300 - Permit requirements. 
It shall be unlawful to establish a home occupation without a town-issued permit under this chapter. Home occupations (including cottage food operations, or CFO) shall be permitted as an accessory land use activity related to a dwelling unit subject to obtaining town approval and issuance of a home occupation permit. To apply for a home occupation permit, the following information must be submitted to the town community development department: 
A.  A completed home occupation permit application form and detailed plot plan drawn to scale, along with payment of the processing fee in effect at the time of application. If the applicant is not the owner of the property, proof of agency on behalf of or from the property owner must be submitted in writing in order to legally process the application. 
B.  A detailed written project description that describes the proposal, the setting of the neighborhood, proximity to neighboring residences, the level of noise generated by the proposal, parking demand of the home occupation, and the anticipated increase in traffic generated by the project. 
C.  A written explanation describing how the proposed home occupation complies with the standards and criteria set forth in Section 17.33.500 of this chapter. 
D.  Any additional information deemed necessary by the planning director to fully understand the proposed project. 
E.  If the property upon which the home occupation would be conducted is afforded access by a private road, the applicant shall submit written evidence indicating that all property owners having legal interest in the private road have no objection to the proposed home occupation. 
F.  If the type of proposed home occupation or cottage food operation has the potential to increase wastewater flows (e.g., food processing, catering, hair and nail salons or pet grooming), the application shall be accompanied by material evidence showing that the existing sewage disposal system serving the residence has a valid and current operating permit issued by the Town of Paradise. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 2, 6-25-2013; Ord. 313 § 5(part), 1998)  
17.33.400 - Permits reviewed by the planning director. 
The planning director shall review and act upon all home occupation permit (and/or modifications thereof) applications once all the required information has been submitted. Because the permits are nondiscretionary, no formal notice or public hearing are required. In reviewing home occupation permit applications (and/or application for modifications thereof), the planning director shall determine if the actual proposal complies with the standards and criteria listed in Section 17.33.500 of this chapter. The planning director shall consider the required findings contained in Section 17.33.600 of the chapter. If the planning director is unable to make any one of the required findings, the proposed home occupation permit [or modification(s) thereof] shall be denied. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 2, 12-11-2007; Ord. 313 § 5(part), 1998)  
17.33.500 - Required standards and criteria. 
The planning director shall grant a permit for a home occupation as an accessory residential use on property zoned for residential use, provided that the use complies with all of the following standards and criteria: 
A.  The location of the home occupation is the principal residence of the applicant and is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes. 
B.  No major structural changes are proposed which will significantly alter the character of the residence or change its occupancy classification pursuant to the California Uniform Building Code. 
C.  Any traffic or parking needs generated by the proposed home occupation would not be out of character with the existing traffic levels and parking demands of the surrounding residential neighborhood. 
D.  The proposed home occupation shall not create levels of new light and glare inconsistent with existing amounts of light and glare within the surrounding residential [neighborhood]. 
E.  The proposed home occupation shall not adversely increase noise levels or noise durations beyond permissible residential noise levels or noise durations within the surrounding neighborhood as regulated by the Paradise Municipal Code. 
F.  The proposed home occupation shall not generate vibration, dust, odor, heat, solid waste, electrical interference or other characteristics in excess of that customarily associated with similar residential uses in the surrounding neighborhood. 
G.  Employment shall be limited to members of the family residing on the premises, and to one (1) additional full-time equivalent nonresident employee. In no event may more than one (1) part time employee be working at any one (1) time. 
H.  The total floor area used for the home occupation, including area within accessory buildings, may be as large as fifty (50) percent of the net floor area of the dwelling unit, but shall in no case exceed seven hundred fifty (750) square feet; provided however that a cottage food operation shall be restricted to the registered or permitted area of the residence as approved by the Butte County Environmental Health Department. 
I.  Signs shall be limited to one (1) unlighted sign and not larger than six (6) square feet in area. Such sign may be attached flat on the building wall or may be located elsewhere on the site except in a required yard setback area. 
J.  No equipment, materials or products associated with the home occupation use shall be stored or displayed where visible from off the premises. 
K.  The proposed home occupation shall not involve the storage or use of other than a minimal quantity of five (5) or fewer gallons of toxic, explosive or flammable materials; provided all such materials shall be subject to approval by the town fire chief. 
L.  A proposed home occupation that generates public traffic use in addition to the existing level of traffic use of a private road easement affording its access shall not be permitted unless written consent to such use is provided by all property owners having legal interest in the private road easement. 
M.  Any proposed home occupation affording access by use of a private road easement shall be conducted in a manner that shall not overburden the vehicular use of the private road easement. 
N.  Any cottage food operation (CFO) shall meet the following additional requirements: 
1.  The requirements set out in Health and Safety Code Sections 114365, 114365.2 and 114365.5. 
2.  A CFO shall be restricted to the primary kitchen of the residence. 
3.  A CFO shall comply with the restrictions on gross annual sales as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 113758, as may be amended. 
4.  A CFO shall obtain and maintain a registration and/or operating permit from the Butte County Environmental Health Department. A copy of such registration/permit must be furnished to the Town of Paradise within fifteen (15) days of its issuance. 
5.  No CFO shall conduct sales in an attached garage, detached accessory structure or outside of the dwelling. 
6.  If direct sales are proposed at the site of the CFO, no third parties or customers shall be permitted to dine at the CFO. 
(Ord. No. 531, § 3, 6-25-2013; Ord. No. 414, § 3, 3-9-2004; Ord. 313 § 5(part), 1998)  
17.33.600 - Required findings. 
In order to approve a home occupation permit application, the planning director shall successfully make the following findings: 
A.  The proposed home occupation complies with all the applicable standards and criteria contained in Section 17.33.500 of this chapter; 
B.  The proposed home occupation will not have a significant adverse effect upon the health and safety of the citizens of Paradise or the community in general. 
(Ord. 313 § 5(part), 1998)  
17.33.700 - Fees. 
The planning director or his/her designee is authorized to administer and collect a fee necessary to process the home occupation permit application. The fee shall be identified on the applicable master fee schedule adopted and periodically amended by the town council. 
(Ord. 313 § 5(part), 1998)  
17.33.800 - Revocation of home occupation permit. 
After providing the permittee with written notification and a public meeting, the planning director is vested with the administrative authority to officially revoke a home occupation permit whenever evidence exists and a determination is rendered verifying that a home occupation activity is not being conducted in a manner that complies with the required standards and criteria of this chapter and/or its town adopted and assigned conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 3, 12-11-2007; Ord. 344 § 5, 2000; Ord. 313 § 5(part), 1998)  
Chapter 17.34 - MOBILE HOME PARK STANDARDS 
 
17.34.100 - Regulations. 
The regulations set forth in this chapter shall apply to all mobile home parks within the town which receive approval after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. All proposed newly established or expanded mobile home parks shall require approval of a conditional use permit granted in accordance with the provisions of this title. All uses not specified in this chapter shall not be permitted within a mobile home park. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.34.200 - Uses permitted within a mobile home park. 
A.  Mobile homes containing not less than five hundred (500) square feet of gross area (area excludes decks, awnings, or similar attached structures). 
B.  Management offices and maintenance equipment storage. 
C.  Laundry facilities, for residents only. 
D.  Vending machines, for residents only. 
E.  Noncommercial recreation/meeting halls, clubhouses, swimming pools, and similar uses. 
F.  Other uses which are clearly incidental and subordinate to mobile homes. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.34.300 - Standards for mobile homes and accessory uses. 
A.  Minimum Site Area. Two (2) contiguous acres. 
B.  Maximum Density. Mobile home parks shall not exceed the following potential maximum land use densities for the zoning district in which they are located: 
Zoning District 	Density 
RR-1 	2 mobile homes/gross acre 
RR-2/3 	2 mobile homes/gross acre 
RR-1/2 	3 mobile homes/gross acre 
TR-1 	4 mobile homes/gross acre 
TR-1/2 	5 mobile homes/gross acre 
TR-1/3 	6 mobile homes/gross acre 
M-F 	7 mobile homes/gross acre 
C-C 	8 mobile homes/gross acre 
 
C.  Parking Requirements. Except for senior and/or disabled housing mobile home parks, the overall parking ratio shall be a minimum of two (2) parking spaces per dwelling. The overall parking ratio for senior and/or disabled housing mobile home parks shall be a minimum of one and one-half (1½) parking spaces per dwelling. At least one parking space shall be provided on or immediately adjacent to each mobile home space. All parking within mobile home parks approved after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall conform to the parking requirements contained in this title. 
D.  All structures, including mobile homes, shall have a minimum side and rear yard setback area of ten (10) feet from property lines in the zoning district in which they are located, and twenty-five (25) feet from all street and private road right-of-way lines. 
E.  Signs. Each mobile home park may have a bulletin board for the listing of each mobile home site and name of an occupant thereof. Signs identifying the park may be erected if approved by the planning director. Such signs must be located on the premises and shall be not larger than twenty-five (25) square feet. They shall not be illuminated except by indirect nonflashing light. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 2, 3-9-2010; Ord. 362 § 11, 2001; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.34.400 - Property development standards. 
The following development standards shall apply to the individual mobile home sites. Plans and grading elevations for before and after construction for the mobile home park shall be submitted along with other construction plans with the master development plan for the mobile home park, and shall be subject to review and change as determined necessary upon recommendation of the planning director or the town engineer. 
A.  Mobile Home Site Area. Each mobile home site in a mobile home park shall contain a minimum of three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
B.  Mobile Home Site Width. Each mobile home site designed for occupancy by a mobile home shall be an average width of thirty (30) feet plus the width of the mobile home, unless the applicant can show that adequate space for a patio, parking and side yards will be assured. 
C.  Mobile Home Site Frontage. Each mobile home site shall abut directly upon a mobile home park street for a minimum distance of thirty (30) feet. 
D.  Space Use. Not more than one single-family mobile home may be placed on a mobile home site. 
E.  Landscaping. All landscaping, signing, and lighting for mobile home parks affected by this chapter shall be subject to review and approval of the planning director. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.34.500 - Special development standards. 
A.  Walls and Fences. Walls or fences shall be erected around the perimeter of each mobile home park as required by the planning director or the planning commission. The height, construction and type of material for such perimeter walls or fences shall be as specified by the planning director. 
B.  Mobile Home Park Streets. Interior park streets shall be provided in such a pattern as to provide convenient traffic circulation within the mobile home park. They shall be constructed to the following standards. 
1.  Width. Not less than twenty-four (24) feet (with no on-street parking) including curbs, or asphalt dikes, but not including roadside ditches. 
2.  Streets shall be paved in conformance to the town standards. 
3.  Streets shall have adequate lighting. 
4.  Drainage facilities and encroachment to public streets shall conform to the town standards. 
5.  All roads and drainage improvement facilities shall meet the requirements of the town engineer. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.34.600 - Mobile home park office. 
Each mobile home park subject to the requirements of this chapter may include a permanent building for office use. Such building may include a single-family dwelling for the exclusive use of the owner or manager of the mobile home park. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.34.700 - Laundry rooms. 
Each mobile home park subject to the requirements of this chapter may have one or more laundry rooms. Laundry drying lines shall not be permitted on any mobile home site. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.34.800 - Mailboxes. 
Each mobile home site shall have a receptacle for mail deliveries in accordance with acceptable standards of the United States Post Office Department. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.34.900 - Telephones. 
Each mobile home park shall contain at least one public telephone for the use of park residents. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.34.1000 - Storage areas. 
Areas used for storage of recreational vehicles, or other outdoor storage areas shall be screened from public view outside the mobile home park. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.34.1100 - Recreational vehicles. 
Not more than twenty (20) percent of the mobile home sites may be used for recreational vehicle sites. Sites reserved for recreational vehicles shall be designated as such on the application for the use permit and shall be separate from the area designated for mobile homes. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.35 - ANIMAL REGULATIONS 
 
17.35.100 - Purpose. 
The animal regulations set forth in this chapter are intended to establish minimum standards for the keeping of livestock animals or bees in residential zoned areas; and to avoid overcrowding or other objectionable conditions potentially incompatible with adjacent properties. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.35.200 - General requirements. 
The long-term keeping of livestock animals upon properties within the AR-1, AR-3, AR-5, RR-1, RR-2/3, RR-1/2, TR-1, TR-1/2, and TR-1/3 zoning districts is potentially permitted subject to the specific land use regulations within each zone; and solely in association with established on-site residential uses, and subject to all applicable minimum requirements set forth in this section of Chapter 17.35. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided within Section 17.35.250, all regulations set forth in Table 17.35.200 shall apply to the long-term keeping of livestock animals as follows: 
Table 17.35.200 
Type of Animal 	Minimum Area Per 
Animal (square feet) 	Minimum Net Lot Area 
Required (One Animal) 
(square feet) 	Maximum Number 
Animals* 	Minimum Enclosure 
Setbacks** 
(from residence(s) 
on adjoining site) 
Horse, cow, llama, etc. 	15,500 	30,500 	12 	100 feet 
Swine 	11,000 	26,000 	12 	100 feet 
Goat, sheep 	10,000 	25,000 	18 	100 feet 
Turkey 	5,000 	20,000 	24 	75 feet 
Poultry, fowl 	1,500 	16,500 	36 	75 feet 
Rabbits 	900 	15,900 	36 	75 feet 
Chinchilla, mink, etc. 	1,000 	16,000 	24 	75 feet 
 
 * Maximum number of animals shall not apply to properties of five (5) acres or greater in size. 
** The planning director or planning commission may require specific distances from property lines as he or they deem appropriate. 
B.  The minimum site area per animal requirements of Table 17.35.200 shall apply in addition to a minimum site area requirement of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet (net area) per dwelling on the site. Area requirements shall be determined cumulatively for the purpose of establishing the number of animals allowed, and shall not apply solely to the actual site area used by a particular animal. 
C.  Minimum enclosure setback distances shall apply to any barn, corral, pen, feed area, paddock, stable, fenced pasture, or similar area for housing or enclosure of animals. 
D.  Enclosure setbacks measured from a residence shall apply to any existing dwelling structure located on an adjacent property, but need not apply to dwellings on the same site as the animal enclosure. 
E.  The maximum number of animals shall be the cumulative total number of animals on the site. (Example: two (2) horses plus one cow shall equal the maximum number of animals permitted upon a property less than five (5) acres in size.) 
F.  Animal requirements of this section shall apply only to mature or weaned animals. Requirements for any livestock animal not listed in Table 17.35.200 shall be determined by the planning director on the basis of comparability to animals listed, and the characteristics customarily associated with such animals. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 3, 9-14-2010; Ord. 370 § 7, 2001; Ord. 332 §10, 1999; Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992; Ord. No. 395, § 3, 2003) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 505, § 5, adopted Sept. 14, 2010, provides that this ordinance shall take effect 30 days after the date of its passage.  
17.35.250 - Backyard chickens and rabbits. 
Notwithstanding the requirements of Section 17.35.200, the long-term keeping and raising of chickens and rabbits shall be considered a permitted accessory land use to an established residential land use in residential zoning districts when conducted in accordance with the following standards: 
A.  Up to two chickens and up to two rabbits may be kept and raised upon residentially-zoned properties. 
B.  Chickens kept and raised as permitted residential accessory land uses shall under no circumstances include roosters. 
C.  Chickens and rabbits shall at all times be confined within pens, coops and other enclosed or fenced areas maintained a minimum distance of seventy-five lineal feet from any dwelling structure located on an adjacent property and shall be established in compliance with all applicable yard setback requirements. 
D.  Pens, coops and other areas used to contain and/or confine chickens and rabbits shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition via frequent cleaning and removal of animal waste from the site and shall at no time become a source of offensive odors transmitted to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 505, § 4, 9-14-2010) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 505, § 5, adopted Sept. 14, 2010, provides that this ordinance shall take effect 30 days after the date of its passage.  
17.35.300 - Beekeeping regulations. 
The raising and keeping of bees upon properties within the R-C, AG-10, AG-20, AR-1, AR-3, AR-5, RR-1, and TR-1 zoning districts is permitted in accordance with the specific land use regulations within each zone; and subject to all applicable minimum requirements set forth in this section. 
A.  The following site development regulations shall apply to the keeping of bees: 
Regulation 	Requirement 
Minimum net lot area (square feet) 	43,560 
Maximum number of hives per acre 	5 
Minimum distance setback (hives from neighboring dwelling) 	100 feet 
 
All beekeepers shall secure a permit from the Butte County agricultural commissioner for beekeeping. 
B.  All beekeepers subject to the requirements of this Chapter shall maintain an adequate supply of water for their bees. 
C.  The keeping of bees legally existing prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title shall not be subject to the regulations of this section unless additional hives are to be placed on the property, in which case the regulations set forth in this section shall apply. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992; Ord. No. 395, § 4, 2003)  
17.35.400 - 4-H project animal regulations. 
The temporary raising of livestock animals as a student animal project sponsored by the Future Farmers of America, 4-H, or similar organizations upon properties within all zoning districts is permitted solely in association with an established residence; and subject to all applicable minimum requirements set forth in this section: 
A.  All regulations set forth in Table 17.35.500 shall apply to 4-H student animal projects as follows: 
Table 17.35.500 
Type of Animal 	Minimum Area 
Per Animal 
(square feet) 	Minimum Required 
Net Lot Area 
(One Animal) 
(square feet) 	Maximum Number 
Animals Permitted 
Horse/cow 	10,500 	21,390 	1 
Swine 	 4,500 	15,390 	3 
Sheep/goat 	 3,500 	14,390 	3 
Turkey 	 2,000 	11,000 	3 
Poultry/fowl 	 1,000 	10,000 	12  
Rabbits 	   600 	 9,600 	15  
Chinchilla 	   600 	 9,600 	6 
 
B.  The minimum site area per animal requirements of Table 17.35.500 shall apply in addition to a minimum site area requirement assigned to each category of animal as follows: 
Category of Animal 	Minimum Net Lot Area* 
(square feet) 
Hoofed animals (horse, cow, sheep, swine, etc.) 	10,890 
Nonhoofed animals (fowl, poultry, rabbits, etc.) 	9,000 
 
* Note: Defined as existing lot area excluding land within roadway easements. 
C.  Area requirements for 4-H student animal projects shall be determined cumulatively for the purpose of establishing the number of animals allowed, and shall not apply solely to the actual site area used by a particular animal. 
D.  The temporary raising of livestock animals as a 4-H sponsored student animal project may be permitted upon property in accordance with all applicable regulations set forth in this section during a period of time not exceeding nine (9) months during a calendar year. 
E.  Minimum enclosure setback requirements as set forth in Section 17.35.200 of this chapter shall also apply to the temporary raising of livestock animals as a 4-H sponsored student animal project. 
(Ord. 214, § 2 (part), 1992; Ord. 264, § 2 (part), 1995; Ord. No. 395, § 5, 2003)  
Chapter 17.36 - MOBILE HOME PROVISIONS 
Section: 
 
17.36.100 - Mobile home provisions. 
A mobile home or transportable factory built housing unit may be used as a dwelling in all zones allowing single-family dwellings when such mobile home meets the following minimum requirements in addition to all other provisions applicable to the site. (Government Code Section 65852.3) 
1.  The mobile home or transportable factory built housing unit shall be structurally certified per requirements of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Act of 1974. 
2.  The mobile home shall be installed on an approved permanent foundation. 
3.  Roofs shall have a minimum pitch of three (3) in twelve (12), and shall be shingled or tiled in a manner sufficient to have the same appearance as a standard dwelling built on the site. 
4.  Siding material shall be of masonry, wood, stucco or similar material having the same appearance as a standard dwelling built on the site. 
(Ord. 214, § 2 (part), 1992; Ord. 227, § 8, 1993)  
Chapter 17.37 - SIGN REGULATIONS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ords. 214 and 264. 
 
17.37.100 - Purposes. 
Sign regulations are included in this title for the following purposes: 
A.  To preserve and enhance the natural and man-made aesthetic qualities of the town; and to minimize visual clutter; 
B.  To ensure reasonable opportunity for identification and advertising for commercial and industrial activities, consistent with community goals; 
C.  To minimize conflict between advertising signs and traffic safety devices or signs. 
(Ord. 313 § 6 (part), 1998)  
17.37.200 - Exempt signs. 
The following signs are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, within the limits specified: 
A.  Signs erected or required by law or by contract with a governmental agency, including traffic signs and devices, legal notices, and temporary, emergency or nonadvertising signs authorized by the town; 
B.  Signs erected by public utility companies relating to danger or public safety, or indicating the location of public utility lines and facilities, or public telephones; 
C.  House numbers, and privacy or warning signs such as "no trespassing," or "no parking" signs located on the appurtenant site, and when not exceeding four (4) square feet per sign face; 
D.  Decorations to celebrate recognized holidays and civic events; 
E.  National and state flags, and other flags or insignia displayed in conjunction with official flags; 
F.  Unlighted window signs and decals not exceeding six (6) square feet per sign face or thirty-five (35) percent of the area of the affected window, whichever is the greater. All lighted window signs, and unlighted window signs exceeding the above limits are regulated as flush signs; 
G.  Marquee signs; 
H.  Plaque signs; 
I.  Signs within a building or use which are not visible from beyond the boundary of the site; 
J.  Business signs which are used traditionally to indicate a temporary condition related to the business (e.g., "open/closed" signs, automobile fuel price signs, "no-vacancy" signs); 
K.  "Neighborhood Watch" signs which are approved by the police and community development department. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 2, 4-13-2010; Ord. 313 § 6 (part), 1998; Ord. No. 420, § 5, 6-8-2004; Ord. No. 433, § 1, 2-22-2005)  
17.37.300 - Prohibited signs. 
The following signs are prohibited in all zones, except as specifically allowed or limited herein: 
A.  Animated signs, excepting the following specifically permitted types of animation: 
1.  Barber poles not exceeding three (3) feet in height nor projecting more than one foot from a building; 
2.  Situated on "CC" [Community Commercial] zoned properties located outside of the Paradise Redevelopment Project Area [RDA], any time and temperature indicators included as part of a business sign and maintained in working order; 
3.  Electronic changeable message signs for public, quasi-public and community service land uses located upon property situated within the C-S or C-F zones. 
B.  Signs constituting a safety hazard to vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or impeding ingress and egress from any door, window or emergency exit; 
C.  Signs which imitate, duplicate or portray a commonly recognized traffic control or public safety sign or device, or which make use of words, symbols or characters in such a manner to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicular or pedestrian traffic; 
D.  Signs containing statements, words or characters of an obscene, indecent or immoral character such as will offend public morals or decency; 
E.  Signs emitting sound, smoke or odor; 
F.  Abandoned signs and/or abandoned sign structure(s) unless officially designated as historic by the Town of Paradise and/or the State of California. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 3, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 460, § 7, 4-10-2007; Ord. No. 457, §§ 1, 2, 1-9-2007; Ord. 436, § 6, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 433, § 2, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 420, §§ 6, 7, 6-8-2004; Ord. 362, § 12, 2001; Ord. 313, § 6 (part), 1998)  
17.37.350 - Nonconforming signs. 
Except as otherwise provided within Section 17.37.300.F., the use of signs legally established prior to the adoption of the ordinance regulations codified within Chapter 17.37 may be continued, although the signs do not conform to the specific regulations contained within the chapter. Any alteration of a lawful, nonconforming sign that reduces its nonconformity with the regulations of this chapter shall be permitted. A lawful, nonconforming sign may be repaired and maintained as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 4, 4-13-2010)  
17.37.400 - Permitted signs (nonbusiness). 
The following signs are permitted, subject to the limitations prescribed in this section: 
A.  Political Signs. Political signs are allowed in any zoning district subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Signs shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet per sign face. 
2.  Signs shall be unlighted. 
3.  Political signs not prohibited by this section shall be removed within fourteen (14) calendar days after the event (election) to which they relate occurs. 
4.  Political signs located in windows are not subject to regulation. 
5.  Political signs shall not be placed in any town right-of-way in a manner that shall create potential risk to the public health, safety, general welfare, nor that would injure town property. 
6.  Political signs higher than four (4) feet above grade must be placed beyond all required setbacks. 
7.  Any person, party or group posting political signs shall be liable to the town, private property owners and the general public for any injury to persons or property resulting from the placement and maintenance of such signs. 
B.  Directional Signs. Directional signs are allowed in any zoning district subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Signs shall be limited to those essential to give direction and instruction. 
2.  Signs shall not contain advertising matter, but may include a symbol, insignia or trademark when such element is a minor element of the sign or may be similar to advertising signs used on the premises. 
3.  Directional signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face. 
C.  Real Estate Signs. Real estate "for sale" signs are allowed in any zoning district subject to the following limitations. 
1.  Signs shall be limited to one sign per street frontage for property smaller than one acre. 
2.  Signs shall be unlighted. 
3.  Signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet per sign face for residential signs. Commercial and subdivision signs shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of sign face area. 
4.  A sign to advertise real estate for sale may not legally be placed off-site upon public property. 
5.  Real estate signs higher than four (4) feet above grade must be placed beyond all required yard setbacks. 
D.  Nameplates. Nameplates are permitted in the N-C, C-S, C-F, C-B, C-C or I-S zoning districts subject to the regulations pertaining to business signs, and shall not exceed three (3) square feet of sign face area, nor exceed four (4) feet in height above grade if placed in the front yard setback area. (See Section 17.37.500 of this chapter.) Nameplates shall be permitted in conjunction with an established principal land use within all other zoning districts. 
E.  Community Service Signs. Community service signs are allowed in any zoning district and possibly within a town right-of-way, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  The sign shall be erected and maintained by the town, or a community service organization with authorization procured from either the planning director, the planning commission, or, if the sign is to be located within a town right-of-way, from the town council. 
2.  The sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet above finished grade nor exceed a sign area of one hundred (100) square feet. 
3.  The sign shall serve a general public and/or community purpose. 
4.  [Reserved.] 
F.  Home Occupation Signs. Home occupation signs are allowed on the site of a home occupation subject to the following limitations: 
1.  No off-site sign shall be allowed. 
2.  The sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet. 
3.  The sign shall be unlighted. 
G.  Identification Signs. Identification signs for land uses other than commercial or industrial uses are allowed in any zoning district, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  For any land use subject to an administrative permit, site plan review permit or use permit, regulations for an identification sign may be established as a condition of approval, consistent with the development on surrounding properties. 
2.  For any land use not subject to an administrative permit, site plan review permit or use permit, identification signs are allowed subject to the following limitations: 
Regulation 	R-C, AG-10, AG-20, AR-1, AR-3, RR-1, RR-2/3, RR-1/2, TR-1, TR-1/2, TR-1/3 Zones 	Other Zoning Districts 
Lighting 	Indirect 	All but flashing 
Maximum sign area 	16 square feet 	36 square feet 
Maximum height 	6 feet 	10 feet 
Maximum number 	1 per site 	1 per street frontage 
 
H.  Construction Signs. Construction signs are allowed in any zoning district, subject to the following limitations: 
1.  Construction signs may be established upon the site of an active construction project for which town-issued construction permits are in effect and shall be removed upon completion of construction and/or expiration of all town issued ministerial construction permits, whichever occurs first. 
2.  The sign shall be unlighted. 
3.  The sign shall indicate only the nature of the construction, the proposed use, the name of the sponsor, architect, engineer, contractor or other entity associated with the construction, the projected completion date and similar information associated with the construction project. 
4.  The signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area per sign face for single-family residential projects. Signs for commercial, quasi-public, multiple-family residential and subdivision projects shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet of area per sign face. 
5.  The sign shall not be located within any abutting road easement or right-of-way for either a public street or private road. 
(Ord. No. 497, §§ 5—9, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 476, § 1, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 411, § 5, 2-10-2004; Ord. 347, § 2, 2000; Ord. 313, § 6(part), 1998)  
17.37.450 - Design review. 
A.  All new or redesigned and affixed business, professional, public, quasi-public, multiple-family residential, or industrial land use identification sign structures (excluding sign faces) shall be required to comply with all applicable requirements of the Town of Paradise adopted design standards. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to use, occupy or maintain a building or structure that does not comply with all applicable design standards. Any violation or failure to comply with the architectural and design criteria shall be an infraction punishable by a fine in accordance with Government Code section 36900. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 10, 4-13-2010)  
17.37.500 - Permitted signs (business signs). 
A.  Business signs are permitted in selected zoning districts subject to limitations and conditions set forth in Table 17.37.700 of this chapter. The following provisions apply to that table: 
1.  The cumulative length of all flush wall business signs along an affected building wall (or wall series as determined by the planning director) shall not exceed the percentage limitations specified within Section 17.37.700 of this chapter. Each overall side of the building shall be considered separately. In a unified development such as a shopping center or strip mall, the measurement used to determine the maximum permitted length of flush wall signs for individual businesses shall be determined on an individual basis for each shop using the separation of side walls to determine frontage length. 
2.  To determine the maximum sign area allowed on a site, the total square footage of all business signs shall be included. Where two (2) or more lots or parcels are used together as a single site, and commonly identified as a single site with a development name, common management, common parking facilities or similar sign indication of a unified development, the maximum sign area shall apply to the whole of the lots or parcels comprising the single site. 
3.  Business signs for commercial and/or professional services uses and to be located upon real property located within a Paradise General Plan designated "scenic highway corridor" land area shall be limited to a maximum sign area of one hundred (100) square feet; and subject signs shall not extend above the roof line of any onsite building nor be placed on the roof of any building. 
4.  [Reserved.] 
5.  New business signs defined as "roof signs" shall be prohibited except if the planning director determines, based upon substantial evidence, that the design of the building upon which the roof sign is proposed to be established has no other surface visible from a public street or private roadway to accommodate the placement of a business sign. 
(Ord. No. 497, §§ 11—13, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 476, § 2, 1-22-2008; Ord. No. 433, § 3, 2-22-2005; Ord. 313, § 6(part), 1998; Ord. 347, § 3, 2000)  
17.37.600 - Permitted signs (billboards). 
A.  Billboards may be permitted in the C-C, C-F, C-S and I-S zoning districts subject to town approval and issuance of an administrative permit in addition to the following limitations: 
1.  The sign face (poster panel) shall be limited to a display surface not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet. 
2.  Not more than one single-sided or double-sided billboard panel shall be located at any site. 
3.  Billboards shall not exceed sixteen (16) feet in height. 
4.  Billboards shall not be closer than fifty (50) feet from the centerline of a street unless the administrative permit provides for installation closer than fifty (50) feet. 
5.  Billboard sites shall be located at least five hundred (500) radial feet distance from any existing billboard of a size greater than one hundred (100) square feet; three hundred (300) radial feet from any other billboard. Separation distance requirements for benches displaying advertising other than those benches determined to be exempt from the provisions of this chapter shall be determined as a condition of an administrative permit approval, if required. 
6.  Billboards shall not be permitted to be established upon properties located within the town adopted "Downtown Revitalization Master Plan Area. 
B.  Nonconformance and Removal. Any billboard that does not conform to these regulations shall be removed pursuant to the schedule in this subsection, upon written notification to the owner of the property upon which the billboard is located that such nonconforming sign shall be removed. 
In all zoning districts a nonconforming billboard shall be removed within three (3) years of notification by the town of such removal. 
C.  Noncompliance. Any billboard located in an I-S zoning district which does not comply with the requirements of subsection A. of this section may remain as a nonconforming use; provided, that the billboard shall be removed if active use for outdoor advertising purposes ceases for a continuous period of twelve (12) months or more. 
D.  Removal by the Town. If any billboard remains in place thirty (30) days beyond the time limits specified in subsections B. and C. of this section, the town may remove the sign at the discretion of the planning director, and shall require repayment of the costs of removal from the property owner. The planning director shall give written notice to the property owner as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll thirty (30) days prior to the removal of the sign. 
E.  All owners of billboards required to remove a billboard as required by this section and all affected property owners shall be compensated for such removal as set forth in Section 5412 et seq. of the California Business and Professions Code. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 14, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 433, §§ 4, 5, 2-22-2005; Ord. 313, § 6(part), 1998; Ord. 362, § 13, 2001)  
17.37.630 - Permitted signs (banners). 
A.  Banner signs may be permitted upon properties within the N-C, C-B, C-C, I-S, C-S and/or C-F zoning districts subject to the following regulations: 
1.  Banner signs shall not be placed or affixed atop roof features of an affected building or linear structure. 
2.  Banner signs shall not be placed in any manner that obstructs pedestrian and/or ADA (Americans with Disabilities Act) accessibility. 
3.  Excepting temporary civic or special community event banner signs displayed to promote a civic/special community event, banner signs shall not be placed within the public streets right-of-way or within forty (40) feet linear distance measured from the centerline of a public street or private road. 
4.  Banner signs shall not be placed over any utility box, within three (3) feet of a fire hydrant or in any manner which creates a vehicular and/or bicyclists traffic hazard. 
5.  A maximum of two (2) banner signs per business or business street frontage shall be permitted; the size of any banner signs placed as flush wall-mounted upon a building shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the length and height of the affected building wall. Banner signs not completely supported by a building or a portion thereof shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in size. 
6.  Banner signs shall not be established to serve as business identification signs during a period exceeding sixty (60) days for a single business occupancy unless a longer period is approved by the planning director in order to accommodate extenuating circumstances (e.g., town processing for design review for a new structure, building facade, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 497, § 15, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 473, § 4, 12-11-2007; Ord. No. 457, § 3, 1-9-2007)  
17.37.650 - Portable signs. 
A.  The maximum height of a portable sign shall be four (4) feet above grade; and the total area of the sign face shall not exceed ten (10) square feet. 
B.  Portable signs shall be placed in a manner which provides a minimum of four (4) feet of unobstructed pedestrian clearance and shall otherwise be placed in compliance with handicapped accessibility requirements. 
C.  Portable signs shall not be placed in streets or driveway surfaces, attached or secured to public property, place over any utility box, within three (3) feet of a fire hydrant or in a manner which creates a traffic or pedestrian hazard. 
D.  Portable signs shall be constructed of wood (or other sturdy material) and metal hardware, all surfaces shall be painted and the signs shall be weighted to prevent movement during windy periods. Portable signs shall have no electric or mechanical features or attached objects that move in the wind other than small balloon(s). 
E.  Other than within unified shopping center(s) and/or common owned parking facilities, portable signs used for business signage purposes shall not be placed upon property located offsite from the business being advertised/identified. 
F.  A maximum of one portable sign per business or business street frontage shall be permitted. 
G.  The town manager or his/her designee may authorize town removal of portable signs from public property when the signs are not placed or designed in conformance with the standards set forth within this section. 
H.  [Reserved.] 
(Ord. No. 497, § 16, 4-13-2010; Ord. 313, § 6 (part), 1998; Ord. 349, §§ 15, 16, 2000; Ord. No. 433, § 6, 2-22-2005; Ord. 436, § 7, 6-14-2005; Ord. No. 457, § 4, 1-9-2007)  
17.37.700 - Business signs—Regulations in all zoning districts. 
Business sign regulations applicable in all zoning districts are designated as set forth in Table 17.37.700 as follows: 
Table 17.37.700 
Regulations for Business Signs in All Districts 
(The maximum allowable sizes and numbers are shown) 
Type of Sign 	Zones 	Regulations 
Roof signs 	R-C, AG-10, AG-20, AR-1, AR-3, AR-5, RR-1, RR-2/3, RR-1/2, TR-1, TR-1/2, TR-1/3, M-F, N-C, C-S, C-F 	Not permitted 
	C-B, C-C 	1.0 square foot of sign area per linear foot of roof length; not above highest point of roof or parapet 
	I-S 	1.0 square foot of sign area per linear foot of roof length; not above highest point of roof or parapet 
Projecting signs 	R-C, AG-10, AG-20, AR-1, AR-3, AR-5, RR-1, RR-2/3, RR-1/2, TR-1, TR-1/2, TR-1/3, M-F 	Not permitted 
	C-S, C-F 	16 square feet maximum; 5 feet from wall 
	N-C, C-B 	16 square feet maximum; 5 feet from wall 
	C-C, I-S 	32 square feet maximum; 5 feet from wall 
Flush (wall-mounted) signs 	R-C, AG-10, AG-20, AR-1, AR-3, AR-5, RR-1, RR-2/3, RR-1/2, TR-1, TR-1/2, TR-1/3 	10% of the area of the building wall on which the sign is established; 25 percent of wall length 
	C-S, N-C, C-B, C-F 	1.0 square foot of sign area per linear foot of wall length; 50 percent of wall length 
	C-C, I-S 	1.5 square feet of sign area per linear foot of wall length; 50 percent of wall length 
Freestanding signs 	R-C, AG-10, AG-20, AR-1, AR-3, AR-5, RR-1, RR-2/3, RR-1/2, TR-1, TR-1/2, TR-1/3 	Refer to identification signs section 17.37.400.G. 
	N-C, C-B, C-S, C-F, M-F 	40 square feet; maximum 6 feet height; 1 per site 
	C-C, I-S (excepting RDA, Scenic Highway Corridors) 	Monument, post or pole, 100 square feet, maximum height 10 feet (monument), and 16 feet (post, pole or pylon); 2 per site 
	RDA (excepting the Downtown Revitalization Area) Scenic Highway Corridors 	Monument or post, 100 square feet, maximum height 8 feet; 1 per site 
 
(Ord. No. 497, § 17, 4-13-2010; Ord. 313, § 6 (part), 1998; Ord. No. 414, § 4, 3-9-2004; Ord. No. 433, § 7, 2-22-2005)  
17.37.800 - Maximum sign area per site: 
The maximum sign area of all business signs on a site shall not exceed the following: 
Zone 	Maximum Sign Area per Site Area 
C-B, N-C, C-F 	200 square feet. 400 square feet in a unified development on a site exceeding one acre. 
C-C, I-S, C-S 	300 square feet. 600 square feet in a unified development on a site exceeding 2 acres. 1,500 square feet in a unified development on a site exceeding 4 acres. 
All other zones 	120 square feet. 
 
(Ord. No. 497, § 18, 4-13-2010; Ord. 313, § 6 (part), 1998; Ord. No. 414, § 5, 3-9-2004)  
17.37.900 - Signs within easements. 
Except as permitted by this code, no sign shall be placed, erected or installed within any recorded or established access easement or right-of-way, whether privately or publicly owned. 
(Ord. No. 414, § 6, 3-9-2004; Ord. 313, § 6 (part), 1998)  
Chapter 17.38 - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING REGULATIONS 
 
17.38.100 - Purpose. 
Off-street parking and loading facilities are required to ensure functional, aesthetic and secure off-street parking and loading areas. The regulations and design standards of this chapter are intended to ensure usefulness of facilities, to protect public safety, and where appropriate, to mitigate potential adverse impacts on adjacent land uses. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.200 - Basic regulations—Vehicle parking. 
A.  Unless stipulated by other provisions of this title, off-street parking facilities shall be provided for any new building or land use established. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided for any addition or enlargement of an existing building or use, or any change of occupancy or manner of operation that would result in additional parking spaces being required; provided, that the additional parking shall be required only for the addition, enlargement or change and not for the entire building or use. 
B.  Facilities being used for off-street parking on the effective date of this ordinance codified in this title shall not be reduced in capacity to less than the number of parking spaces required, or altered in design or function to less than the minimum standards prescribed by this title, except as provided by Section 17.38.350 of this chapter. 
C.  For sites with more than one land use, or for adjacent sites served by a common parking facility, the parking requirement shall be the total number of spaces required for each site or use, except as provided by Section 17.38.600 of this chapter. 
D.  Parking facilities constructed or substantially reconstructed subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, shall conform to the design standards set forth in Sections 17.38.900 and 17.38.1000 of this chapter. 
E.  Required parking facilities shall be maintained for the duration of the land use for which it is required. Such facilities shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of motor vehicles or light trucks, and shall not be used for the sale, display or storage of merchandise, or for the storage or repair of vehicles or equipment, except as permitted by this title. 
F.  Required parking facilities shall be on the same site as the land use for which required, except as authorized pursuant to Section 17.38.500 of this chapter. 
G.  A land use may be required to provide more parking spaces than prescribed by this title as determined by the town engineer. 
H.  Parking must be beyond all yard setbacks, except the town engineer may increase or decrease the parking setback distance from the centerline of a public street, based on the quality of sight distance, at his discretion. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 1, 8-7-2012; Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.300 - Schedule of off-street parking requirements. 
A.  Parking facilities for each land use shall be provided according to the minimum requirements set forth in Section 17.38.1000 of this chapter, applied as follows: 
1.  When application of Section 17.38.1000 results in a fractional parking requirement, a fraction of 0.5 or greater shall be resolved to the higher whole number. 
2.  For purposes of this section, requirements shall be based on gross floor area, but excluding enclosed or covered areas used for off-street parking or loading. 
3.  When requirements are based on seats or capacity, Uniform Building Code provisions applicable at the time of determination shall be used to define capacity. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.38.1000, or if alternately addressed by other provisions of this title, a minimum of four (4) off-street parking spaces shall be provided for a new commercial, industrial or multiple-family residential land use. 
(Ord. 319 §2, 1999; Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.350 - Exceptions. 
A.  The parking requirements set forth in Section 17.38.1000 of this chapter may be reduced by up to twenty (20) percent by the planning director, or by the planning commission or the town council upon appeal, via the granting of an administrative permit processed in accordance with Section 17.45.240 of this title. An administrative permit authorizing a reduction in required off-street parking spaces shall be granted only when all of the following findings are determined, based on substantial evidence: 
1.  The specific characteristics of the land use for which the reduction is requested (e.g., hours of operation, mixed use projects, site characteristics, number of employees, characteristics of surrounding land uses, proximity to regional transit lines or public parking, etc.) do not necessitate the number of parking spaces that would otherwise be required by this chapter; 
2.  Information provided by the applicant for a reduction in required parking documents the need for fewer parking spaces (e.g., market studies, sales receipts, documentation of customer volume and frequency, parking standards for the proposed land use required by other jurisdictions, etc.); and 
3.  The reduced parking standards will be adequate to accommodate all parking demands generated by the proposed land use and will not be detrimental to the public's health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 2, 8-7-2012)  
17.38.400 - Parking for compact cars. 
In a parking facility of six (6) or more spaces a maximum of thirty-three (33) percent of the spaces may be designed for small or compact cars. Spaces for compact vehicles shall be located in a manner affording desirability and usability equivalent to standard spaces. 
(Ord. 319 §3, 1999; Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.500 - Off-site or remote parking. 
A.  The planning director may authorize a portion or the total of the parking spaces required for a land use to be located on another site (i.e., off-site or remote parking). An application request for remote parking shall require submission of: (1) its applicable application filing fee, (2) a detailed and scaled site plan of the proposed parking, and (3) a written statement addressing the relevant factors listed in subsection B. of this section. 
B.  In determining whether to approve an application for off-site or remote parking, the planning director shall consider all relevant factors, including: 
1.  The location of the land use and the proposed off-site parking, and the existing and potential parking demand created by other land uses in the vicinity; 
2.  The characteristics of the land use, including employee and customer parking demand, hours of operation, and projected convenience and frequency of use of off-site parking; 
3.  Convenience and safety of pedestrian access between off-site parking and the use; 
4.  Difficulty or impracticality of providing all required parking on the same site as the land use it serves; 
5.  The recommendations of the town engineer. 
C.  The planning director may require such guarantees as deemed necessary to assure continued availability and usability of any off-site (remote) parking. 
(Ord. 319 §5, 1999)  
17.38.600 - Parking for mixed use developments. 
A.  The planning director may authorize an adjustment in the total parking requirement for separate land uses located on the same site, or for separate uses located on adjacent sites and served by a common parking facility. A request for adjustment shall require submission of a site plan and a written statement addressing the relevant factors listed in subsection D. of this section. 
B.  The total parking requirement for all land uses served by a parking facility, determined separately for each use, may be reduced by an amount not to exceed the following: 
Total Requirement 
For All Uses 	Maximum Allowable 
Reduction 
40 or less spaces 	 5 percent 
41 to 99 spaces  	10 percent 
100 to 149 spaces  	15 percent 
150 or more spaces 	20 percent 
 
C.  A parking facility subject to adjustment under this section shall be designed as a common, unified parking facility providing reasonably equivalent accessibility and convenience to all land uses which the parking is intended to serve. 
D.  In determining whether to approve an adjustment for mixed uses, the planning director shall consider all relevant factors, including: 
1.  The characteristics of each land use and the differences in projected peak parking demand, including days or hours of operation; 
2.  Potential reduction in vehicle movements afforded by multipurpose use of the parking facility by employees, customers, or residents of the uses served; 
3.  Potential improvements in parking facility design, circulation, and access afforded by a joint parking facility; 
4.  The recommendations of the town engineer. 
E.  The planning director may require such guarantees as deemed necessary to assure the continued availability of parking, and adequacy of maintenance and operating agreements to retain the usability of the parking facility. 
(Ord. 319 §6, 1999; Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.700 - Handicapped and/or disabled facilities. 
A.  Parking spaces for serving handicapped and/or disabled persons shall be established in each parking facility in accordance with the regulations of Section 1129B of Title 24, California Code of Regulations. 
B.  Handicapped and/or disabled parking space facilities may be permitted to be established with a location within a yard setback area subject to town approval and issuance of an administrative permit. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 3, 3-9-2010; Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 227 §9, 1993; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.800 - Off-street loading. 
A.  Each off-street loading space required by this title shall be of sufficient size to park commercial vehicles loading and unloading merchandise and materials on the property on which a space is located, together with such additional area which the town engineer determines is necessary to safely maneuver a vehicle between the loading space and any public right-of-way or any road, street or alley adjoining the property. 
B.  Private off-street loading space for the handling of goods, materials and equipment shall be provided as follows: 
1.  Buildings fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or greater of gross floor area (including building conversions): one off-street loading space, plus one additional space for each additional thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross floor area. 
2.  Buildings less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or greater of gross floor area shall not be required to install an off-street loading space. 
(Ord. No. 524, § 3, 8-7-2012; Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.900 - Facility design standards. 
A.  Use of Standards. The design standards established by this section are basic guidelines for design, construction and maintenance of parking and loading facilities. The town engineer may authorize minor variation or adjustment to the design, function, attractiveness, or protection to adjoining uses in a manner equal to or greater than the specific requirements of this section. 
B.  Basic Dimensions. The following basic dimensions apply to parking and loading spaces: 
Type of Space 	Length (feet) 	Width (feet) 	Vertical Clearance 
(feet) 
Standard 	18.5 	9.0 	7.5 
Compact 	15.0 	8.0 	7.5 
Handicapped 	18.0 	14.0  	7.5 
Loading 	40.0 	12.0  	15.0  
 
C.  Design. Basic facility design dimensions are illustrated in Section 17.38.1100. Additional guidelines relating to internal design and layout, turning radii, pavement, slope, signage, pedestrian circulation, construction materials, and other design features may be adopted by resolution of the planning commission upon recommendation of the planning director and town engineer. 
D.  Landscaping. The following basic standards shall apply, except where conflicts may arise with the landscape ordinance of the town, in which case the landscape ordinance shall prevail. 
1.  Each parking facility shall provide interior landscaping, including shade trees where appropriate, in accord with the following schedule. Where possible, existing trees shall be incorporated into landscaped areas. Interior landscaping shall be distributed throughout the parking facility to reduce the visual impact of large paved areas. 
Size of Parking Facility (square feet) 	Minimum Required Interior Landscaping (percent of total parking facility) 
Less than 10,000 	None 
10,000 to 19,999 	5.0 
20,000 to 29,999 	7.5 
30,000 and greater 	10.0  
 
2.  Each parking facility having twelve (12) or more spaces shall provide a perimeter landscaped strip at least five (5) feet wide where the facility adjoins a property line. Perimeter landscaping shall be continuous, except for necessary access to the site or to the parking facility. 
3.  Landscaped areas shall be provided with irrigation facilities, and shall be protected with curbs or equivalent barriers. 
E.  Paving and Drainage. The following standards shall apply: 
1.  All parking and loading facilities shall be graded and provided with permanent storm drainage facilities. 
2.  Surfacing, curbing and drainage improvements shall be sufficient to preclude free flow of water onto adjacent properties or streets, and to provide adequate drainage within the facility. 
3.  The surfacing of parking and loading facilities may be required to be paved, chipsealed or an equivalent improvement as deemed appropriate by the town engineer. 
F.  Safety Features. The following standards shall apply: 
1.  Safety barriers, protective bumpers or curbing, and directional markings shall be provided to assure safety, efficient utilization, protection to landscaping, and to prevent encroachment onto adjoining public or private property. 
2.  Visibility of and between pedestrians, bicyclists and motorists shall be assured within the parking facility and at all access driveways. 
3.  Internal circulation patterns, and the location and traffic direction of all access drives, shall be designed and maintained in accord with accepted principles of traffic engineering and traffic safety. 
G.  Lighting. Aboveground lighting fixtures shall be designed to reflect away from any residential land use, and to minimize glare and reflection onto adjoining properties. 
H.  Noise. Areas used for primary circulation, frequent idling of vehicle engines or loading activities shall be designed and located to minimize impacts on adjoining properties, including provisions for screening or sound baffling and shall comply with the regulations of the town noise ordinance. 
I.  Maintenance. Parking and loading facilities shall be maintained to assure desirability and usefulness, free of refuse, debris or other accumulated matter. Landscaping, screening, fencing, signing, lighting, surfacing, striping, and other features shall be maintained in a usable manner. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 227 §10, 1993; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.950 - In-lieu parking fees. 
A.  With development of new or expanded land uses upon real properties within any portion of a "C-C" (community-commercial) or "C-S" (community-services) zoning district, in lieu of providing off-street parking spaces as required by the provisions of Section 17.38.1000 of this chapter, such requirements may be satisfied subject to town of Paradise approval by: 
1.  Payment to the town of Paradise, prior to the issuance of a building permit or other permit which may be required, of a sum of money for each parking space required by this chapter in an amount prescribed by the town council. The funds so deposited shall be retained by the town and shall be exclusively for the purpose of acquiring and developing public off-street parking facilities and related public transportation facilities; 
2.  The town council shall, by resolution and following a public hearing, establish and/or modify the amount of money that may be deposited in lieu of providing the off-street parking facilities required by this chapter; 
3.  The town council shall have the sole determination as to when and where the off-street public parking facilities contemplated to be provided pursuant to this chapter shall be acquired and developed. 
B.  In the event a property owner or developer, having made a monetary deposit pursuant to subsection A of this section, subsequently brings his real property into compliance with the provisions of this chapter before the town of Paradise has expended or otherwise obligated or committed any of the money so deposited for the development of off-street parking facilities in the vicinity of such use, then upon certification of compliance furnished by the public works director to the town manager, the amount so deposited shall be refunded to the depositor. 
(Ord. 319 §7, 1999)  
17.38.1000 - Off-street parking requirements. 
Requirements for off-street parking are as set forth in this section as follows: 
Use 	Minimum Requirements 
Residential Uses 	Parking Spaces 
Accessory dwelling 	1/dwelling, plus requirement for principal use 
Group residential 	0.5/sleeping unit 
Multiple-family dwelling 	Less than 700 square feet       1.2/unit 
	700 to 1,200 square feet       1.5/unit 
	More than 1,200 square feet       1.8/unit 
Mobile home park 	2/dwelling, subject to Chapter 17.34 
Secondary dwelling 	1/dwelling 
Senior housing 	1.2/unit 
Single-family, two-family 	2/dwelling 
All other uses 	As required by the planning director 
Commercial Uses 	Parking Spaces 
Agricultural service 	1 per 350 square feet 
Automotive sales 	1 per 750 square feet, plus 1 per 2 employees at maximum shift 
Automotive service 	1 per 500 square feet, plus 1 per 2 employees at maximum shift 
Business/trade school 	1 per 5 persons capacity 
Business service 	1 per 400 square feet, plus 1 per 750 square feet outdoor sale or rental area 
Campground 	1.5 per campsite 
Car washing 	2 times number of vehicles serviced simultaneously, plus 1 per employee 
Cocktail lounge 	1 per 2 persons seating capacity plus 1 per 2 employees at maximum shift 
Commercial recreation 	1 per 6 persons capacity, plus 1 per 2 employees at maximum shift 
Construction sales/service 	1 per 500 square feet indoors, plus 1 per 750 square feet outdoor sales or rental area 
Consumer repair services 	1 per 300 square feet 
Convenience storage 	N/A 
Equipment repair 	1 per 1,200 square feet of used area 
Financial services 	1 per 300 square feet 
Food sales 	1 per 200 square feet 
Funeral home 	1 per 4 chapel persons capacity plus 1 per employee at maximum shift 
Kennel/vet service 	
 (Indoor) 	1 per 300 square feet 
 (Outdoor) 	1 per 500 square feet 
Laundry service 	1 per 400 square feet 
Liquor sales 	1 per 200 square feet 
Motel/lodging 	1 per sleeping unit plus 1 per 2 employees at maximum shift 
Office, 	
 Business 	1 per 300 square feet 
 Medical 	1 per 200 square feet 
 Professional 	1 per 300 square feet 
Personal improvement 	1 per 350 square feet 
Personal service 	1 per 250 square feet 
Pet service 	1 per 250 square feet 
Research service 	1 per 300 square feet 
Restaurant 	
 predominantly fixed table 	1 per 4 persons seating capacity* 
 predominantly drive-in 	1 per 3 persons capacity* 
 predominantly fast food 	1 per 2 persons capacity* 
* All restaurants add space per 2 employees at maximum shift 
Retail sales, retail service 	1 per 250 square feet 
Scrap/salvage service 	1 per 300 square feet indoor sales area plus 1 per 4,000 square feet outdoor storage area 
Service station 	1 per employee at maximum shift 
Transportation service 	2 per facility, plus 1 per employee at maximum shift 
All others 	As required by the planning director 
Industrial Uses 	Parking Spaces 
Resource extraction 	2 per facility, plus 1 per employee at maximum shift 
All others 	As required by the planning director 
Community Uses 	Parking Spaces 
Administrative service 	1 per 300 square feet 
Cemetery 	No requirement 
Club/lodge 	1 per 4 person capacity 
Convalescent service 	1 per 2.5 beds plus 1 per employee during maximum employee shift 
Cultural service 	1 per 4 persons capacity 
Day care home (large family) 	1 per 4 persons cared, plus 1 per employee at maximum shift 
Day care home (small family) 	2 per facility, plus 1 per 4 persons cared at maximum use level 
Educational facility 	
 Elementary, jr. high 	7 per facility, plus 1 per employee at maximum shift 
 High school, college 	As required by the planning director 
Guidance service (limited or general) 	1 per 300 square feet of building area plus 1 per employee at maximum shift 
Hospital service 	1 per 2.5 beds, plus 1 per employee at maximum employee shift 
Park/recreation service 	
Indoor 	1 per 4 persons capacity 
Postal service (not U.S.) 	2 per building, plus 1 per employee plus 1 per delivery vehicle kept or serving the facility 
Public, religious assembly 	1 per 4 persons capacity within major auditorium 
Community care facility 	2 per dwelling, plus 1 per 4 persons cared at capacity, plus 1 per employee at maximum shift 
Safety service 	2 per facility, plus 1 per employee at maximum shift 
Transportation terminal 	1 per employee, plus 1 per transport vehicle using facility, plus 1 per 500 square feet of terminal building area 
Utility service (major) 	1 per 2,000 square feet of developed area 
All others 	As required by the planning director 
 
(Ord. No. 556, § 2, 4-14-2015; Ord. No. 524, § 4, 8-7-2012; Ord. No. 496, § 4, 3-9-2010; Ord. 319 §§8, 9, 1999; Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.1100 - Minimum parking facility requirements. 
Minimum parking facility requirements are as set forth in this section. The lesser dimension requirements refer to compact vehicles. 
Angle of 
Parking 	Width of Stall 	Depth of Stall 90° to Aisle 	Width of Aisle 	Width of Stall 
Parallel to 
Aisle 	Module Width 
Parallel 	9.0 	 9.0 	12.5 	22.0 	30.5 
30 	8.0 	14.0 	12.5 	15.0 	41 
	9.0 	17.3 	12.5 	18.5 	48 
45 	8.0 	15.9 	13.0 	10.6 	45 
	9.0 	17.5 	12.5 	12.8 	52 
60 	8.0 	16.7 	18.0 	 8.7 	52 
	9.0 	19.0 	16.0 	10.1 	58 
75 	8.0 	16.4 	18.0 	 7.8 	51 
	9.0 	19.5 	23.0 	 9.5 	62 
90 	8.0 	15.0 	18.0 	 8.0 	48 
	9.0 	18.5 	26.0 	 9.0 	63 
 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
17.38.1150 - Minimum parking facility standards. 
The diagrams as set forth in this section depict the applicable minimum design standard for parking facilities. 
Diagrams for Section 17.38.1150  
Diagrams for 17.38.1150 
 
Diagrams for 17.38.1150 
 
Diagrams for 17.38.1150 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.39 - NONCONFORMING USES 
 
17.39.100 - Continuation of existing nonconforming uses. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the lawful use of land, buildings or structures existing at the time of adoption of the ordinance regulations codified in this Title 17 may be continued, although the land use, building or structure does not conform to the regulations specified by this title for the zoning district in which such use, building or structure is located. A lawful, nonconforming building or structure may be repaired, maintained or altered internally unless otherwise restricted. 
B.  An existing nonconforming use of land or building may be continued upon approval and issuance of a conditional use permit processed in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.45 of this code; and only if all the following conditions are verified as being applicable to the subject nonconforming use: 
1.  The nonconforming use could have been permitted on the property in question subject to a use permit under the provisions of county of Butte zoning ordinance No. 1750 on November 29, 1979 (date of town of Paradise incorporation); and 
2.  The nonconforming use existed on the property on November 29, 1979, and has existed continually on the property to the present date. 
(Ord. 320, § 4, 1999; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.39.150 - Nonconforming parcels or lots. 
A.  An unimproved or undeveloped nonconforming parcel or lot that does not comply with the minimum area or lot width requirements of the land use regulations for the zoning district in which it is located, shall be considered to be a legal building site if it meets one of the following criteria: 
1.  Approved Land Division. The parcel or lot was created through a recorded parcel map or subdivision final map or a recorded certificate of compliance. 
2.  Partial Government Acquisition. The parcel or lot was created in compliance with the provisions of this code, but was made nonconforming when a portion of the parcel or lot was acquired by a governmental entity so that the affected parcel or lot size is decreased not more than twenty-five (25) percent of its minimum area requirement assigned by the land use regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of such criteria. 
(Ord. 320, § 5, 1999; Ord. No. 442, § 2, 1-10-2006)  
17.39.200 - Abandonment of nonconforming uses. 
If the lawful nonconforming use of land, buildings or a structure ceases either totally or partially for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, the nonconforming use shall be deemed totally or partially abandoned as the case may be, unless adequate evidence is provided to the planning director verifying that the nonconforming use has not been abandoned or partially abandoned. If the planning director finds and declares that a nonconforming use of land, buildings or structures has ceased for a continuous twelve (12) month period of time, then to the extent of abandonment, any subsequent use of the land, building or structure shall be in conformity to the regulations specified by this title. 
(Ord. 227, § 11, 1993; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.39.300 - Restoration of damaged nonconforming use. 
Any lawful nonconforming building or structure destroyed by any means to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its assessed value as shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll preceding its destruction may be restored as follows: 
A.  Restored and used only in compliance with the regulations specified by this title for the zoning district wherein the building or structure is located; or 
B.  Restored and used again as a lawful nonconforming use subject to town approval and issuance of a conditional use permit. 
(Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.39.400 - Expansion or alteration of nonconforming use. 
The enlargement or expansion of any lawful nonconforming use shall be subject to all general requirements as set forth in this section. 
A.  Enlargement. 
1.  Any building or structure, lawfully nonconforming as to yard setback, height or lot coverage requirements, may not be added onto or enlarged unless the additions and enlargements are made in conformance with the regulations of the applicable zone, or upon issuance of a variance. 
2.  Any building or structure, lawfully nonconforming for reasons other than those in subsection A.1. of this section, may be added onto or enlarged upon town approval and issuance of a conditional use permit. 
B.  Expansion. 
1.  A lawful nonconforming use may be expanded within an existing building or structure upon town approval and issuance of a conditional use permit. 
2.  A building or structure containing a lawful nonconforming use may be added onto or enlarged to expand the lawful nonconforming use upon town approval and issuance of a conditional use permit. 
3.  A lawful nonconforming use of land with no structures shall not be expanded or increased to occupy a greater land area either on the same or adjoining property nor shall the intensity of the existing use be increased, except that occupation of a greater land area or an increase in intensity may be permitted upon town approval and issuance of a conditional use permit. 
C.  Relocation. A lawful nonconforming building or structure shall not be moved to any other lot or to any other portion of the lot on which it is presently located unless as a result of the move the building or structure shall conform to the regulations specified by this title. 
D.  Change in Use. If no structural alterations are made, the lawful nonconforming use of a building or structure may be changed to another nonconforming use, which, in the opinion of the planning commission, is of the same, functionally equivalent, or more conforming nature. 
E.  Alteration. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any alteration of a lawful nonconforming building or structure in a manner that decreases its nonconformity with the regulations of this title shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.39.500 - Termination of nonconforming use. 
A.  Upon recommendation of the planning commission, the town council may order a nonconforming use to be terminated. Before recommending the termination of a nonconforming use, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing not sooner than fifteen (15) days after written notice of the public hearing is mailed or delivered to the owners and tenants of the nonconforming use. If the owner or tenants have not made a substantial investment in furtherance of the use, or if the investment can be substantially utilized or recovered by changing the nonconforming use to a currently permitted use of the property, the recommendation may require complete termination of the nonconforming use within a minimum of one year after the date of the town council order. If the owner or tenants have made a substantial investment in furtherance of the nonconforming use, or if the investment cannot be substantially utilized or recovered by changing the nonconforming use to a currently permitted use, the recommendation may require complete termination of the nonconforming use within a reasonable amount of time exceeding one year after the date of the town council order. The planning commission may recommend that nonconforming uses, which are determined to be an imminent threat to public health or safety, may be terminated immediately. In making its recommendation to the town council, the planning commission shall consider: 
1.  The total cost of land and improvement; 
2.  The length of time the use has existed; 
3.  Adaptability of the affected property to a currently permitted use; 
4.  The cost of moving and re-establishing the use elsewhere; 
5.  Whether the use is detrimental to the implementation of the Paradise general plan; 
6.  Compatibility of the use with the existing land use patterns and densities of the surrounding neighborhood; 
7.  Whether the use poses a possible threat to public health, safety or welfare; and 
8.  Any other relevant factors. 
B.  If the planning commission recommends that the nonconforming use should be terminated, the town council shall hold a public hearing after fifteen (15) days written notice to the owner and tenants of the nonconforming use. If the town council concurs with the recommendation of the planning commission, it shall order the termination of the nonconforming use as set forth in this section. 
C.  Failure to comply with a town council order to terminate a nonconforming use shall constitute a public nuisance subject to abatement in accordance with California Code of Civil Procedure Section 531, or, at the discretion of the town attorney, the public nuisance shall be subject to an action to enjoin it. 
D.  Costs incurred by the town by reason of involuntary abatement of the public nuisance shall be paid by the owners and tenants of the nonconforming use and shall be a special assessment against the land where the nonconforming use is located. 
(Ord. 348, § 3, 2000)  
17.39.600 - Termination as a result of public agency acquisition or eminent domain. 
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever a nonconforming use of land or buildings is terminated by reason of an acquisition of the property or portion thereof by a public agency by eminent domain or an acquisition under threat of the use of eminent domain, the nonconforming use may be relocated to another location where zoning permits it and that any relocated or reconstructed building or structure shall complement and harmonize with the existing and permitted land uses in its new vicinity and shall be compatible with the physical design aspects of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(Ord. 348, § 4, 2000)  
Chapter 17.40 - RECYCLING MACHINES AND FACILITIES 
 
17.40.100 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the placement and installation of recycling facilities, reverse vending machines and mobile recycling units. In addition, this chapter implements Title 14, Division 2, Chapter 5 of the California Administrative Code, known as the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1987. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.40.200 - Basic regulations—Permits required. 
No person shall permit the placement, construction or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in this title. Recycling facilities may be permitted as set forth in Section 17.40.250 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.40.250 - Permitted recycling facilities. 
Recycling facilities are permitted as set forth in this section as follows: 
Type of Facility 	Zoning District 	Permit Required 
Reverse vending machine(s) 	C-C, C-B, N-C, I-S, C-F, C-S 	Administrative permit 
Small collection 	C-C, C-B, N-C, I-S, C-S, C-F 	Administrative permit 
Large collection 	C-C 	Site plan review 
	I-S 	Site plan review 
 
Type of Facility 	Zones Permitted 	Permit Required 
Light processing 	C-C 	Conditional use permit 
	I-S 	Site plan review 
Heavy processing 	I-S 	Conditional use permit 
 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.40.300 - Permits for multiple sites. 
A single administrative permit may be granted by the planning director to allow more than one reverse vending machine(s) or small collection facility located on different sites under the following conditions: 
A.  The operator of each of the proposed facilities is the same operator. 
B.  The proposed facilities are determined by the planning director to be similar in nature, size and intensity of activity. 
C.  All of the applicable criteria and standards set forth in this chapter are met for each such proposed facility. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.40.400 - Criteria and standards. 
Recycling facilities permitted with a site plan review shall meet all the applicable criteria and standards listed. Those recycling facilities permitted with a site plan review, or conditional use permit shall meet the applicable criteria and standards; provided, that the planning director, planning commission or town council, as the case may be, may relax such standards or impose stricter standards as an exercise of discretion upon a finding that such modifications are reasonably necessary in order to implement the general intent of this chapter and the purposes of this title. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.40.500 - Standards and criteria for recycling facilities. 
A.  Reverse Vending Machine(s). Reverse vending machines do not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers and may be permitted in all commercial, community facilities/services and industrial zones following issuance of an administrative permit by the planning director; and provided, that they comply with the following standards: 
1.  Established in conjunction with a commercial or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the town. 
2.  Located within thirty (30) feet of the entrance to the established primary land use and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation. A greater distance can be approved by the planning director upon a finding that the greater distance will better serve the site. 
3.  Shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary use. 
4.  Shall occupy no more than fifty (50) square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight (8) feet in height. 
5.  Constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material. 
6.  Clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instruction, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative. 
7.  Shall have a maximum sign area of four (4) square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions. 
8.  Shall be maintained in an operable and clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis. 
9.  Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use. 
10.  Shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn. 
B.  Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities may be sited in the C-C, C-B, N-C, C-S, C-F and I-S zones following approval and issuance of an administrative permit by the planning director provided they comply with the following conditions: 
1.  Established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the town. 
2.  No larger than five hundred (500) square feet and occupy no more than five (5) parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers. 
3.  Established in such a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation, nor create a sight distance problem as determined by the planning director. 
4.  Shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. 
5.  Use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines. 
6.  Use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when the site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule. 
7.  Store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present. 
8.  Maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials; and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed, shall be swept at the end of each collection day. 
9.  Shall not exceed noise levels of sixty (60) dba as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dba. 
10.  Attended facilities located within one hundred (100) feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
11.  Containers for the twenty-four (24) hour donation of materials shall be at least thirty (30) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a recognized service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use. 
12.  Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers. 
13.  Signs may be provided as follows: 
a.  Recycling facilities may have identification signs with a maximum of twenty (20) percent per side or sixteen (16) square feet, whichever is larger, in addition to informational signs required in Section 17.40.500(B)(12); and in the case of a wheeled facility, the side will be measured from the pavement to the top of the container. 
b.  Directional signs, having no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the planning director if necessary to facilitate circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
14.  The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by local ordinances, by this title or any permit issued pursuant thereto for any concurrent land use. 
15.  No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. Open space will be provided for the attendant, if needed. 
16.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present. 
17.  Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all the following conditions exist. 
a.  The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation. 
b.  A parking study shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site. 
18.  A reduction in available parking spaces in an established parking facility may be allowed as follows: 
a.  For a commercial host use: 
Number of Available 
Parking Spaces 	Maximum 
Reduction 
0—25 	0 
26—35 	2 
36—49 	3 
50—99 	4 
100+ 	5 
 
b.  For a community facility host use: a maximum five (5) spaces reduction may be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the host use. 
19.  If the permit has an expiration date and such a permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following the permit expiration. 
C.  Large Collection Facilities. A large collection facility is one that is generally larger than five hundred (500) square feet, or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a host use, and which may have a permanent building. A large collection facility is permitted in either the C-C or I-S zone with a site plan review, provided the facility meets the following standards: 
1.  The facility location does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use. 
2.  The facility will be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or: 
a.  Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six (6) feet in height and not exceeding eight (8) feet in height with landscaping; 
b.  Located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from property zoned or planned for residential use; and 
c.  Meets all applicable noise standards in this code. 
3.  Setbacks and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
4.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition, as determined by the planning director. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. No storage, excluding truck trailers and overseas containers, will be visible above the height of the fencing. 
5.  The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis. 
6.  Space will be provided on a site for six (6) vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, whichever is higher, to circulate and to deposit recyclable materials, except where the planning director determines that allowing overflow traffic above six (6) vehicles is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety. 
7.  One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements will be as provided for in the zone, except that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary such as when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility. 
8.  Noise levels shall not exceed sixty (60) dba as measured at the property line of residentially zoned property, or otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dba. 
9.  If the facility is located within five hundred (500) feet of property zoned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. 
10.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
11.  Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; the facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
12.  The facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs will meet the standards of the zone; and directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed with the approval of the planning director, if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
13.  Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved at the discretion of the planning director if noise standards and other conditions are met. 
D.  Processing Facilities. A light processing facility may be permitted in the community-commercial zone with a conditional use permit and in the industrial-services zone with a site plan review. Heavy processing may be allowed in the industrial-services zone with a conditional use permit. A processor must meet all the following conditions: 
1.  The facility location does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use. 
2.  In the C-C or I-S zone, processors must operate in a wholly enclosed building except for incidental storage, or: 
a.  Within an area enclosed on all sides by an opaque fence or wall not less than eight (8) feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages; 
b.  Located at least one hundred fifty (150) feet from property zoned or planned for residential use. 
3.  Power-driven processing shall be permitted, provided all noise-level requirements are met as set forth in this code. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. 
4.  A light processing facility shall be no larger than forty-five thousand (45,000) square feet. It shall have no more than an average of two (2) outbound truck shipments of material per day and may shred, compact or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers. 
5.  Setbacks and landscaping requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
6.  All exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured and maintained in good condition, as determined by the planning director. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. No storage shall be visible above the height of the fencing, excepting truck trailers and overseas containers. 
7.  The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be secured from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present. 
8.  Space shall be provided on-site for the anticipated peak load of customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public, space shall be provided for a minimum of ten (10) customers or the peak load, whichever is higher, except where the planning director determines that allowing overflow traffic is compatible with surrounding businesses and public safety. 
9.  One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing center. Parking requirements shall otherwise be as mandated by the zone in which the facility is located. 
10.  Noise levels shall not exceed sixty (60) dba as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, or otherwise shall not exceed seventy (70) dba measured at the property line. 
11.  If the facility is located within four hundred (400) feet of property zoned or planned for residential use, it shall not be in operation between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. The facility will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open. 
12.  Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use; they shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; they shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and they shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials. 
13.  Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling containers. 
14.  Sign requirements shall be those provided for the district in which the facility is located. In addition, the facility shall be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.40.600 - Appeals. 
All decisions of the planning director made pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the planning commission within seven (7) days of the decision. 
(Ord. 264 §2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 §2(part), 1992)  
Chapter 17.41 - DESIGN STANDARDS AND DESIGN REVIEW[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 400, § 1, adopted Aug. 12, 2003, repealed Ch. 17.41, in its entirety and enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 17.41 pertained to design review and derived from Ord. No. 378, § 1(part), adopted 2002; and Ord. No. 393, § 1, adopted 2003. Additionally, Ord. No. 497, § 19, adopted April 13, 2010, changed the title of Ch. 17.41 from "Design Guidelines and Design Review" to read as herein set out. 
 
17.41.100 - Purpose. 
This chapter is adopted to promote the general health, safety, welfare and economy of the community. The purposes of this chapter are to: 
A.  Promote orderly and harmonious development of the Downtown and Redevelopment Project Area. 
B.  Enhance the desirability of investment in future development projects within the Town of Paradise. 
C.  Encourage the attainment of the most desirable designs for new and existing commercial and residential improvements in developing areas within the Town of Paradise. 
D.  Enhance the desirability of living conditions upon new commercial sites or in adjacent areas in the Town of Paradise; and 
E.  Promote commercial developments, which are of high aesthetic quality and are compatible with each other. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 20, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 8-12-2003)  
17.41.200 - Adoption of Town of Paradise Design Standards. 
The Town Council does hereby repeal the Town of Paradise Downtown Design Guidelines dated May 14, 2002; and hereby adopts the Town of Paradise Design Standards dated March 9, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 21, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 8-12-2003)  
17.41.300 - Reserved. 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 497, § 22, adopted April 13, 2010, repealed § 17.41.300, which pertained to design review board and derived from Ord. No. 469, § 1, 8-28-2007; Ord. No. 433, § 8, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 8-12-2003.  
17.41.400 - Design review approval. 
A.  No person shall be issued a building permit for a new or expanded commercial quasi-commercial, community service, office, publicly-funded or multi-family development project, the design of which is subject to the town's adopted design standards and criteria in the Town of Paradise unless the project has been approved or conditionally approved by town staff for compliance with the design criteria and standards set forth in the Town of Paradise Design Standards. 
B.  No person shall change the color of the exterior of a commercial, quasi-commercial, community service, office, public or multi-family building in violation of the design criteria and standards set forth in the Town of Paradise Design Standards. 
C.  All design review applications under this Chapter 17.41 shall be processed in accordance with time limits set forth in the Permit Streamlining Act, commencing with Government Code section 65920. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 23, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 8-12-2003; Ord. No. 433, § 9, 2-22-2005; Ord. No. 457, § 5, 1-9-2007)  
17.41.500 - Procedures for design review. 
A.  Design Review Applications. Any person proposing to construct a development project subject to design review under the provisions of this chapter or any other program of the town shall, prior to implementation of such action and/or filing for any required building permit, file an application for design review with town staff for design review. Such application shall be in the form as required by the Town Manager. 
B.  Procedures for Design Review by Town Staff. 
1.  Design Plan Decision and Notification. After consideration of the architectural/design plans, town staff shall issue its determination setting forth its approval, conditional approval, or its disapproval of the plans, and shall then transmit or cause to be transmitted to the applicant and Community Development Director written notice of its decision. The Community Development Director (or a designee), upon receipt of the drawings and plans, shall certify that the final plans submitted under this section are in accord with the architectural/design plans as approved by town staff. After such certification, any permits for the project may thereafter be issued in accordance with the provisions of this code. 
2.  Appeal. Any party aggrieved by an action of town staff under this chapter may file an appeal to the Town Council within ten (10) days after notice of the decision is given. Such appeal shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the Town Clerk. Upon the filing of a notice of appeal, the Community Development Director shall, within ten (10) days, transmit to the Town Clerk all papers and documents relating to the appeal. The notice of appeal shall include and be accompanied by the fee set forth in the Town Master Fee Schedule. 
(Ord. No. 497, § 24, 4-13-2010; Ord. No. 400, § 1, 8-12-2003; Ord. No. 433, § 10, 11, 2-22-2005)  
Chapter 17.42 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES 
 
17.42.010 - Purpose. 
With the rapid growth of the telecommunications industry and subsequent development of wireless communication facilities, the purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Provide the regulatory mechanism that accommodates the installation and development of wireless communication facilities, whose services benefit the residents and business service providers of the. 
B.  Define the development standards for the placement and construction of wireless communication facilities consistent with the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996. 
C.  Minimize the visual impacts these facilities can create in the community by promoting well-designed and appropriately placed facilities. 
(Ord. 369, § 1 (part), 2001)  
17.42.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Antenna" means any system of wire, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or receiving of electromagnetic radio frequency waves. 
(1)  "Building mounted" means an antenna which is affixed to or supported by the roof or exterior wall of a building or other structure. 
(2)  "Ground mounted" means an antenna which is fully or partially supported by a platform, framework, pole, or other structural system that is affixed to or placed directly on or in the ground. 
"Co-location" means the location of two (2) or more wireless communication facilities on a single support structure or otherwise sharing a common location. For the purposes of this chapter, co-location shall also include the location of wireless communication facilities with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards, and other utility facilities and structures. 
"Communication tower" means any structure which is used to transmit or receive electromagnetic radio frequency waves or that supports such a device. 
"Electromagnetic radio frequency waves" means waves of electric and magnetic energy radiating away from a transmission source to be picked up by a receiving antenna for the purpose of communicating information. 
"Wireless communication facility" means a facility containing communication towers and/or antennas and any related equipment for the purpose of transmitting or receiving electromagnetic radio frequency waves. 
(Ord. 369, § 1 (part), 2001)  
17.42.025 - Exemptions. 
The following wireless communication facilities shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter provided its antenna structure complies with all other applicable zoning requirements of this title: 
A.  Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely to receive UHF, VHF, AM and FM broadcast signals from licensed radio and television stations; 
B.  Any antenna structure that is designed and used solely in connection with authorized operations of an amateur radio station licensed by the FCC [i.e., a "ham" radio transmission]. 
(Ord. 369 §1(part), 2001)  
17.42.030 - Compliance with applicable codes. 
Every wireless communication facility permitted and constructed within the town shall comply with all safety standards of the American National Standards Institute, Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Public Utilities Commission, Federal Communications Commission, Uniform Building Code, National Electric Code, this code and any other codes and standards as applicable. In addition, the town shall not be liable if subsequent new wireless communication facility development impairs existing antenna reception. 
(Ord. 369 § 1 (part), 2001)  
17.42.040 - Permits. 
All wireless communication facilities shall be subject to the following permitting: 
A.  Administrative Permit. New wireless communication facilities which will be co-locating on or within an existing approved tower or facility shall be subject to town approval of an administrative permit. This shall include co-location with other facilities such as water tanks, light standards and other similar utilities. 
B.  Site Plan Review Permit. Other than those facilities subject to an administrative permit, all new wireless communication facilities which comply with the regulations contained in this chapter including, but not limited to height, location and screening shall be subject to town approval of a site plan review permit. 
C.  Conditional Use Permit. Those facilities that require a conditional use permit include: 
1.  Where multiple wireless communication sites are proposed by a single applicant, a conditional use permit shall be required to act as a master land permit for all sites under single review by the planning commission; 
2.  All facilities which do not comply with the regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. 369 § 1 (part), 2001)  
17.42.050 - Height. 
A.  Building mounted facilities shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height greater than the maximum height permitted for the zoning district in which it is located. Height limits for all ground mounted facilities shall be subject to the following standards: 
Maximum Height for Ground Mounted Facilities 
Distance From a Residence 	Maximum Height 
Between 0—110 feet 	1 foot per 1 foot of distance from a residence 
Between 111—130 feet 	135 feet 
Greater than 130 feet 	160 feet 
 
(Ord. 369 § 1 (part), 2001)  
17.42.060 - Location. 
A.  New wireless communication facilities shall be co-located with other existing or planned facilities where feasible or where found to minimize visual impact. 
B.  No facility shall be installed closer than one-half (½) mile from another site unless it is on a previously approved co-located facility or multiple-user site. 
C.  All new facilities shall be located outside of the required setback area for the respective zoning district in which the facility is located. 
D.  On a developed site, communication towers may be permitted only where the applicant has demonstrated a good faith effort to secure an alternate site at an existing utility substation and it is reasonably demonstrated that the proposed facility cannot be placed on an existing building or communication tower. 
E.  No facility shall be installed on an exposed ridgeline, in or at a location readily visible from a public trail or other recreation area, a town designated scenic area or town residential zoned area unless it is satisfactorily screened or made to appear as a natural environment feature. 
F.  A communication tower shall not be located in the required front yard setback. 
(Ord. 369 § 1 (part), 2001)  
17.42.070 - Town residential zoning districts. 
Only those facilities that are building mounted or totally enclosed within a building shall be permitted in any town residential zoning district. Building mounted facilities in a town residential zoning district shall be located or screened so as to prevent any public view or shall be architecturally designed to appear as an integral part of the building on which it is attached. 
(Ord. 369 § 1 (part), 2001)  
17.42.080 - Development and design standards. 
The following development and design standards shall be considered in the design and location of all wireless communication facilities: 
A.  All wireless communication facilities equipment shall be screened or camouflaged so as to reduce visual impacts. Existing site features shall be used to screen the facility where possible. 
B.  All facilities must be architecturally and visually compatible with surrounding buildings, structures, vegetation and/or uses in the area. 
C.  All antennas, towers or related equipment shall have a non-reflective finish or paint consistent with the background area where the facility is to be placed. 
D.  Screening for ground-mounted equipment shall include existing and/or new vegetation pursuant to Chapter 15.36 of this code. 
E.  Building-mounted equipment shall be located, painted and/or architecturally designed so as to be compatible with surrounding buildings and/or uses. 
(Ord. 369 § 1 (part), 2001)  
17.42.090 - Discontinuance of use. 
The service provider of a wireless communication facility shall notify the town of the intent to discontinue operation no less than thirty (30) days before discontinuance. Upon the discontinuance of use, all related equipment shall be removed and the property restored to the pre-construction condition within one hundred twenty (120) days of the cessation of operation. 
(Ord. 369 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 17.43 - LARGE FAMILY DAY CARE HOMES[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Prior ordinance history: Ord. 214 
 
17.43.500 - Required standards and criteria. 
The planning director shall grant a day care permit for a large family day care home as an accessory residential use on property zoned for single-family residences provided that the use complies with all of the following standards and criteria: 
A.  The facility is the principal residence of the provider and the use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the property for residential purposes; 
B.  No major structural changes are proposed which will significantly alter the character of the single-family residence or change its occupancy classification pursuant to the California Uniform Building Code; 
C.  Provisions have been made to provide a minimum of one off-street parking space per employee at maximum shift of day care facility operation. The existing residential driveway will suffice as a parking area provided it does not conflict with any required child drop-off/pick-up area, and does not block the public right-of-way or sidewalk; 
D.  The operation and conduct of the facility shall comply with the noise standards contained in Chapter 9.18 of this code; 
E.  Residences on major arterial streets, as determined by the town engineer and planning director, shall provide a child drop-off/pick-up area designed to prevent vehicles from backing onto the major arterial roadway; 
F.  The provider shall comply with all applicable regulations of the state Fire Marshal and/or Paradise fire department regarding health and safety requirements; 
G.  The provider shall comply with all applicable regulations of the town sewage disposal ordinance regarding health and safety requirements assigned to a single-family residence; 
H.  The provider shall secure a large family day care home license from the State Department of Social Services; 
I.  The facility shall not be located adjacent to another approved large family day care home, or shall not create a situation where any single-family residence is bounded on more than one side by a large family day care facility; 
J.  A proposed large family day care home that generates public traffic use in addition to the existing level of traffic use of a private road easement affording its access shall not be permitted unless written consent is provided by all property owners having legal interest in the private road easement; 
K.  Any proposed large family day care home affording access by use of a private road easement shall be conducted in a manner that shall not overburden the vehicular use of the private road easement. 
(Ord. 313 §7(part), 1998)  
17.43.600 - Required findings. 
In order to approve a large family day care home permit application and issue its related day care permit, the planning director shall successfully make the following findings: 
A.  The proposed large family day care home complies with all the standards and criteria contained in Section 17.43.500 of this chapter; 
B.  The proposed large family day care home will not have a significant adverse effect upon the health and safety of the citizens or the community in general. 
(Ord. 313 §7(part), 1998)  
17.43.700 - Prohibited types of large family day care homes. 
Any proposed large family day care home which does not comply with the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter, and for which the planning director cannot make the required findings for approval shall not be permitted. If the planning director determines that a proposed large family day care home proposal does not comply with the standards and criteria set forth in this chapter, findings shall be made detailing the reasons that justify such determination. Examples of justified reasons for denial of a proposed large family day care home include, but are not limited to the following: 
A.  The proposed project fails to meet the minimum requirements of the town sewage disposal ordinance regarding health and safety requirements assigned to a single-family residence; 
B.  The proposed project cannot comply with the requirements of the state Fire Marshal and/or town fire department; 
C.  The proposed project cannot provide the minimum number of parking spaces; 
D.  The proposed project cannot comply with the provisions of Chapter 9.18 (noise and vibration control) of this code; 
E.  The proposed project would adjoin property where another approved large family day care home is located, or would create a situation where any single-family residence would be bounded by a large family day care home on more than one side. 
(Ord. 313 §7(part), 1998)  
17.43.800 - Revocation of day care permit. 
After providing the permittee with written notification and a public meeting, the planning director is vested with the administrative authority to officially revoke a day care permit for a large family day care home whenever evidence exists and a determination is rendered verifying that the family day care home activity is being conducted in a manner that does not comply with the required standards and criteria of this chapter. 
(Ord. 344 § 6, 2000; Ord. 313 §7(part), 1998)  
17.43.900 - Fees. 
The planning director or his/her designee is authorized to administer and collect a fee necessary to process the large family day care home permit application. The fee shall be identified on the applicable master town services fee schedule adopted and periodically amended by the town council. 
(Ord. 313 §7(part), 1998)  
Chapter 17.44 - AFFORDABLE HOUSING INCENTIVES/RESIDENTIAL DENSITY BONUS 
 
17.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of providing a housing density bonus or incentives is to contribute to the economic feasibility of affordable housing in housing developments proposed within the town. 
(Ord. 338 §1(part), 2000)  
17.44.020 - Applicability. 
When a developer proposes to enter into an agreement to construct affordable units pursuant to Government Code Section 65915, the developer shall be eligible for a housing density bonus or incentives if the housing development consists of five (5) or more units. 
(Ord. No. 553, § 1, 2-10-2015; Ord. 338 §1(part), 2000)  
17.44.030 - Application and approval. 
Any person requesting a housing density bonus or incentives shall apply for an agreement with the town. A housing density bonus or incentives shall be granted by approval of the agreement which shall specify the density bonus and/or incentives, and any conditions attached to the approval of such bonus and/or incentive. 
(Ord. No. 553, § 2, 2-10-2015; Ord. 338 §1(part), 2000)  
17.44.040 - Planning commission recommendation. 
Prior to town action on an agreement providing housing density bonus or incentives, the planning commission shall consider the agreement and make a recommendation to the town council. 
(Ord. No. 553, § 3, 2-10-2015; Ord. 338 § 1(part), 2000)  
17.44.050 - Determination of housing density bonus or incentives. 
The developer may specify the housing density bonus or incentives requested; however, the town may agree to provide a housing density bonus or incentives other than those requested, so long as such housing density bonus or incentives meet the requirement set forth in California Government Code Section 65915 and such action is determined to be consistent with the housing element of the Paradise general plan. 
(Ord. 338 § 1(part), 2000)  
Chapter 17.45 - ADMINISTRATION  
Article I. - ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW 
 
17.45.100 - Environmental review procedures. 
All procedures set forth by the environmental review guidelines in effect for the town shall be used in all reviews of land use projects subject to the regulations set forth in this title. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
Article II. - CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS/ADMINISTRATIVE PERMITS 
 
17.45.200 - Use permit procedure. 
Use permit application procedures shall be as follows: 
A.  Use permits shall be issued as provided in this title only for land uses or purposes for which such permits are required. The planning director shall conduct a public hearing and decide all applications for use permits required by this title. If the planning director determines that the use permit application is controversial or if major policy questions are at issue, the application may be referred to the planning commission for public hearing and action. Notice of such public hearing shall be in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.45.700. In approving a use permit, the planning director or planning commission may include such conditions as are deemed reasonable and necessary to preserve the integrity and character of the zoning district and the general plan. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to: time limitations, street dedication, street and drainage improvements, etc. Nothing in this title shall be construed to limit the discretion of the authority of the planning director to require conditions. Conditions imposed upon issuance of a use permit must be reasonably related to the use of the property for which the permit is requested. 
B.  The planning director may condition a use permit to prohibit a building, structure or land use to be occupied until an inspection has been made which finds that the building, structure or land use complies with all conditions specifically required to be completed prior to occupancy. If a building permit is issued for a building or structure which is subject to a use permit so conditioned, the town engineer or building inspector shall not approve a final inspection of such building or structure until the conditions have been met; provided, however, that responsibility for use permit compliance remains with the planning director. The planning commission or the planning director may also require conditions be completed prior to the issuance of building permits. 
C.  Applications for use permits shall be filed with the community development department and shall be accompanied by a plot plan sufficient to show the details of the proposed land use or building. Upon receipt of a complete application and payment of the appropriate fee for a use permit, the planning staff shall set a date for a public hearing on the application. 
D.  The planning director or the planning commission, on the basis of the evidence submitted at the public hearing, may grant use permits whenever the following findings are determined: 
1.  The proposed land use is consistent with the provisions of this title as well as the goals and policies of the Paradise general plan. 
2.  The proposed land use is compatible with surrounding land uses and shall not be detrimental to the public's health, safety and general welfare. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.210 - Time limit—Expiration. 
A.  If any land use for which a use permit has been granted and issued is not established within three (3) years of the use permit's effective date established in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.45.220 of this chapter, the use permit may become subject to revocation and the planning director (or designee) may initiate a revocation proceeding as set forth in Section 17.45.230 of this chapter. In the event the use permit is revoked pursuant to this chapter, reapplication and reapproval shall be required to establish the land use previously granted under the expired and revoked permit. 
B.  A use permit shall be deemed eligible for revocation if the established land use for which the permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for twelve (12) consecutive months. 
C.  Upon application, and for good cause shown by the permittee at a public hearing, the planning director or the planning commission may extend the time limit of an unexpired use permit up to one additional year. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 5, 3-9-2010; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.220 - Effective date. 
The use permit shall be deemed legally in effect and force when the use permit approval's appeal period has lapsed and the use permit is signed by the planning director. This date shall be so noted in the official use permit application file and shall also be noted upon the issued use permit. 
(Ord. 332 § 12, 1999; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.230 - Violation of terms of the use permit. 
Whenever any alleged violation of the terms of a use permit is brought to the attention of the planning director and after investigation it is determined that a violation does exist, then the permittee shall be sent a written notice to comply within thirty (30) days. The notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, and the thirty-day period shall commence with the date of the mailing of the notice. If the permittee does not comply within the thirty-day period, the planning director (or designee) may place the question of revocation of the use permit on the agenda of the next available planning commission and/or planning director meeting. A public hearing shall be required to be conducted by the planning commission or the planning director in order for the town to legally revoke a use permit. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 6, 3-9-2010; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.240 - Administrative permit procedure. 
Administrative permit application procedures shall be as follows: 
A.  Administrative permits (and/or modifications thereof) shall be processed and approval thereof issued as provided via the provisions of this title only for those land uses or purposes for which such permits are required. The planning director shall conduct a review and administratively render a town decision-making action for all applications for administrative permits (and/or modifications thereof). 
B.  At the discretion of the planning director, any administrative permit (and/or modifications thereof) application may be directed to the planning commission for consideration and decision-making action. 
C.  In processing and approving an administrative permit application, the planning director or planning commission shall evaluate and base the application decision subject to the use and/or application of the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act and existing Town of Paradise adopted development standards, criteria, policies, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 473, § 5, 12-11-2007; Ord. 375 § 6, 2002; Ord. 332 § 13, 1999)  
17.45.245 - Effective date. 
The administrative permit shall be deemed legally in effect and force when the administrative permit approval's appeal period has lapsed and the administrative permit is signed by the planning director. This date shall be so noted in the official administrative permit application file and shall also be noted upon the issued administrative permit. 
(Ord. 436, § 8, 6-14-2005)  
17.45.250 - Revocation of administrative permit. 
After providing the permittee with written notification and a public meeting, the planning director is vested with the administrative authority to officially revoke an administrative permit whenever evidence exists and a determination is made verifying that an administrative permit authorized land use activity has been established or is being conducted in a manner that does not comply with existing town of Paradise land use regulations of this code and/or applicable town of Paradise adopted land use development standards, policies and criteria. 
(Ord. 332 § 14, 1999)  
Article III. - VARIANCES 
 
17.45.300 - Variance. 
A.  Variances from the requirements of this title shall be granted only when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, the strict application of this title deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and subject to identical zoning regulations. 
B.  Any variance granted may be subject to such conditions as will assure that the adjustment authorized shall not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and subject to identical zoning regulations. 
C.  All variances to building coverage, height, lot width, parking, setback and signage requirements shall be granted or denied by the planning director. This decision may be appealed to the planning commission within seven (7) days following the decision date. Anyone directly effected by the decision may appeal. Ten (10) days prior to a decision rendered by the planning director, the property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property shall be notified by mail of the application. At his/her discretion, the planning director may refer the variance application to the planning commission. Any variance reviewed by the planning commission shall require a public hearing. 
D.  All variance applications other than variances addressed by the provisions of subsection C of this section shall be granted or denied by the planning commission at a public hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given pursuant to Section 17.45.700 of this chapter. 
E.  A variance shall not be granted to allow land uses on property which conflict with the uses permitted in the zoning district affecting the property. 
F.  Applications for variances shall be made to the community development department together with appropriate fees, documents and maps. 
(Ord. 354 § 7, 2000; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
Article IV. - SITE PLAN REVIEW 
 
17.45.400 - Site plan review. 
The procedures and standards of this article shall apply to all the following listing of proposed new or expanded multiple-family, commercial, industrial and public/quasi-public land uses, unless exempted pursuant to Section 17.45.410 of this chapter or identified as either a permitted land use or a land use subject to only an administrative permit within the applicable zoning district in effect. 
A.  All new construction of multiple-family, commercial, industrial or public/quasi-public buildings or structures requiring a building permit; 
B.  Projects involving the expansion of an existing legal land use by a minimum of seventy (70) percent of the building or structure; 
C.  A change in the character of the occupancy or use of a building, as defined in the Uniform Building Code in effect for the town, and which creates a greater impact on traffic, sewage disposal or drainage in the general area, or imposes a greater potential fire danger than the occupancy or use immediately preceding the subject use; 
D.  Any multiple-family, commercial, industrial or public/quasi-public use proposed on a vacant lot which does not require a building permit, and does not require a use permit or an administrative permit by the provisions of this title (e.g., a parking lot); 
E.  Structures and devices, including water tanks and radio towers, exceeding thirty-five (35) feet or higher above grade; 
F.  The establishment of all billboards; 
G.  Modifications to site plan reviews previously approved by the town. 
(Ord. 310 § 5(part), 1998; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.410 - Exemptions. 
This article shall not apply to the following uses: 
A.  Expansions of land uses enumerated as either being permitted or subject only to an administrative permit within the applicable zoning district in effect on the site; 
B.  Interior building remodels not resulting in changes in the character of the occupancy or use nor creating a greater impact on traffic, sewage disposal or drainage in the general area, nor imposing a greater potential fire danger than the occupancy or use immediately preceding the subject use, as determined by the planning director; 
C.  Minor alterations on building exteriors, as determined by the planning director; 
D.  Repair and maintenance of structures or parking areas, but not including nonconforming buildings, and structures or facilities destroyed in excess of fifty (50) percent of their value as shown on the latest tax assessment roll; 
E.  Expansions of less than seventy (70) percent of buildings or structures and which do not result in a change in the character of the occupancy or use as defined by the latest adopted Uniform Building Code, or which do not create a greater impact on traffic, sewage disposal, or drainage in the general area, nor impose greater potential fire danger than the use immediately preceding the subject use, as determined by the planning director. 
(Ord. 310 § 5(part), 1998; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.420 - Site plan review approving body. 
All applications for site plan review shall be considered and acted upon by either the planning director, the planning commission or, upon appeal, by the town council in accordance to the following regulations: 
A.  The planning director shall review and decide upon all applications for site plan review that are subject to the requirements of Section 17.45.400 of this chapter. 
B.  At the discretion of the planning director, any site plan review application may be directed to the planning commission for consideration and decision-making action. 
C.  For all site plan reviews, the planning director shall follow the notification procedures for variances as set forth in this chapter. (See Section 17.45.300(C)). 
D.  The planning commission shall review all site plan review applications which: 
1.  Are directed to them by the planning director; 
2.  Are appealed to them after approval or denial by the planning director. 
E.  The notification requirements and procedures of a variance application as set forth in this chapter shall be followed for any site plan review application formally considered and acted upon by the planning commission. 
F.  Any site plan which is reviewed by the planning director or the planning commission may be approved, conditionally approved or denied. 
(Ord. 310 § 5(part), 1998; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.430 - Right to appeal. 
A.  Any person adversely affected by the decision of the approving body may appeal the decision within seven (7) days of the decision. 
B.  All appeals of a decision must be made within seven (7) days of the decision. The appeal shall be forwarded to the next higher reviewing body. Appeals to the town council must be made after review of the project by the planning commission. The town council shall have the authority to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a site plan based on findings of fact, except for denials based on sewage disposal requirements, which shall follow the requirements of appropriate ordinances. 
(Ord. 310 § 5(part), 1998; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.440 - Standards or conditions. 
The planning director, the planning commission, or the town council may impose any of the following standards or conditions on a project subject to site plan review as set forth in this article: 
A.  Landscaping, including signing and lighting review; 
B.  Parking requirements, including type of surface material; 
C.  On-site and off-site drainage improvements or fees; 
D.  Fencing requirements; 
E.  Hours of operation; 
F.  Location and position of uses on property; 
G.  Noise level limitations; 
H.  Access location and encroachment standards; 
I.  Building design (exterior); 
J.  Grading requirements; 
K.  Health department requirements; 
L.  On-site or off-site road improvements or fees; 
M.  Other department or agency requirements; 
N.  Other requirements as deemed necessary and proper to protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the town. 
(Ord. 310 § 5(part), 1998; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.450 - Findings. 
The approving body for any site plan review may approve the project only if it finds that the use, as conditioned, is consistent with the provisions of this title, the policies of the general plan, is compatible with the surrounding uses, and does not impair the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the town. 
(Ord. 310 § 5(part), 1998; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.460 - Effective date. 
The site plan review permit shall be deemed legally in effect and force when the site plan review permit approval's appeal period has lapsed and the site plan review permit is signed by the planning director. This date shall be so noted in the official site plan review application file and shall also be noted upon the issued site plan review permit. 
(Ord. 375 § 7, 2002)  
17.45.480 - Time limit—Expiration. 
A.  If any land use for which a site plan review approval and permit has been granted is not established within three (3) years of the site plan review permit's effective date, the site plan review permit shall become subject to revocation proceeding as set forth in Section 17.45.490 of this chapter. 
B.  A site plan review permit shall be deemed revoked if the established land use for which the permit was granted has ceased or been suspended for twelve (12) consecutive months. 
C.  Upon application, and for good cause shown by the permittee at a public hearing, the planning director or the planning commission may extend the time limit of an unexpired site plan review permit up to one additional year. 
(Ord. 310 § 5(part), 1998; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992; Ord. 436, § 9, 6-14-2005)  
17.45.490 - Revocation of site plan review permit. 
The planning commission and/or the planning director is vested with the authority to officially revoke a town approved and issued site plan review permit. Whenever evidence exists and a determination is rendered, upon completion of a public hearing conducted by the planning commission and/or the planning director pertaining thereto, verifying that a specific land use is not being performed in a manner that complies with the provisions of this title or its town adopted and assigned conditions of approval, the planning commission and/or the planning director may officially revoke the affected site plan review permit. 
(Ord. No. 496, § 7, 3-9-2010; Ord. 310 § 5(part), 1998; Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
Article V. - TEXT AMENDMENTS, REZONES AND PREZONES 
 
17.45.500 - Procedures for zoning district(s) or zoning text amendments. 
The provisions of this title may be amended by changing the boundaries of the zoning districts or by changing any text provisions of this title whenever the public necessity, convenience or general welfare require such amendment. Amendments may be initiated by: 
A.  The town council; 
B.  The planning commission; 
C.  The planning director; 
D.  By a petition filed with the community development department signed by the property owner(s) representing the area to be rezoned or supporting the text amendment(s) proposed. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.510 - Public hearing. 
The planning commission shall hold a public hearing on any such proposed amendment. Notice of the time, date and place of the hearing, including a general explanation of the subject to be considered and including, as appropriate, a general description of the area affected shall be given at least ten (10) calendar days before the hearing. 
In addition, for town-initiated district amendments, notices shall be mailed to the owner(s) of the property which is the subject of the proposed amendment as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.520 - Planning commission action. 
Within thirty (30) days of the conclusion of the public hearing, or continuations thereof, the planning commission shall make and transmit to the town council a report of its findings and its recommendations with respect to the proposed amendment. The report shall include a list of persons who testified at the hearing, a summary of the facts presented at the hearing, the findings of the planning commission, and copies of any maps or other data and/or documentary evidence submitted in connection with the proposed amendment. The town council may take action upon the proposed amendment within ninety (90) days from the date of receipt of the planning commission's recommendation. (Government Code Section 65853 et seq.). 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.530 - Town council action. 
A.  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission to change land from one zone to another, the town council shall hold a public hearing; provided, however, that if the planning commission has recommended against the adoption of the amendment, the town council shall not be required to take further action unless an interested party requests such a hearing by filing a written appeal with the town clerk and paying any required appeal fee, within seven calendar days after the planning commission files its recommendation with the town council by filing the recommendation with the town clerk. (Government Code Sections 65354.5 and 65856) 
B.  Upon receipt of the recommendation of the planning commission to amend the zoning ordinance text to add or to delete a zone or regulations pertaining thereto, the town council shall hold a public hearing regardless of the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.540 - Town council approval, modification or disapproval. 
The town council may approve, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission with-in ninety days of receipt of the planning commission's recommendation; provided, that any modification of the pro-posed ordinance or amendment by the town council shall first be referred to the planning commission for report and recommendation, but the planning commission shall not be required to conduct a public hearing thereon. Failure of the planning commission to report within forty days after the referral shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. (Government Code Section 65857) 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.550 - Prezoning of unincorporated territory. 
The town may prezone unincorporated territory adjoining the town for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of subsequent annexation to the town. The method of accomplishing such prezoning shall be as provided by Section 17.45.500 et seq. as set forth in this article for zoning within the town. Action to prezone may be initiated by the planning director, planning commission or the town council. Such zoning shall become effective at the same time that the annexation becomes effective. (Government Code Section 65859) 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
Article VI. - EFFECT OF DENIAL OF APPLICATION 
 
17.45.560 - Effect of denial of application. 
When an application for zoning amendment, a use permit, site plan review, or variance is denied, the application shall not be eligible for reconsideration for one year subsequent to such denial unless a new application affecting or including all or part of the same property is substantially different, in the opinion of the planning director, from the application that was denied. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.570 - Denial of application without prejudice. 
Notwithstanding the regulations as set forth in Section 17.45.560 of this title, the planning commission or the town council may deny any project "without prejudice" when the application requires only minor modifications to satisfy the planning commission or the town council. The applicant may reapply for the use with the stated modification within one year of the denial action. At the time the project is denied without prejudice, the town council or planning commission shall determine whether or not a reapplication fee shall be charged. Any reapplication fee imposed shall be in conformance with the master fee schedule in effect at the time reapplication is made. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
Article VII. - APPEALS 
 
17.45.600 - Right of appeal. 
All determinations of the planning director or the planning commission shall be final unless a written appeal and any required appeal fee are filed with the planning commission secretary or town clerk, as appropriate. The planning commission or the town council, as appropriate, shall conduct a public hearing on the appeal in accordance to the applicable procedures as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.700 - Notice of public hearings. 
Notices of public hearings on applications for use permits, appeals and amendments to this title changing the boundaries of any district or text of this title shall be given by the body conducting such hearings at least ten days prior thereto, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the town. In addition, the town shall give additional notice by mail, using addresses from the latest equalized assessment roll, to all owners of property within a three-hundred-foot distance of any boundary of the subject property. The town shall also mail or deliver such notice at least ten days prior to the hearing to the owner(s) of the subject property, or his agent, and to the project applicant. Notice shall also be mailed or delivered at least ten days prior to the hearing to each local agency expected to pro-vide water, schools or other essential facilities and services which may be significantly affected. The town shall follow the notice procedures of California Government Code Section 65091. Failure of any person to receive mailed notice or failure to post notice shall not invalidate any proceedings conducted by the decision-making body. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.800 - Appeal of planning director or planning commission decisions. 
Except as otherwise provided in this title, all appeals of planning director or planning commission decisions shall be administered as per the following applicable provisions: 
A.  All decisions of the planning director or the planning commission affecting but not limited to home occupation permits, large family day care permits, site plan reviews, variances, etc., may be appealed in writing to the planning commission or the town council, respectively. 
B.  All appeals shall be initiated by filing a written notice of appeal along with an appeal fee with the secretary of the planning commission or the town clerk for the town council within seven days after the final decision action of the planning director or the planning commission. 
C.  The secretary of the planning commission shall set the time and date for a public hearing before the planning commission concerning an appeal of the planning director decision. The town clerk shall set the time and date for a public hearing before the town council concerning an appeal of a planning commission decision. 
D.  Public hearings concerning appeals before the planning commission or the town council, respectively, shall be conducted within forty days after the receipt of a written appeal and related appeal fee. 
E.  Upon receipt of the notice of appeal of a planning commission decision, the planning director shall prepare a report of the facts pertaining to the decision of the planning commission and shall submit such report to the town council. 
F.  The town council may refer any matter subject to appeal back to the planning commission for further consideration if, in the opinion of the town council, any new and substantial evidence is presented to the town council that was not previously presented to the planning commission. 
G.  At the close of the public hearing, the planning commission or the town council, respectively, may affirm, reverse, revise or modify the appealed decision of the planning director or planning commission. 
H.  If the town council does not finalize its action on an appeal within ninety days after the filing thereof, the decision action of the planning commission shall be deemed affirmed. 
(Ord. 264 § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214 § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.900 - Appeal of other planning commission decisions. 
Except as otherwise provided in Section 17.45.800 of this chapter, all appeals of other planning commission decisions affecting but not limited to amendments to this title shall be administered as per the following provisions: 
A.  All decisions of the planning commission concerning rezones, general plan amendments, or prezones may be appealed in writing to the town council. 
B.  An appeal shall be initiated by filing a written notice of appeal along with an appeal fee with the town clerk for the town council within five (5) days after the final decision action of the planning commission. (Government Code Sections 65354.5 and 65856) 
C.  The town clerk shall set the time and date for a public hearing before the town council concerning the appeal. The public hearing shall be conducted before the town council within forty days after receipt of a written appeal and related appeal fee. 
D.  If the town council does not finalize its action on the appeal within ninety days after the filing of the appeal, the decision action of the planning commission shall be deemed affirmed. 
(Ord. No. 476, § 3, 1-22-2008; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Article VIII. - ENFORCEMENT 
 
17.45.1000 - Enforcement, penalties and legal procedure. 
All departments and employees of the town vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title, and any such permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995: Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.1100 - Investigations—Penalties—Abatement—Enforcement. 
A.  Investigations, penalties, abatement and enforcement of the provisions of this title shall be conducted or applied as specified and regulated in this code. In addition, all violations of this title shall be investigated by the planning director or his designee within seven days of the written request for such investigations. The site shall be inspected and the planning director shall determine if the site was and is being used in concurrence with the zoning regulations governing the site. 
B.  The planning director shall provide mailed notice to the owner and occupant of the site within seven days of the site investigation as to the results of the investigation. All requests for investigation and enforcement of zoning violations shall be on a form provided by the community development department and shall require the name, address and phone number of the complainant and the location of the alleged violation. 
C.  All zoning violations shall be abated within thirty days of the mailing of the notice of violation to the owner and occupant of the subject property, unless the planning director determines that a different amount of time will be applied to prevent harm. If the violation continues beyond the thirty-day period, or other established period, or if the violation is reestablished, then the procedures set forth in this code shall apply. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.1200 - Violations of provisions unlawful. 
Any violation of the provisions of this title by any person shall be unlawful. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.1300 - Nuisance—Designated—Abatement. 
A.  Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title and any use of any land, building or premises established, conducted, operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this title shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. 
B.  The town attorney shall, upon order of the town council or town manager, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take such action and shall apply to such courts of competent jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or structure or use, and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining, or using of such building, structure, or use contrary to this title. 
(Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
17.45.1400 - Violations—Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction with fines pursuant to Government Code Section 36900. Any additional violation of this title within one year of the first violation shall be prosecuted by the town attorney as a misdemeanor with a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six (6) months in the county jail; and provided, however, the town attorney shall have the discretion to reduce the misdemeanor to an infraction. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense and is punishable as such. 
(Ord. 332, § 15, 1999; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992)  
Article IX. - APPLICATION FOR REQUIRED PERMITS 
 
17.45.1500 - Application for required permits. 
A.  Fees. All applications for a required permit as set forth in this title shall be accompanied by the appropriate fee as established by a fee schedule adopted by resolution of the town council. 
B.  Accurate/Complete Information Required. It shall be the responsibility of any applicant for any permit or license required in this title to submit an accurate and complete application that complies with the listing of required application information administratively created by the town manager or his/her designee. Any application determined to contain significant information that is false in any material detail may form a separate and distinct basis for town denial of the permit for which the application is submitted. The falsification of any such application can also constitute a violation of this title and can be punishable as a separate and distinct offense under this title as determined by the town attorney. 
(Ord. 332, § 16, 1999; Ord. 264, § 2(part), 1995; Ord. 214, § 2(part), 1992) 
